
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8910747 
 20835 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 0898-929X 
 1530-8898 
 
 
 18702579 
 2855879 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21073 
 NIHMS189050 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural Correlates of Semantic Competition during Processing of Ambiguous Words 
 
 
 
 
 Bilenko 
 Natalia Y. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Grindrod 
 Christopher M. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Myers 
 Emily B. 
 
 
 
 
 Blumstein 
 Sheila E. 
 
 
 Brown University 
 
 
 Correspondence address: Sheila Blumstein, Brown University, Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Providence, RI 02912, 401-863-2849 (phone), 401-863-2255 (fax),  Sheila_Blumstein@brown.edu 
 
 1 
 now at A. A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 
 
 
 2 
 now at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 23 
 3 
 2010 
 
 
 5 
 2009 
 
 
 18 
 4 
 2010 
 
 21 
 5 
 960 
 975 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The current study investigated the neural correlates that underlie the processing of ambiguous words and the potential effects of semantic competition on that processing. Participants performed speeded lexical decisions on semantically related and unrelated prime-target pairs presented in the auditory modality. The primes were either ambiguous words (e.g.,  ball ) or unambiguous words (e.g.,  athlete ), and targets were either semantically related to the dominant (i.e., most frequent) meaning of the ambiguous prime word (e.g.,  soccer ) or to the subordinate (i.e., less frequent) meaning (e.g.,  dance ). Results showed increased activation in the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) for ambiguous related compared to unambiguous related stimulus pairs, demonstrating that prefrontal areas are activated even in an implicit task where participants are not required to explicitly analyze the semantic content of the stimuli and to make an overt selection of a particular meaning based on this analysis. Additionally, increased activation was found in the left IFG and the left cingulate gyrus for subordinate meaning compared to dominant meaning conditions, suggesting that additional resources are recruited in order to resolve increased competition demands in accessing the subordinate meaning of an ambiguous word. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 homophones 
 inferior frontal gyrus 
 prefrontal cortex 
 semantic ambiguity 
 semantic competition 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Semantic ambiguity is an inherent feature of words in many languages, including English. While listening to speech, we constantly encounter ambiguous words, such as the word “bank”; in this case, the same word form has several different meanings, including “a shore of a river” and “a financial institution”. Auditory comprehension requires that the listener be able to process this ambiguity and to select the appropriate meaning. And yet, as listeners, we are able to do so quickly as the linguistic message is unfolding without apparent difficulty and often without being aware that the word is even ambiguous. The goal of this research is to investigate the processing of ambiguous words in the presence of words that were semantically related to one or the other meaning of the ambiguous word in order to examine the effects of semantic competition that arise due to the resolution of ambiguity, and to identify the neural correlates that underlie these processes. 
 Psycholinguistic evidence suggests that during early stages of processing, all meanings of ambiguous words are initially activated, regardless of the frequency of these meanings or the biasing context in which the ambiguous words are presented ( Onifer & Swinney, 1981 ;  Swinney, 1979 ). The results of these experiments also demonstrate that after all meanings of ambiguous words are activated, a single interpretation is ultimately selected based on meaning frequency and context. Thus, at early stages of processing there is competition between the multiple lexical-semantic representations of ambiguous words and this competition is resolved later in the processing stream. 
 In recent years, Thompson-Schill and colleagues have proposed that the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) is involved in the selection of information among competing alternatives from semantic memory ( Kan & Thompson-Schill, 2004 ;  Thompson-Schill  et al ., 1997 ,  1999 ,  2002 ). In their landmark study, Thompson-Schill and colleagues ( Thompson-Schill  et al ., 1997 ) investigated the role of the left IFG in selection and semantic retrieval by varying selection demands among semantically competing alternatives in unambiguous words across three different tasks including generation, classification, and comparison. Their results showed left IFG activation for the comparison of high and low selection conditions in all three tasks, with a large region of overlap among the three tasks. There was greater activation in the high selection conditions compared to the low selection conditions suggesting that the left IFG was involved in selection among competing alternatives. All three tasks used in this experiment required the subjects to make an overt selection from an array of alternatives. Such a process requires the subjects to consider competing alternatives and consciously choose one of them. Given these findings, accessing the meanings of ambiguous words should invoke left IFG activation. What is less clear is whether such activation will emerge for ambiguous words even when overt selection is not required. One of the aims of the current study is to investigate this issue. 
 Several neuroimaging experiments have investigated the neural systems underlying the processing of ambiguous words ( Chan  et al ., 2004 ;  Copland  et al ., 2003 ,  2007 ;  Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ), and while some studies have shown increased activation in the left IFG during processing of ambiguous words ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ), others have not ( Chan  et al ., 2004 ;  Copland  et al ., 2003 ), leading to some uncertainty as to the role of the left IFG in the processing of ambiguity. 
 In one of the first neuroimaging studies to focus on the processing of ambiguous words, Chan and colleagues ( Chan  et al ., 2004 ) used a word generation task with single word stimuli to investigate ambiguous word processing in an experiment that also included unambiguous words as a control condition. Participants were visually presented with ambiguous and unambiguous words and they were required to silently generate words that were semantically related to the stimuli. Results showed that ambiguous words elicited increased activation in bilateral MFG, superior frontal gyri (SFG) and in the anterior cingulate, whereas unambiguous words elicited increased activation in bilateral IFG, middle temporal gyrus (MTG), and superior temporal gyrus (STG). Thus, the presentation of single ambiguous words failed to show increased activation in the IFG despite the fact that participants were required to ‘select’ and silently produce a word related to one of the meanings of the ambiguous word. The failure to show IFG activation could have been due to several factors. First, it is not clear whether the meanings of the ambiguous words differed in their frequencies or were weighted toward a single highly frequent dominant meaning. In the latter case, selection demands would not have been high reducing the likelihood of IFG activation. Second, because participants silently generated the words, it is not clear what their response choices were. If they consistently selected the highly frequent dominant meaning, competition demands would again have been minimal. 
 A crucial role of context in invoking left IFG activation in the processing of ambiguity is supported by the results of another study of ambiguous words that employed sentence stimuli ( Rodd  et al ., 2005 ). Participants in this study heard sentences containing several ambiguous words and matched sentences containing only unambiguous words. In the first experiment, the participants decided whether a target word that followed each sentence was semantically related to the meaning of the sentence, and in the second experiment, the participants simply attended to the sentences. The results showed increased activation in bilateral IFG and left posterior inferior temporal cortex for ambiguous sentences compared to unambiguous sentences for both tasks. These findings suggest that the IFG is recruited for the processing of ambiguous words in the presence of a sentence context. They also suggest that IFG activation is recruited even in the absence of an overt decision or selection of a response by the participant. 
 The results of Rodd and colleagues ( Rodd  et al ., 2005 ) were replicated in two recent studies ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ). In the study by Zempleni and colleagues ( Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ), participants silently read sentences containing ambiguous and unambiguous words. The results revealed increased activation in bilateral IFG and bilateral MTG during processing of ambiguous sentence stimuli. In the study by Mason and Just ( Mason & Just, 2007 ), participants silently read sentence stimuli and answered yes/no comprehension questions that followed each sentence. The results of this study also showed increased activation in the left IFG during processing of ambiguous stimuli compared to unambiguous stimuli. This combined evidence supports the view that ambiguous word processing in sentence contexts recruits the IFG. 
 Taken together, existing fMRI evidence suggests that the presence or absence of a disambiguating context plays a role in whether the IFG is recruited in ambiguous word processing. While the IFG may not be necessary for processing of single ambiguous words ( Chan  et al ., 2004 ), it is recruited in the processing of sentences containing ambiguous words ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ). Nonetheless, sentence comprehension is a complex process requiring not only access to individual word meanings, but also the integration of the meanings of words into the syntactic frame of the sentence. It has been shown that integration of meaning into sentence context recruits the left IFG ( Baumgaertner  et al ., 2002 ;  Hagoort  et al ., 2004 ). For example, reading sentences with unexpected endings (e.g., “The pilot flies the kite”) elicits increased activation in the left IFG compared to reading sentences with highly expected endings (e.g., “The pilot flies the plane”) ( Baumgaertner  et al ., 2002 ). Thus, it is uncertain whether the increased activation in the left IFG reported in the studies with ambiguous sentence stimuli ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ) is due to the competition among alternative meanings of ambiguous words or whether it is the result of increased resources required for integrating ambiguous word meanings into the larger sentence context. If increased activation in the IFG is due to the competition inherent in accessing the meaning of ambiguous words and not due to increased demands on integrating meanings into the sentence context, then increased IFG activation should emerge for ambiguous words presented in the absence of sentence context, but in the presence of disambiguating cues such as single words semantically related to one of the meanings of the ambiguous words. 
 Most ambiguous words have a dominant (i.e., more frequent) meaning and a subordinate (i.e., less frequent) meaning. For example, for the ambiguous word “bank”, the meaning “a financial institution” is dominant compared to the meaning “a shore of a river”, because it is more frequently used in the former interpretation. It has been shown that the subordinate meaning requires more time to achieve its activation threshold compared to the dominant meaning, and that differences in activation have an effect on ambiguous word processing. Behavioral evidence is consistent with this hypothesis and shows that meaning frequency has an effect on processing of ambiguous words. In particular, it takes longer to access the subordinate meaning ( Martin  et al ., 1999 ), there is a greater magnitude of priming for the dominant than for the subordinate meaning ( Burgess & Simpson, 1988 ;  Simpson & Burgess, 1985 ), and while the presence of a subordinate-biased context is unable to override access to the dominant meaning, the presence of a dominant-biased context is able to override access to the subordinate meaning ( Tabossi  et al ., 1987 ;  Tabossi, 1988 ;  Tabossi & Zardon, 1993 ). 
 Results of the above-mentioned studies suggest that when the meanings of ambiguous words compete, the extent of competition among the meanings varies as a function of meaning frequency or dominance. Because subordinate meanings are less frequent, it takes increased processing resources for the subordinate meaning to reach its activation threshold and hence to be accessed. Additionally, it has been proposed that the subordinate meaning may actually never override the dominant meaning ( Duffy  et al ., 1988 ;  Rayner  et al ., 1994 ). In this case, when an ambiguous word is presented in a subordinate-biased sentence context, the subordinate meaning ultimately is activated to the same extent as the dominant meaning, resulting in increased competition between these two meanings, and thus requiring greater processing resources to access the subordinate meaning. According to either interpretation, there should be increased activation in the left IFG for the subordinate meaning of ambiguous words compared to the dominant meaning. 
 Nonetheless, existing fMRI evidence looking at semantic priming of ambiguous words in the visual modality failed to show such an effect ( Copland  et al ., 2003 ). In particular, although Copland and colleagues ( Copland  et al ., 2003 ) showed differential activation patterns for dominant related word pairs versus matched unrelated word pairs and subordinate related word pairs versus matched unrelated word pairs with decreased MTG activation for the dominant related comparison and decreased IFG activation for the subordinate related comparison, there was no difference in the neural activation patterns comparing dominant and subordinate pairs directly. As the authors indicate, the failure to show this effect could have been due to a number of factors relating to power, namely, number of subjects, number of events, and/or magnetic field strength. 
 It is the goal of the current study to investigate the neural correlates that underlie the processing of ambiguous words in the presence of disambiguating single word cues and the potential effects of semantic competition on that processing. The question is whether increased competition inherent in ambiguous words recruits the left IFG even in the absence of overt selection of word meaning. To this end, subjects are asked to perform an auditory lexical decision (LD) task on semantically related and unrelated pairs of stimuli. The resolution of ambiguity to one of the meanings of an ambiguous word should require greater processing resources than resolving the meaning of an unambiguous word. Thus, the processing of a word target semantically related to one of the meanings of a preceding ambiguous prime stimulus will be compared to the processing of the same target preceded by a semantically related unambiguous prime stimulus. The effect of meaning dominance is investigated by comparing the processing of target words that are related to either the dominant or the subordinate meanings of the ambiguous words (e.g.,  ball – soccer ,  ball – dance ). 
 The behavioral results should show semantic priming for related stimuli compared to unrelated stimuli, replicating previous studies ( Howard  et al ., 1981 ;  Meyer & Schvaneveldt, 1971 ;  Moss  et al ., 1995 ). However, differences should emerge in reaction-time latencies for a target word when it is preceded by an ambiguous word semantically related to one of the meanings of the target word compared to when it is preceded by a semantically related unambiguous word. Similar to the results from psycholinguistic investigations of lexical ambiguity, it is expected that the conditions containing ambiguous words followed by subordinate targets will show a smaller semantic priming effect than the condition with ambiguous words followed by dominant targets ( Burgess & Simpson, 1988 ;  Simpson & Burgess, 1985 ). 
 The expectations for the fMRI data are that there will be increased left IFG activation associated with conditions of increased competition. These findings should emerge even in an implicit task such as LD where participants are not required to explicitly analyze the semantic content of the stimuli and to make a selection based on this analysis but rather are required to make a decision based on another attribute of the stimulus, namely its lexicality. Thus, it is hypothesized that there will be increased left IFG activation for semantically related word pairs that contain ambiguous primes compared to those that contain unambiguous primes. Additionally, there should be increased left IFG activation for semantically related word pairs which are related to the subordinate meaning of the ambiguous word compared to the dominant meaning, because of the greater processing requirements for accessing the less frequent interpretation. Finally, overall semantic priming effects should replicate previous fMRI findings ( Copland  et al ., 2003 ;  Kotz  et al ., 2002 ;  Mummery  et al ., 1999 ;  Rissman  et al ., 2003 ;  Rossell  et al ., 2001 ,  2003 ). In particular, there should be activation in the left STG and left frontal areas including the IFG and MFG, with more activation associated with semantically unrelated conditions compared to related conditions. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Sixteen right-handed native speakers of English (9 women) participated in this experiment. Their age range was 18–21 years, and the mean age was 19.5 years. Handedness was confirmed by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory ( Oldfield, 1971 ). None of the participants had any history of psychiatric or neurological problems, and none had any ferromagnetic implants or devices in their body. The participants provided informed consent according to the guidelines approved by the Human Subjects Committees of Brown University and Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island. All participants were familiarized with the experimental task and the fMRI procedure prior to performing the experiment in the scanner. The participants received monetary compensation and copies of images of their brain for their involvement in the study. 
 
 
 Stimuli 
 Twenty-eight ambiguous words served as prime stimuli. The ambiguous words were selected from ambiguity norms with meaning frequency values taken from Twilley and colleagues ( Twilley  et al ., 1994 ). The average frequency of the dominant meaning was 82%, and the range was 60–98%. Each of the ambiguous words occurred in two semantically related conditions. In one condition, the semantically related target corresponded to the dominant meaning of the ambiguous word (e.g.,  ball - soccer ) and in the other condition, the target corresponded to the subordinate meaning of the ambiguous word (e.g.,  ball - dance ). These two conditions will be referred to as Ambiguous Dominant Related and Ambiguous Subordinate Related, respectively. For each of these semantically related pairs a corresponding semantically unrelated unambiguous pair was created, matched for word frequency ( Francis & Kucera, 1982 ). In this case, the same target as the one used in the related pair was preceded by an unambiguous semantically unrelated word (e.g.,  item - soccer; item - dance ), which was matched in frequency to the ambiguous prime ( Francis & Kucera, 1982 ). These two conditions will be referred to as Unrelated Dominant A and Unrelated Subordinate A, respectively, to reflect the relationship of the targets to the ambiguous words in the related conditions. The letter A indicates that these sets of stimuli were constructed to correspond to the ambiguous word conditions, although the stimuli themselves in these conditions were unambiguous. 
 Fifty-six unambiguous words also served as prime stimuli in two semantically related conditions. The targets for these conditions were the same as those used in the ambiguous stimulus pairs (e.g.,  athlete – soccer; music – dance ). Half of these semantically related pairs were matched in association strength ( Nelson  et al ., 1998 ) with the dominant ambiguous word pairs and the other half were matched with the subordinate ambiguous word pairs, as confirmed by nonsignificant t-tests (dominant: t(27) = .766, p = .45; subordinate: t(27) = .053, p = .96). These conditions will henceforth be referred to as Unambiguous Dominant Related and Unambiguous Subordinate Related to reflect the fact that they are matched in association strength with the two dominant and subordinate related conditions; nonetheless, the primes in these two conditions have only one meaning, and so there is technically no meaning dominance. Analogous to the ambiguous word conditions, two corresponding sets of semantically unrelated pairs were constructed using the same targets as in these semantically related conditions (e.g.,  rabbit – soccer, enter – dance) . These conditions will be referred to as Unrelated Dominant U and Unrelated Subordinate U. Once again, the words “dominant” and “subordinate” in this case are used to indicate the relationship of the targets to the ambiguous words, and the letter U is used to show that these sets of stimuli were constructed to correspond to the unambiguous word conditions. In total, there were eight conditions, with 28 pairs of stimuli in each. A full list of all stimulus pairs is provided in the  Appendix . 
 Each ambiguous prime was repeated twice, once in the Ambiguous Dominant Related condition, and once in the Ambiguous Subordinate Related condition. Twenty-eight unambiguous primes were also repeated twice, once in condition Unrelated Dominant A and once in condition Unrelated Subordinate A, to correspond with the repetition in the ambiguous word conditions. Additionally, each target was repeated four times, with one half of the targets appearing in conditions Ambiguous Dominant Related, Unambiguous Dominant Related, Unrelated Dominant A, and Unrelated Dominant U, and the other half of the targets appearing in conditions Ambiguous Subordinate Related, Unambiguous Subordinate Related, Unrelated Subordinate A, and Unrelated Subordinate U. 
 All prime stimuli were matched for frequency ( Francis & Kucera, 1982 ), as confirmed by a nonsignificant ANOVA [F(5, 23) = 1.41, p = .26]. Experimental targets were also matched for frequency across the conditions [t(27) = .77, p = .45]. Two hundred twenty-four filler trials with pronounceable nonword targets were also included. Similar to the word target conditions, there were 28 ambiguous primes, each repeated twice. 
 The current study was designed to explore the neural activation patterns recruited in  resolving  the meaning of an ambiguous word when that word is paired with a target related to one of its meanings. As a consequence, we did not investigate whether there would an overall effect of ambiguity (i.e. a main effect of ambiguity) in the context of a semantically unrelated word. For this reason, the design of this experiment did not include a condition in which a target stimulus was preceded by a semantically unrelated ambiguous word. While the overall effect of ambiguity on processing semantically unrelated as well as semantically related word pairs is of interest, this question is beyond the scope of the current investigation. 
 
 
 Task Design 
 The experiment was divided into 4 runs with 7 pairs of stimuli from each condition in each run, resulting in 112 trials per run. The stimuli were distributed in such a way that no words were repeated within a run. The trials were pseudo-randomized so that no more than three trials with the same response or from the same condition appeared consecutively. 
 The participants were asked to make a yes or no lexical decision indicating whether the second stimulus in each pair was a word of English or not by pressing one of two buttons with their right hand. They were asked to respond as quickly and accurately as possible. Button mapping for yes/no responses was counterbalanced across participants. 
 The Brown Lab Interactive Speech System (BLISS) software ( Mertus, 2005 ) was used to set up and present the experimental stimuli. All stimuli were recorded digitally at a sampling rate of 22050 Hz by a male speaker of American English and edited to create the sound files used in the experiment. 
 
 
 Image Acquisition 
 All anatomical and functional image acquisition was performed using a 1.5T Symphony Magnetom MR System (Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany). A standard whole-head coil was used. The experiment consisted of four 12-minute runs, with 112 pairs of stimuli in each run. The order of trials within each run was fixed, and the order of the runs was randomized across subjects, so that each subject received a unique order. The experimental task required the participants to listen to pairs of stimuli, with a 50 ms interstimulus interval (ISI) between the two stimuli in each pair. The intertrial interval (ITI) was jittered in increments equal to quarters of the TR, resulting in seven trial onset asynchrony (TOA) values: 3620 ms, 4525 ms, 5430 ms, 6335 ms, 7240 ms, 8145 ms, and 9050 ms. Jittering was done in accordance with a design optimization algorithm ( Dale, 1999 ). 
 The stimuli were presented through MR-compatible headphones (Resonance Technologies, Inc.), and the participants responded via an MR-compatible response box. The participants’ responses and RTs from the onset of the second stimulus were recorded on a Dell laptop computer using the BLISS software ( Mertus, 2005 ). All participants performed a 10-trial practice session during the acquisition of the anatomical data. 
 A high resolution 3D anatomical data set was acquired, using a rapid acquisition gradient-echo MPRAGE sequence (TR =1900 msec, TE = 4.15 msec, TI = 1100 msec, 1 mm isotropic voxels, 256 mm FOV). Functional data was acquired using a gradient-echo echo-planar pulse sequence in an interleaved fashion (45 axial slices, 3 mm isotropic voxels, TR = 3620 ms, TE = 38 ms, 192 mm FOV, 200 volumes per run). 
 
 
 fMRI Data Analysis 
 Processing and statistical analysis of the MR data was performed using AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ;  http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni/ ). A total of 800 echo-planar volumes were acquired, with 200 volumes per run. The first four volumes in each run were discarded to allow the scanner to reach equilibrium in order to avoid T1 saturation effects. Anatomical and functional data were co-registered using the position coordinates obtained from the scanner. The time-series corrections were performed in accordance to the interleaved slice-timing fMRI sequence. Motion correction was performed by realigning the subjects’ EPI images to the first volume in the experiment via a six-parameter rigid body transformation ( Cox & Jesmanowicz, 1999 ). The MPRAGE anatomical dataset was normalized to the Talairach and Tournoux stereotaxic space ( Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ) using AFNI. The functional data was then Talairach-aligned using the normalized anatomical dataset, and finally spatially smoothed with a 6-mm full width half maximum Gaussian kernel. 
 
 Statistical analyses 
 Deconvolution analysis was performed on the functional data using AFNI, so that an estimate of the hemodynamic response to each stimulus condition could be obtained. Time series files were created for each condition containing the time points at which stimuli in each condition were presented. The time series files were convolved with a gamma function to obtain the idealized hemodynamic response for each condition. 
 Statistical analyses were performed using multiple linear regression, using AFNI’s 3dDeconvolve program. The time-series vectors for each condition convolved with a stereotypic hemodynamic response function served as regressors. There were eleven regressors for condition types: eight word conditions with only correct trials included (Ambiguous Dominant Related, Ambiguous Subordinate Related, Unambiguous Dominant Related, Unambiguous Subordinate Related, Unrelated Dominant A, Unrelated Subordinate A, Unrelated Dominant U, Unrelated Subordinate U), nonwords, incorrect word trials, and incorrect nonword trials. The six realignment parameters obtained during motion correction were also included as regressors to account for any variance due to movement that was not removed by the earlier motion correction. Finally, linear and baseline trends were also estimated to correct for linear drift and mean signal fluctuation between runs. The condition coefficients for each subject were then converted to percent signal change by dividing the coefficient for each voxel by the mean estimated baseline for that voxel across the four runs. 
 The percent change values were then submitted to a two-way ANOVA, with experimental condition (excluding the incorrect trial conditions) as a fixed effect and subjects as a random effect. The following planned comparisons were performed: To examine the effect of ambiguity resolution towards dominant and subordinate meanings:

 Ambiguous Related {Ambiguous Dominant Related + Ambiguous Subordinate Related} versus Unambiguous Related {Unambiguous Dominant Related + Unambiguous Subordinate Related} Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Unambiguous Dominant Related Ambiguous Subordinate Related versus Unambiguous Subordinate Related 
 
 To examine the effect of dominance:
 Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Ambiguous Subordinate Related 
 
 To examine the effect of relatedness (priming):
 Related vs. Unrelated across all conditions Unambiguous Related {Unambiguous Dominant Related + Unambiguous Subordinate Related} versus Unambiguous Unrelated {Unrelated Dominant U + Unrelated Subordinate U} Ambiguous Related {Ambiguous Dominant Related + Ambiguous Subordinate Related} versus Unrelated {Unrelated Dominant A + Unrelated Subordinate A} Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Unrelated Dominant A Ambiguous Subordinate Related versus Unrelated Subordinate A 
 
 Monte Carlo simulations were performed in order to determine the number of contiguous voxels to achieve a correct significance level of p < .05. These simulations model the likelihood that a cluster of a given size would occur in a randomly generated data set. To this end, 20,000 iterations of normally distributed random data were generated within a brain volume of the same dimensions used in this study. A voxel-level threshold of p < .05 and a cluster-level threshold of 122 contiguous voxels were ultimately adopted for a corrected significance level of p < .05. The maximum intensity points of the activated clusters were used to identify the location of activated anatomical regions, and an additional analysis was undertaken to investigate the proportion of voxels within a cluster that fell within different anatomical regions. The atlases used to locate anatomical structures were the Anatomy Toolbox atlases ( Eickhoff  et al ., 2005 ;  2006 ;  2007 ) and the Duvernoy anatomical atlas ( Duvernoy, 1991 ). The summary of significant activation that emerged in these analyses is provided in  Table 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 Mean RTs across subjects (n=16) for all experimental conditions are presented in  Table 1 , and mean RTs for the semantically related conditions are presented in  Figure 1 . All means were calculated after errors and outliers were removed. Outliers were defined as responses greater than 2000 ms or outside two standard deviations from the mean for a particular condition. Accuracy data for each condition are presented in  Table 2 , and accuracy data for all related conditions are presented in  Figure 2 . A 2 × 2 × 2 repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the RT and accuracy data for word conditions, with Ambiguity (ambiguous, unambiguous), Dominance (dominant, subordinate), and Relatedness (related, unrelated) as the three within-subjects factors. In the analysis of the RT data, Relatedness emerged as a significant main effect in both subject and item analyses [F1(1, 15) = 76.33, p < .0001; F2(1, 27) = 108.96, p < .0001]. RTs were significantly faster for related conditions compared to unrelated conditions in all cases: Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Unrelated Dominant A [t(15) = 3.44, p < .01], Ambiguous Subordinate Related versus Unrelated Subordinate A [t(15) = 5.31, p < .0001], Unambiguous Dominant Related versus Unrelated Dominant U [t(15) = 6.18, p < .0001], and Unambiguous Subordinate Related versus Unrelated Subordinate U [t(15) = 3.80, p < .01]. The interaction of Ambiguity X Relatedness approached significance in the subject analysis [F1(1, 15) = 4.30, p = .056], and reached significance in the item analysis [F2(1, 27) = 7.94, p < .01]. The interaction was due to a smaller priming effect for ambiguous than unambiguous words. No other main effects or interactions were found to be significant in the RT data. With respect to the accuracy data, there was a significant main effect of Relatedness [F1(1, 15) = 9.06, p < .01], due to subjects performing with higher accuracy on related trials than unrelated trials. No other main effects or interactions were significant for the accuracy data. 
 
 
 fMRI Results 
 A two-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the functional data with two factors: Condition and Subjects. A number of planned contrasts were carried out as described above in the methods section. 
 
 Ambiguity Effects 
 
 Ambiguous Related versus Unambiguous Related 
 Activation was greater for the Ambiguous Related conditions {Ambiguous Dominant Related + Ambiguous Subordinate Related} than for the Unambiguous Related conditions {Unambiguous Dominant Related + Unambiguous Subordinate Related}. The significant clusters emerged in bilateral frontal areas (see  Figure 3 ) including the left (253 voxels) and right (167 voxels) inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). 
 
 
 Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Unambiguous Dominant Related 
 No significantly activated clusters emerged in this comparison. 
 
 
 Ambiguous Subordinate Related versus Unambiguous Subordinate Related 
 The contrast between Ambiguous Subordinate Related and Unambiguous Subordinate Related trials showed more activation for ambiguous words than unambiguous words. Frontal activation in the left hemisphere (LH) was centered in the left IFG, the left cingulate gyrus, and the left medial orbital gyrus. There was also a cluster in the right hemisphere (RH) centered in the right MFG. Parietal activation occurred in the bilateral superior parietal lobules (SPL), with one cluster (307 voxels) in the LH, and another cluster (127 voxels) in the RH. 
 
 
 
 Dominance Effects 
 
 Ambiguous Dominant Related versus Ambiguous Subordinate Related 
 The comparison of Ambiguous Dominant Related and Ambiguous Subordinate Related trials revealed more activation for the subordinate trials than the dominant trials. Two significant clusters emerged in the frontal areas of the LH. Although one of the clusters (152 voxels) had its point of maximum intensity in the temporal pole, only 3% of the cluster was located in the temporal pole; while the largest part of the cluster (56%) was in the left IFG. The second cluster (128 voxels) was located in the left posterior cingulate gyrus (see  Figure 4 ). 
 
 
 
 Relatedness (Priming) Effects 
 
 Unambiguous Related versus Unambiguous Unrelated {Unrelated Dominant U + Unrelated Subordinate U} 
 The contrast between Unambiguous Related conditions {Unambiguous Dominant Related + Unambiguous Subordinate Related} and corresponding unrelated conditions {Unrelated Dominant U + Unrelated Subordinate U} showed more activation for unrelated words. In the LH, two significant clusters emerged. One cluster was located in the left STG (237 voxels). Although the maximum intensity of the second cluster (187 voxels) was located in the left temporal pole, it constituted only 7% of this cluster; 72% of this cluster was located in the left IFG including BA45 and BA47. A third significantly activated LH cluster was located in the left IFG (128 voxels). In the RH, three significantly activated clusters emerged. One cluster (2243 voxels) was located in the right precentral gyrus, another cluster (221 voxels) was found in the right postcentral gyrus, and the third cluster (140 voxels) emerged in the right angular gyrus. 
 
 
 Related versus Unrelated 
 The contrast between Related conditions {Ambiguous Dominant Related + Ambiguous Subordinate Related + Unambiguous Dominant Related + Unambiguous Subordinate Related} and all Unrelated conditions {Unrelated Dominant A + Unrelated Subordinate A + Unrelated Dominant U + Unrelated Subordinate U} showed more activation for unrelated words than for related words. There were two significant clusters in the frontal areas of the RH, one cluster (443 voxels) in the MFG and another cluster (155 voxels) in the supplementary motor area (SMA). Parietal activation centered in one significant cluster (183 voxels) in the right postcentral gyrus, and occipital activation emerged in two significant clusters in the bilateral lingual gyrus (216 voxels in the LH and 213 voxels in the RH). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The results of this experiment support the hypothesis that the bilateral IFG is involved in lexical-semantic processing under conditions of increased competition, showing increased activation for ambiguous words in the presence of a single disambiguating related word compared to unambiguous words. This study also demonstrates that left IFG activation is not dependent on overt selection, but is recruited in implicit tasks using stimuli that have competition as an intrinsic property. 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 As expected, behavioral findings revealed a semantic priming effect in all conditions with shorter RT latencies and greater accuracy for related pairs compared to unrelated pairs. This semantic priming effect occurred presumably because related primes partially activate the same lexical-semantic network as the target stimuli (cf.  Rissman  et al ., 2003 ). These data also demonstrate that the subjects’ increased speed on related conditions did not compromise their accuracy. A significant Ambiguity X Relatedness interaction approached significance in the subject analysis and was significant in the item analysis. This interaction was due to increased RT latencies in the semantically related conditions for the ambiguous stimuli compared to the unambiguous stimuli. This result suggests that the processing demands resulting from competition of meanings inherent in ambiguous words were deleterious to the facilitation effects found for semantically related target stimuli. 
 
 
 fMRI Results 
 
 Ambiguity Effects 
 The contrast of neural activation patterns for the Ambiguous Related conditions compared to the Unambiguous Related conditions revealed increased bilateral prefrontal activation in the IFG associated with the processing of ambiguous words and their related targets. Increased activation in the left IFG for ambiguous stimuli expands on the hypothesis that the left IFG is recruited under conditions of increased competition ( Thompson-Schill  et al ., 1997 ). These findings suggest that bilateral prefrontal areas are involved in the processing of competing meaning alternatives when subjects hear ambiguous words. Since the experimental task did not explicitly require the subjects to overtly select a particular meaning of the ambiguous word, these results show that increased processing resources recruit the bilateral prefrontal areas under conditions of competition, even in the absence of overt selection demands imposed by the task. 
 These results are consistent with some of the existing neuroimaging evidence that suggests that prefrontal areas are recruited in the processing of ambiguous words that occur in sentences ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ). All three of these studies showed increased activation in the IFG for ambiguous words compared to unambiguous words in a sentence context. The results of the current study show that the activation of the IFG for ambiguous words is not contingent on sentence processing demands, and can be found in a minimal context such as paired priming. Existing neuroimaging evidence suggests that when ambiguous words are presented in isolation, in the absence of a disambiguating context, the IFG is not recruited ( Chan  et al ., 2004 ). The results of the current study demonstrate that a single related word constitutes a sufficient cue for ambiguous word meanings to compete and hence to increase processing demands that lead to increased activation of the IFG. These results also suggest that the increased IFG activation in the processing of ambiguous words in sentence contexts is due at least in part to semantic competition demands of ambiguous words, and not due to increased demands imposed by integration of ambiguous word meanings into sentence context ( Mason & Just, 2007 ;  Rodd  et al ., 2005 ;  Zempleni  et al ., 2007 ). 
 As hypothesized, the findings for the contrast of the Ambiguous Subordinate Related condition with the Unambiguous Subordinate Related condition revealed areas of activation that were similar to the activation seen in the comparison of the Ambiguous Related condition with the Unambiguous Related condition, including a cluster in the left IFG and the right MFG. However, there were several other areas which showed significant activation, including the left medial orbital gyrus, left cingulate gyrus, and bilateral SPL, that were not found in the comparison of Ambiguous Related and Unambiguous Related conditions. The left cingulate has been shown to play a major role in cognitive control ( Kan & Thompson-Schill, 2004 ;  Miller, 2000 ;  Miller & Cohen, 2001 ;  Novick  et al ., 2005 ), so its involvement may be necessary for the inhibition of the dominant meaning or the increase in activation of the subordinate meaning when the subordinate meaning of an ambiguous word is primed. The role of the left medial orbital gyrus in language processing has not been directly shown in the literature, so further research is needed to shed more light on its potential involvement. However, it is part of the orbitofrontal complex, which has been implicated in decision-making ( Bechara  et al ., 2000 ;  Bolla  et al ., 2003 ;  Manes  et al ., 2002 ), so its recruitment may be due to increased difficulty of making a relatedness decision about a subordinate meaning of an ambiguous word, compared to its dominant meaning. 
 The role of the bilateral SPL in ambiguous word processing is less certain. In previous fMRI studies, superior parietal areas have been implicated in maintaining representations in working memory ( Wolpert  et al ., 1998 ). Thus, it is possible that the SPL is recruited in order to maintain meaning alternatives of ambiguous words in memory during competition among meaning alternatives. Inferior parietal areas have previously been shown to play a role in lexical retrieval ( Badre  et al ., 2005 ), and although the LD task does not require explicit lexical retrieval, parietal areas may have a role in maintaining representations of possible meanings in case retrieval is required. 
 Although the comparison of the Ambiguous Dominant Related condition to the Unambiguous Dominant Related condition was expected to elicit similar results to the comparison of the Ambiguous Related to Unambiguous Related conditions, no significantly activated clusters were found. This may be due to the fact that the dominant meaning has a higher level of activation than the subordinate meaning ( Duffy  et al ., 1988 ). As a result, recruitment of the IFG would not be required for the dominant condition, because competition demands are minimal. 
 The significantly greater activation that emerged in the IFG for semantically related ambiguous words compared to unambiguous words, and, as well, for subordinate meanings of ambiguous words, occurred largely in BA45. These findings are consistent with a number of studies in the literature suggesting different functional roles for cortical areas within the IFG ( Badre & Wagner, 2007 ;  Dapretto & Bookheimer, 1999 ;  Fiez, 1997 ;  Miller & Cohen, 2001 ;  Snyder et al., 2007 ). What is less clear is whether the distinctions relate to different functional domains of language, e.g. semantics, phonology, and syntax ( Buckner et al., 1995 ;  Dapretto & Bookheimer, 1999 ;  Fiez, 1997 ) or more domain general cognitive operations, e.g. activation of representations, selection among competing alternatives ( Badre and Wagner, 2007 ;  Snyder et al., 2007 ; cf. also  Vuust et al., 2006 ). Because the current experiment investigated lexical-semantic processing in relation to competition, we are unable to distinguish between these two possibilities. What is the case, however, is that the extent of competition between lexical-semantic representations modulates activation in the IFG, particularly in BA45. 
 
 
 Dominance Effects 
 Comparison of the Ambiguous Subordinate Related condition to the Ambiguous Dominant Related condition showed increased activation in the left IFG and the left posterior cingulate gyrus. These findings are consistent with the view that there are greater processing demands for subordinate compared to dominant meanings of ambiguous words. It has been proposed that the subordinate meaning of an ambiguous word may require more time to reach its threshold of activation compared to the dominant meaning ( Martin  et al ., 1999 ). As a consequence, even when the subordinate meaning is primed, greater processing resources are required to ultimately access the subordinate meaning instead of the dominant meaning. By comparison, when the dominant meaning is primed, competition between the dominant and subordinate meaning is minimal, because the dominant meaning achieves its threshold of activation faster than the subordinate meaning, so the processing demands are lower. 
 As discussed above, previous evidence shows that both the left IFG and the left cingulate are major players in cognitive control ( Kan & Thompson-Schill, 2004 ;  Miller, 2000 ;  Miller & Cohen, 2001 ;  Novick  et al ., 2005 ). Activation of these areas is observed when automatic processing has to be overridden, and cognitive conflict is detected and resolved. Thus, the left IFG and the left cingulate gyrus may be involved in resolution of cognitive conflict and competition when the subordinate meaning of an ambiguous word is primed. 
 
 
 Relatedness (Priming) Effects 
 A number of significant clusters emerged as a function of semantic relatedness. Priming effects, as shown by decreased activation for the related stimulus pairs in the comparison between the Unambiguous Related conditions and corresponding unrelated conditions {Unrelated Dominant U + Unrelated Subordinate U} revealed a network of increased activation. Areas showing significant activation were the left STG, left IFG, left precuneus, right precentral gyrus, right angular gyrus, and right postcentral gyrus. The activation of the left STG and left IFG is consistent with existing evidence of the neural correlates of semantic priming ( Copland  et al ., 2003 ;  Kotz  et al ., 2002 ;  Mummery  et al ., 1999 ;  Rissman  et al ., 2003 ;  Rossell  et al ., 2001 ,  2003 ). The activation in the angular gyrus was also expected, as it has been implicated in the literature in lexical-semantic processing ( Binder  et al ., 1997 ;  Demonet  et al ., 1992 ;  Newman  et al ., 2001 ). The activation in the right precentral gyrus was somewhat unexpected, although left precentral gyrus activation has been found before in semantic priming studies. It is possible that higher demands for motor planning of the response in the unrelated condition may account for this activation ( Rissman  et al ., 2003 ). The role of the left precuneus is under debate in the literature, but previous evidence suggests that it plays a role in lexical-semantic processing, including the processing of associatively related words ( Kotz  et al ., 2002 ; Koustaal  et al ., 2001). Thus, its increased activation in the unrelated condition may be due to the higher lexical-semantic processing demands in that condition. There is little evidence in the fMRI literature that would account for the postcentral gyrus activation, though it has been shown to play a role in language perception in multiple modalities ( Kang  et al ., 2006 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 The findings of this experiment demonstrate that competition between the multiple meanings of ambiguous words recruits bilateral prefrontal areas, including the bilateral IFG. Moreover, prefrontal activation is not contingent upon overt selection among competing alternatives, as observed in earlier studies ( Thompson-Schill  et al ., 1997 ,  1998 ,  1999 ), but is found under conditions of implicit competition for ambiguous words in the presence of disambiguating single related words. Competition is present in the processing of ambiguous words because all meanings of ambiguous words are initially activated. The results of the current study not only show increased left IFG activation under conditions of competition for semantically related ambiguous stimuli compared to unambiguous stimuli, but they also show that this competition is modulated by the frequency of the ambiguous word meanings. In conditions where the less frequent, subordinate meaning, is primed, there is increased left IFG activation, presumably because additional resources are required in order for the activation level of the subordinate meaning to reach threshold, such that it is accessed instead of the more frequent, dominant meaning. 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Mean RTs (ms) for the related conditions in the lexical decision task. Dominant and subordinate refer to the relationship of the target stimulus to one of the two meanings of the ambiguous prime stimulus (see  Table 1 , see text). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Mean accuracy (% correct) for the related conditions in the lexical decision task. Dominant and subordinate refer to the relationship of the target stimulus to one of the two meanings of the ambiguous prime stimulus (see  Table 1 , see text). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Group functional map (N=16) for the Ambiguous Related > Unambiguous Related contrast. Significantly activated clusters shown: left IFG and right MFG (p < .05).  Figure 4 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Group functional map (N=16) for the Ambiguous Dominant Related < Ambiguous Subordinate Related contrast. Significantly activated clusters shown: left IFG and left cingulate gyrus (p < .05). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Mean RTs (ms) for the lexical decision task. Example stimuli are included for each condition. The dominant and subordinate targets are related to the two distinct meanings of the ambiguous prime and are repeated across the 4 prime conditions (see text). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prime Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Type of Target 
 
 Ambiguous Related (e.g.‘affair’) 
 Unrelated A (e.g.‘slowly’) 
 Unambiguous Related (e.g.‘hug”social’) 
 Unrelated U (e.g.‘pump’/’young’) 
 
 
 Dominant (e.g.‘love’) 
 811 
 865 
 778 
 889 
 
 
 Subordinate(e.g.‘event’) 
 829 
 894 
 793 
 886 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean accuracy (% correct) for the lexical decision task. Example stimuli are included for each condition. The dominant and subordinate targets are related to the two distinct meanings of the ambiguous prime and are repeated across the 4 prime conditions (see text). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prime Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Type of Target 
 
 Ambiguous Related (e.g.’affair’) 
 Unrelated A (e.g.’slowly’) 
 Unambiguous Related (e.g.’hug’’social’) 
 Unrelated U (e.g.‘pump’/’young’) 
 
 
 Dominant (e.g.‘love’) 
 96 
 93 
 95 
 92 
 
 
 Subordinate(e.g.‘event’) 
 96 
 94 
 94 
 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Clusters which exceed the minimum cluster threshold of p<0.05, corrected. For each cluster, Brodmann areas (BA), number of voxels in the activated cluster (# Vox), x,y,and z coordinates in Talairach and Tournoux, and mean difference in % signal change with standard error of the mean are listed. P statistics are calculated on the basis of Monte Carlo simulations of cluster size likelihood at a voxel-level correction of p<0.05 (see Methods). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 # Vox 
 p statistic 
 Coordinates [x, y, z] 
 Difference in % signal change (SEM) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ambiguous Related > Unambiguous Related 
 
 
 
 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 45/44 
 253 
 p<0.001 
 [−52, 14, 23] 
 0.089 (0.018) 
 
 
 R inferior frontal gyrus 
 45/44 
 167 
 p<0.01 
 [47, 14, 29] 
 0.080 (0.017) 
 
 
 
 
 Ambiguous Subordinate Related > Unambiguous Subordinate Related 
 
 
 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 45 
 152 
 p<0.025 
 [−43, 41, 11] 
 0.126 (0.035) 
 
 
 L superior parietal lobule 
 1 
 307 
 p<0.001 
 [−28, −61, 56] 
 0.138 (0.033) 
 
 
 L cingulate gyrus 
 6 
 166 
 p<0.01 
 [−4, −1, 44] 
 0.114 (0.031) 
 
 
 L medial orbital gyrus 
 11 
 420 
 p<0.001 
 [−1, 56, −4] 
 0.169 (0.047) 
 
 
 R superior parietal lobule 
 7 
 127 
 p<0.05 
 [23, −73, 47] 
 0.133 (0.038) 
 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 45 
 139 
 p<0.025 
 [44, 20, 41] 
 0.137 (0.035) 
 
 
 
 
 Ambiguous Subordinate Related >Ambiguous Dominant Related 
 
 
 
 
 L temporal pole  * 
 38/45 
 152 
 p<0.025 
 [−46, 14, −7] 
 0.106 (0.024) 
 
 
 L posterior cingulate 
 31 
 128 
 p<0.05 
 [−1, −43, 27] 
 0.112 (0.024) 
 
 
 
 
 Unrelated > Related 
 
 
 
 
 L lingual gyrus 
 19 
 216 
 p<0.005 
 [−16, −61, −7] 
 0.075 (0.020) 
 
 
 R lingual gyrus 
 18 
 213 
 p<0.005 
 [14, −73, −10] 
 0.078 (0.021) 
 
 
 R supplementary motor 
 6 
 155 
 p<0.025 
 [14, 2, 65] 
 0.057 (0.013) 
 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 9 
 443 
 p<0.001 
 [29, 35, 35] 
 0.060 (0.012) 
 
 
 R postcentral gyrus 
 3 
 183 
 p<0.005 
 [38, −31, 59] 
 0.061 (0.015) 
 
 
 
 
 Unambiguous Unrelated > Unambiguous Related 
 
 
 
 
 
 L superior temporal gyrus 
 42 
 237 
 p<0.001 
 [−64, −31, 14] 
 0.075 (0.012) 
 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 45 
 128 
 p<0.05 
 [−49, 17, 26] 
 0.069 (0.009) 
 
 
 L temporal pole  * 
 38/45/47 
 187 
 p<0.005 
 [−46, 14, −10] 
 0.078 (0.012) 
 
 
 L precuneus 
 7 
 848 
 p<0.001 
 [−7, −70, 50] 
 0.104 (0.024) 
 
 
 R precentral gyrus 
 6 
 2243 
 p<0.001 
 [23, −19, 65] 
 0.084 (0.013) 
 
 
 R angular gyrus 
 19 
 140 
 p<0.025 
 [38, −67, 41] 
 0.084 (0.022) 
 
 
 R postcentral gyrus 
 1/2 
 221 
 P<0.001 
 [62, −16, 17] 
 0.083 (0.017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Although the maximum intensity fell within the L temporal pole, only a small percentage of the activated voxels were in the temporal pole; the largest percentage of the activated voxels fell within the IFG (see text). 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 
 
 Test stimuli 
 
 
 
 
 Type of Target 
 Ambiguous Related 
 Unrelated A 
 Unambiguous Related 
 Unrelated U 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 affair – love 
 slowly - love 
 hug - love 
 pump - love 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 affair – event 
 slowly - event 
 social - event 
 young - event 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 ball - soccer 
 item - soccer 
 athlete - soccer 
 rabbit - soccer 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 ball - dance 
 item - dance 
 music - dance 
 enter - dance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 bowl – dish 
 blade - dish 
 tray - dish 
 realm – dish 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 bowl – alley 
 blade - alley 
 lane - alley 
 rice – alley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 bluff - fake 
 script - fake 
 genuine - fake 
 suitable - fake 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 bluff - cliff 
 script - cliff 
 ledge - cliff 
 pave - cliff 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 cane – walk 
 confide - walk 
 jog - walk 
 sieve – walk 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 cane - sugar 
 confide - sugar 
 spice - sugar 
 wool – sugar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 fan - wind 
 host - wind 
 storm - wind 
 beer - wind 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 fan - cheer 
 host - cheer 
 yell - cheer 
 bunk – cheer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 grave – death 
 tongue - death 
 tombstone - death 
 puddle - death 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 grave – danger 
 tongue - danger 
 enemy - danger 
 recently - danger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 hamper - laundry 
 sever - laundry 
 detergent - laundry 
 vigorous - laundry 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 hamper – bother 
 sever - bother 
 tease - bother 
 luggage – bother 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 kid - boy 
 concept - boy 
 guy - boy 
 text – boy 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 kid - goat 
 concept - goat 
 sheep - goat 
 red – goat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 mass - large 
 tooth - large 
 big - large 
 nation-large 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 mass - church 
 tooth - church 
 catholic - church 
 compare - church 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 mold - fungus 
 depth - fungus 
 mushroom - fungus 
 kidnap - fungus 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 mold - clay 
 depth - clay 
 sculpture - clay 
 glory - clay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 net – tennis 
 sand - tennis 
 sport - tennis 
 slave - tennis 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 net – worth 
 sand - worth 
 appraise - worth 
 smolder - worth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 play – fun 
 member - fun 
 pleasure - fun 
 farmer – fun 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 play - actor 
 member - actor 
 singer - actor 
 illness - actor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 poach - eggs 
 hive - eggs 
 omelet - eggs 
 diaper - eggs 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 poach - kill 
 hive - kill 
 gun - kill 
 size - kill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 pool - water 
 brother - water 
 liquid - water 
 silence - water 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 pool - table 
 brother - table 
 dresser - table 
 cynic - table 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 pot - kettle 
 fate - kettle 
 steam - kettle 
 false - kettle 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 pot - smoke 
 fate - smoke 
 fog - smoke 
 jaw - smoke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 present - birthday 
 effort - birthday 
 celebrate - birthday 
 discourage - birthday 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 present – future 
 effort - future 
 history - future 
 receive - future 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 relish - ketchup 
 facet - ketchup 
 tomato - ketchup 
 single - ketchup 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 relish - enjoy 
 facet - enjoy 
 relax - enjoy 
 prevail - enjoy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 sage - herb 
 flaunt - herb 
 parsley - herb 
 mildew - herb 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 sage - wise 
 flaunt - wise 
 owl – wise 
 rodent – wise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 sign – stop 
 horse - stop 
 pause - stop 
 tube – stop 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 sign - name 
 horse - name 
 title - name 
 reflect - name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 stable – barn 
 nerve - barn 
 loft – barn 
 joy – barn 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 stable – secure 
 nerve - secure 
 protect – secure 
 liquor - secure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 staple - attach 
 juggle - attach 
 connect – attach 
 planet - attach 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 staple - food 
 juggle - food 
 barbecue - food 
 investor - food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 strain – pressure 
 path - pressure 
 tension - pressure 
 decade - pressure 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 strain – spaghetti 
 path - spaghetti 
 garlic - spaghetti 
 puncture - spaghetti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 strip – remove 
 lake - remove 
 detach – remove 
 acute - remove 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 strip – bacon 
 lake - bacon 
 ham – bacon 
 success - bacon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 stroke - caress 
 wipe - caress 
 soothe - caress 
 dusk - caress 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 stroke – heart 
 wipe - heart 
 surgery – heart 
 disclosure – heart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 tire - car 
 author - car 
 engine - car 
 lawyer - car 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 tire - weary 
 author - weary 
 weak - weary 
 dine - weary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 vessel - boat 
 sheriff - boat 
 motor - boat 
 suffer - boat 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 vessel - blood 
 sheriff - blood 
 wound - blood 
 queen - blood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dominant 
 wake - morning 
 scream - morning 
 evening - morning 
 language - morning 
 
 
 Subordinate 
 wake - funeral 
 scream - funeral 
 burial - funeral 
 overlap - funeral 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This research was supported in part by NIH Grant RO1 DC006220 to Sheila E. Blumstein, as well as a Brown University MRI Research Facility Undergraduate Student Fellowship and an Undergraduate Teaching and Research Assistantship to Natalia Bilenko. Many thanks to Brendan Britton for his help in the analysis of the fMRI data. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Pare-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Insler 
 RZ 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Dissociable controlled retrieval and generalized selection mechanisms in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 Neuron 
 2005 
 47 
 6907 
 6918 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baumgaertner 
 A 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI reveals cortical sites involved in contextual sentence integration 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 16 
 736 
 745 
 12169257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bechara 
 A 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 Emotion, decisión making and the orbitofrontal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2000 
 10 
 295 
 307 
 10731224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Prieto 
 T 
 
 
 Human brain language areas identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 353 
 362 
 8987760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Yetkin 
 YZ 
 
 
 Jesmanowicz 
 A 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Wong 
 EC 
 
 
 Estkowski 
 LD 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 MD 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human auditory cortex 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1994 
 35 
 662 
 672 
 8210222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolla 
 KI 
 
 
 Eldreth 
 DA 
 
 
 London 
 ED 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 KA 
 
 
 Mouratidis 
 M 
 
 
 Contoreggi 
 C 
 
 
 Matochik 
 JA 
 
 
 Kurian 
 V 
 
 
 Cadet 
 JL 
 
 
 Kimes 
 AS 
 
 
 Funderbunk 
 FR 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in abstinent cocaine abusers performing a decision-making task 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 19 
 1085 
 1094 
 12880834 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Dissociation of human prefrontal cortical areas across different speech production tasks and gender groups 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 1995 
 74 
 2163 
 2173 
 8592204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 C 
 
 
 Simpson 
 GB 
 
 
 Cerebral hemispheric mechanisms in the retrieval of ambiguous word meanings 
 Brain and Language 
 1988 
 33 
 86 
 103 
 3342321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chan 
 AHD 
 
 
 Liu 
 HL 
 
 
 Yip 
 V 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Gao 
 JH 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Neural systems for word meaning modulated by semantic ambiguity 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 1128 
 1133 
 15219584 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Copland 
 DA 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 GI 
 
 
 McMahon 
 K 
 
 
 Eastburn 
 M 
 
 
 Neural correlates of semantic priming for ambiguous words: An event-related fMRI study 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1131 
 163 
 172 
 17173868 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Copland 
 DA 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 GI 
 
 
 McMahon 
 K 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SJ 
 
 
 Eastburn 
 M 
 
 
 Chenery 
 HJ 
 
 
 Brain activity during automatic semantic priming revealed by event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 20 
 302 
 310 
 14527590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Jesmanowicz 
 A 
 
 
 Real-time 3D image registration for functional MRI 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 1999 
 42 
 1014 
 1018 
 10571921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Bookherimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Form and content: Dissociating suntax and semantics in sentence comprehension 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 24 
 427 
 432 
 10571235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Chollet 
 F 
 
 
 Ramsay 
 S 
 
 
 Cardebat 
 D 
 
 
 Nespoulous 
 JL 
 
 
 Wise 
 R 
 
 
 Rascol 
 A 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 R 
 
 
 The anatomy of phonological and semantic processing in normal subjects 
 Brain 
 1992 
 115 
 1753 
 1768 
 1486459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duffy 
 SA 
 
 
 Morris 
 RK 
 
 
 Rayner 
 K 
 
 
 Lexical ambiguity and fixation times in reading 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1988 
 27 
 429 
 446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duvernoy 
 HM 
 
 
 The human brain: structure, three-dimensional sectional anatomy, and MRI 
 1991 
 Wien, NY 
 Springer-Verlag 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 1325 
 1335 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Heim 
 S 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Testing anatomically specified hypotheses in functional imaging using cytoarchitectonic maps 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 32 
 570 
 582 
 16781166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Grosbras 
 MH 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Amuants 
 K 
 
 
 Assignment of functional activations to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 26 
 511 
 521 
 17499520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiez 
 J 
 
 
 Phonology, semantics, and the role of the left inferior prefrontal cortex 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1997 
 5 
 79 
 83 
 10096412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Francis 
 W 
 
 
 Kucera 
 H 
 
 
 Frequency Analysis of English Usage 
 1982 
 Boston, MA 
 Houghton Mifflin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and memory 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 1998 
 95 
 906 
 913 
 9448258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Hald 
 L 
 
 
 Bastiaansen 
 M 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Integration of word meaning and world knowledge in language comprehension 
 Science 
 2004 
 304 
 438 
 441 
 15031438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howard 
 DV 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 Lasaga 
 MI 
 
 
 Semantic priming of lexical decisions in young and old adults 
 Journal of Gerontology 
 1981 
 36 
 707 
 714 
 7299087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Selection from perceptual and conceptual representations 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2004 
 4 
 466 
 482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kang 
 E 
 
 
 Lee 
 DS 
 
 
 Kang 
 H 
 
 
 Hwang 
 CH 
 
 
 Oh 
 SH 
 
 
 Kim 
 CS 
 
 
 Chung 
 JK 
 
 
 Lee 
 MC 
 
 
 The neural correlates of cross-modal interaction in speech perception during a semantic decision task on sentences: A PET study 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 32 
 423 
 431 
 16644239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Modulation of the lexical-semantic network by auditory semantic priming: An event-related functional MRI study 
 Neuromage 
 2002 
 17 
 1761 
 1772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Perceptual specificity in visual object priming: Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a laterality difference in fusiform cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2001 
 39 
 184 
 199 
 11163375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manes 
 F 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 B 
 
 
 Clark 
 L 
 
 
 Rogers 
 R 
 
 
 Antoun 
 N 
 
 
 Aitken 
 M 
 
 
 Robbins 
 T 
 
 
 Decision-making processes following damage to the prefrontal cortex 
 Brain 
 2002 
 125 
 624 
 639 
 11872618 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 C 
 
 
 Vu 
 H 
 
 
 Kellas 
 G 
 
 
 Metcalf 
 K 
 
 
 Strength of discourse context as a determinant of the subordinate bias effect 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1999 
 52A 
 813 
 839 
 10660407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mason 
 RA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Lexical ambiguity in sentence comprehension 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1146 
 115 
 127 
 17433891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McNealy 
 K 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Cracking the language code: Neural mechanisms underlying speech parsing 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2006 
 26 
 7629 
 7639 
 16855090 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mertus 
 J 
 
 
 Brown Lab Interactive Speech System 
 2005 
 Providence, RI 
 Brown University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 DE 
 
 
 Schvaneveldt 
 RW 
 
 
 Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence between retrieval operations 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1971 
 90 
 227 
 234 
 5134329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 The prefrontal cortex and cognitive control 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2000 
 1 
 59 
 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2001 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moss 
 HE 
 
 
 Ostrin 
 RK 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Marslen-Wilson 
 WD 
 
 
 Accessing different types of lexical semantic information: Evidence from priming 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 
 1995 
 21 
 863 
 883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Dual-process model in semantic priming: A functional imaging perspective 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 9 
 516 
 525 
 10329291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neely 
 JH 
 
 
 
 
 Besner 
 D 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 G 
 
 
 Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition: A selective review of current findings and theories 
 Basic Processes in Reading: Visual Word Recognition 
 1991 
 Hillsdale, NJ 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 264 
 336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 DL 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 CL 
 
 
 Schreiber 
 TA 
 
 
 The University of South Florida word association, rhyme, and word fragment norms 
 1998 
 
 http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 AJ 
 
 
 Pancheva 
 R 
 
 
 Ozawa 
 K 
 
 
 Neville 
 HJ 
 
 
 Ullman 
 MT 
 
 
 An event-related fMRI study of syntactic and semantic violations 
 Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 
 2001 
 30 
 339 
 364 
 11523278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Novick 
 JM 
 
 
 Trueswell 
 JC 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Cognitive control and parsing: Reexamining the role of Broca’s area in sentence comprehension 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2005 
 5 
 263 
 281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1971 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Onifer 
 W 
 
 
 Swinney 
 DA 
 
 
 Accessing lexical ambiguities during sentence comprehension: Effects of frequency of meaning and contextual bias 
 Memory and Cognition 
 1981 
 9 
 225 
 236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 van Mier 
 H 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The effects of practice on the functional anatomy of task performance 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 1998 
 95 
 853 
 860 
 9448251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 10 
 15 
 35 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rayner 
 K 
 
 
 Pacht 
 JM 
 
 
 Duffy 
 SA 
 
 
 Effects of prior encounter and global discourse bias on the processing of lexically ambiguous words: Evidence from eye fixations 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1994 
 33 
 527 
 544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Eliassen 
 JC 
 
 
 Blumstein 
 SE 
 
 
 An event-related fMRI investigation of implicit semantic priming 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 1160 
 1175 
 14709234 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodd 
 JM 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 The neural mechanisms of speech comprehension: fMRI studies of semantic ambiguity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 1261 
 1269 
 15635062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roskies 
 AL 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Task-dependent modulation of regions in the left inferior frontal cortex during semantic processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2001 
 13 
 829 
 843 
 11564326 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossell 
 SL 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Williams 
 SCR 
 
 
 David 
 AS 
 
 
 Brain activation during automatic and controlled processing of semantic relations: A priming experiment using lexical-decision 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2001 
 39 
 1167 
 1176 
 11527554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossell 
 SL 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 The anatomy and time course of semantic priming investigated by fMRI and ERPs 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 550 
 564 
 12638581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simpson 
 GB 
 
 
 Burgess 
 C 
 
 
 Activation and selection processes in the recognition of ambiguous words 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 1985 
 11 
 28 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snyder 
 HR 
 
 
 Feigenson 
 K 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortical response to conflict during semantic and phonological tasks 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 761 
 775 
 17488203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swinney 
 DA 
 
 
 Lexical access during sentence comprehension: (Re) consideration of context effects 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1979 
 18 
 645 
 659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabossi 
 P 
 
 
 Accessing lexical ambiguity in different types of sentential contexts 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1988 
 27 
 324 
 340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabossi 
 P 
 
 
 Colombo 
 L 
 
 
 Job 
 R 
 
 
 Accessing lexical ambiguity: Effects of context and dominance 
 Psychological Research 
 1987 
 49 
 161 
 167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabossi 
 P 
 
 
 Zardon 
 F 
 
 
 Processing ambiguous words in context 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1993 
 32 
 359 
 372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 Stuttgart 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge: A reevaluation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 1997 
 94 
 14792 
 14797 
 9405692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 Effects of repetition and competition on activity in left prefrontal cortex during word generation 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 23 
 513 
 522 
 10433263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Marshuetz 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Swick 
 D 
 
 
 Effects of frontal lobe damage on interference effects in working memory 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2002 
 2 
 109 
 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Swick 
 D 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Verb generation in patients with focal frontal lesions: A neuropsychological test of neuroimaging findings 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 1998 
 95 
 15855 
 15860 
 9861060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Twilley 
 LC 
 
 
 Dixon 
 P 
 
 
 Taylor 
 D 
 
 
 Clark 
 K 
 
 
 University of Alberta norms of relative meaning frequency for 566 homographs 
 Memory and Cognition 
 1994 
 22 
 111 
 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuust 
 P 
 
 
 Roepstorff 
 A 
 
 
 Wallentin 
 M 
 
 
 Mouridsen 
 K 
 
 
 Østergaard 
 L 
 
 
 It don’t mean a thing… Keeping the rhythm during polyrhythmic tension, activates language areas (BA47) 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 832 
 841 
 16516496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Pare-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Clark 
 J 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Recovering meaning: Left prefrontal cortex guides controlled semantic retrieval 
 Neuron 
 2001 
 31 
 329 
 338 
 11502262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Goodbody 
 SJ 
 
 
 Husain 
 M 
 
 
 Maintaining internal representations: The role of the human superior parietal lobe 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 1998 
 1 
 529 
 533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zempleni 
 MZ 
 
 
 Renken 
 R 
 
 
 Hoeks 
 JCJ 
 
 
 Hoogduin 
 JM 
 
 
 Stowe 
 L 
 
 
 Semantic ambiguity processing in sentence context: Evidence from event-related fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 34 
 1270 
 1279 
 17142061 
 
 
 
 
