
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 NeuroImage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 19457372 
 2686060 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.042 
 NIHMS99858 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Made you look! Consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues can hijack the attentional network 
 
 
 
 
 Moore 
 Katherine Sledge 
 
 
 
 
 Porter 
 Clare B. 
 
 
 
 
 Weissman 
 Daniel H. 
 
 
 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
 
 
 Address correspondence to: Katherine Moore ( mooreks@umich.edu ) or Daniel Weissman ( danweiss@umich.edu ), Department of Psychology, 1012 East Hall, 530 Church St, Ann Arbor, MI 48104 
 
 
 31 
 3 
 2009 
 
 
 5 
 2 
 2009 
 
 
 15 
 5 
 2009 
 
 
 15 
 5 
 2010 
 
 46 
 1 
 270 
 279 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of endogenous cued attention suggest that a fronto-parietal attentional network keeps track of current task objectives in working memory and enhances activity in posterior sensory regions that underlie the perceptual processing of behaviorally relevant stimuli. Relatively little is known, however, about whether consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues can hijack the attentional network, leading to an enhancement of the perceptual processing of irrelevant stimuli. Using a cross-modal attentional cueing task in combination with functional magnetic resonance imaging, we found that such irrelevant cues can indeed hijack the attentional network, as indexed by increased activity in (a) frontal regions that control attention and (b) sensory cortices that underlie the perceptual processing of task-irrelevant stimuli. Furthermore, we found that in left ventrolateral (but not dorsolateral) prefrontal regions, the magnitude of this increased activity varies with whether an irrelevant instructional cue is presented simultaneously with (versus after) a relevant instructional cue. These findings show that consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues can activate inappropriate task objectives in working memory, resulting in a hijacking of the attentional network. Moreover, they reveal different time courses of hijacking effects in ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal regions, consistent with models in which these regions make distinct contributions to cognitive control. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 attention 
 visual 
 auditory 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 The ability to voluntarily and flexibly orient attention toward behaviorally relevant stimuli is a fundamental aspect of human cognition. Some models posit that this ability is enabled by a fronto-parietal attentional network ( Corbetta et al., 2000 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Hills, 2006 ;  Mesulam, 2004 ), in which lateral prefrontal regions of the brain keep track of current task objectives in working memory ( Banich et al., 2000 ;  Milham et al., 2003 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ) and communicate those objectives to parietal regions that allocate attention to behaviorally relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 1998 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ). The attentional network is also thought to bias activity in sensory regions of the brain to favor the perceptual processing of upcoming relevant stimuli ( Kanwisher and Wojciulik, 2000 ;  Kastner et al., 1998 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ). Consistent with this model, cueing humans to attend to an upcoming behaviorally relevant feature of the task environment (e.g., a specific color or spatial location) leads to a relative enhancement of activity in frontal and parietal regions of the attentional network as well as in sensory regions that underlie the perceptual processing of the behaviorally relevant feature ( Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ;  Shulman et al., 1999 ). 
 While often beneficial, the cognitive flexibility that allows us to voluntarily direct our attention can have costs. One such cost is attentional capture, a phenomenon in which attention is drawn to irrelevant stimuli that share critical features (e.g., color) with target stimuli as defined by task objectives ( Downing, 2000 ;  Folk et al., 2002 ;  Folk et al., 1992 ) or that, for other reasons, stand out in the environment ( Theeuwes, 1994 ;  Yantis and Hillstrom, 1994 ). Presenting irrelevant stimuli that capture attention greatly impairs the identification of target stimuli that are presented soon afterwards ( Folk et al., 2002 ). As an everyday example, while searching for a friend in a red shirt at a crowded sporting event, the appearance of a stranger wearing a red shirt may capture one's attention and interfere with one's ability to locate the friend. 
 A second cost that derives from this cognitive flexibility is that representations of previously relevant task objectives sometimes remain activated in working memory even when they are no longer relevant, resulting in increased attention to irrelevant stimuli and in slower and/or less accurate performance ( Yeung et al., 2006 ). Drawing again from everyday experience, if the goal of playing offense remains activated in a basketball player's working memory for too long after the other team steals the ball, then the player may be unable to quickly switch to playing defense in order to prevent the other team from scoring. Disruptions of attention associated with the activation of irrelevant task objectives in working memory are also prominent after brain damage to the lateral prefrontal cortex ( Berger and Posner, 2000 ) and in numerous clinical syndromes, such as drug addiction ( Ventura et al., 2005 ), and attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder ( Casey et al., 1997 ;  Max et al., 2005 ). For these reasons, there has been growing interest in understanding under what circumstances irrelevant task objectives become activated in working memory. 
 The authors of two recent studies used variants of attentional cueing tasks, in combination with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), to directly investigate some of the conditions under which irrelevant task objectives become activated in working memory, and the behavioral and neural consequences of experimentally inducing such activation ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004b ;  Lau and Passingham, 2007 ). In both studies, a relevant instructional cue directed participants to perform one of two possible tasks on an upcoming target stimulus, while an irrelevant instructional cue signaled either the same task (congruent cues) or a different task (incongruent cues).  Brass and von Cramon (2004b)  reported increased error rates to identify targets that followed incongruent (versus congruent) cues (i.e., a behavioral cue congruency effect). However, they observed no difference in brain activation for incongruent and congruent cues (i.e., a neural cue congruency effect). Thus, this initial study revealed a behavioral deficit associated with activating irrelevant task objectives in working memory, but shed no light on the neural underpinnings of that deficit. 
 Lau & Passingham (2007)  also manipulated cue congruency to investigate the behavioral and neural consequences of activating irrelevant task objectives in working memory. Similar to  Brass and von Cramon (2004b) , they reported slower and less accurate behavioral performance for targets that followed incongruent (versus congruent) cues. However, they also observed significantly greater activation for incongruent than for congruent cues in the mid-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), a neural structure that is thought to play a key role in maintaining task objectives in working memory ( Banich et al., 2000 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Milham et al., 2003 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ). One interpretation of this neural cue congruency effect is that incongruent cues led to the activation of both relevant and irrelevant task objectives in working memory while congruent cues led to the activation of only relevant task objectives ( Lau and Passingham, 2007 ). Consistent with this interpretation, activity in posterior cortical regions underlying performance of the irrelevant task was greater for incongruent than for congruent cues. These findings suggest that activating irrelevant task objectives in working memory impairs behavioral performance by hijacking the attentional network into enhancing the processing of currently irrelevant task representations, including representations of irrelevant stimuli. 
 Of importance, such hijacking differs from various distracter interference effects that are more traditionally reported in the selective attention literature. For example, while hijacking leads to the activation of an irrelevant task goal in working memory, contingent attentional capture results in a shift of spatial attention toward irrelevant stimuli whose features match a relevant task goal ( Folk et al., 1992 ;  Serences et al., 2005 ). Similarly, distracters in selective attention tasks (e.g., the Stroop and flanker tasks) often impair performance because they activate competing responses that are associated with a relevant task goal ( MacLeod, 1991 ). Thus, hijacking effects differ from various other types of distracter effects because they stem from the activation of an irrelevant goal in working memory, rather than from the activation of a relevant goal. 
 A key finding in  Lau and Passingham's (2007)  study was that cue congruency effects in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were observed only when irrelevant instructional cues were not consciously perceived. This finding concurs with evidence indicating greater distraction from irrelevant stimuli that are unconsciously (versus consciously) perceived, an effect that may occur because unconsciously perceived stimuli sometimes fail to be inhibited by attentional control mechanisms ( Tsushima et al., 2006 ). However, it conflicts with a vast literature indicating that consciously perceived, irrelevant stimuli robustly interfere with the performance of selective attention tasks by activating irrelevant semantic and response representations in working memory ( MacLeod, 1991 ). From the perspective of this latter literature, it is perplexing that both  Brass and von Cramon (2004b)  and  Lau and Passingham (2007)  did not observe neural evidence indicating that consciously perceived irrelevant stimuli can activate irrelevant task objectives in working memory. 
 One possible explanation is that the simple shapes that served as irrelevant instructional stimuli in these studies (e.g., squares and diamonds) were not strongly associated with irrelevant task objectives. The degree to which a stimulus is strongly and automatically associated with an irrelevant semantic or response representation often predicts the amount of interference that it will evoke when it serves as a distracter in a selective attention task ( Dunbar and MacLeod, 1984 ;  MacLeod and Dunbar, 1988 ). For example, due to our extensive language training, words automatically activate irrelevant semantic and response representations in working memory which, in turn, interfere with the performance of selective attention tasks ( MacLeod, 1991 ). Given these considerations, effects of consciously perceived cue congruency on brain activity should be most clearly visible when irrelevant instructional cues are strongly associated with irrelevant task objectives. 
 In which brain regions might one expect manipulations of consciously perceived cue congruency to influence activity? First, one might expect to observe cue congruency effects in posterior sensory regions whose nature is similar to the effects reported by  Lau and Passingham (2007) . More specifically, for congruent cues one should expect a relative enhancement of activity in task-relevant sensory regions, consistent with the existing literature on endogenous cued orienting of attention ( Kanwisher and Wojciulik, 2000 ;  Kastner et al., 1998 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ). For incongruent cues, however, one should expect a reduction of this enhancement, or possibly even a reversal, in which there is an enhancement of activity in task-irrelevant sensory regions ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ). In short, the nature of cue congruency effects in the sensory cortices should reveal whether consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues can hijack the attentional network. 
 Second, one might expect to observe larger effects of cue congruency on brain activity when a relevant and an irrelevant instructional cue are presented simultaneously than when they are presented sequentially (i.e., when the irrelevant cue is presented nearly a second after the relevant cue) in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). The left VLPFC is thought to retrieve task sets or stimulus-response mappings from memory ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004a ;  Bunge, 2004 ). Overall, the demands imposed on such retrieval processes should be greater when an irrelevant cue signals a different (versus the same) task than a relevant cue ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004b ;  Lau and Passingham, 2007 ;  Mattler, 2005 ). However, since cue-triggered retrieval of a task set from memory is usually completed in well under a second ( Monsell and Mizon, 2006 ), any increase in the demands on task-set retrieval processes that is imposed by varying cue congruency should be maximal when a relevant and an irrelevant cue are presented simultaneously and minimal when they are presented sequentially (i.e., when the irrelevant cue is presented almost a second after the relevant cue). Drawing once again from everyday life, it is often much more difficult to retrieve from memory the mental set that is appropriate for performing a particular cognitive task (e.g., playing chess) when a distracter (e.g., a commercial on TV) simultaneously activates a competing, irrelevant task set in working memory (e.g., watching a movie) than when a distracter activates a competing task set only after the relevant task set has been retrieved. 
 Third, in contrast to the left VLPFC, one might expect to observe relatively similar cue congruency effects in a simultaneous and a sequential presentation condition in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) regions that help to maintain task sets in working memory ( Banich et al., 2000 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ) and in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) regions that detect or resolve conflict between relevant and irrelevant task sets ( Luks et al., 2002 ;  Orr and Weissman, in press ). In both presentation conditions, it may be harder to maintain information about the relevant task set after an irrelevant instructional cue activates a competing task set in working memory (i.e., incongruent cues) than after it activates the relevant task set (i.e., congruent cues). Similarly, in both presentation conditions incongruent cues should impose greater demands than congruent cues on processes that detect and/or resolve conflict between the relevant and the irrelevant task sets. Thus, cue congruency effects in the DLPFC and the dorsal ACC may not vary as a function of the relative timing with which a relevant and an irrelevant instructional cue are presented. 
 Fourth, one might expect to observe cue congruency effects in superior and/or inferior parietal regions that manage and allocate attentional resources. As we stated earlier, lateral prefrontal regions that keep track of current task objectives in working memory ( Banich et al., 2000 ;  Milham et al., 2003 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ) are thought to communicate with parietal regions that allocate attentional resources to behaviorally-relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 1998 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ). Thus, if irrelevant instructional cues influence activity in lateral prefrontal regions underlying working memory, they might also influence activity in parietal regions that allocate attentional resources. 
 With the considerations above in mind, we used a cross-modal attentional cueing task ( Fig 1 ) in combination with fMRI to investigate whether consciously perceived, irrelevant instruction words can hijack the attentional network, and whether the extent of any such hijacking depends on the relative timing with which the relevant and the irrelevant instruction words are presented. In each trial, a relevant visual cue (“Look” or “Hear”) instructed participants to attend to and identify either the visual letter (“X” or “O”) or the auditory letter (“X” or “O”) within a possibly upcoming, multisensory letter pair. Accompanying the relevant visual instruction word was an irrelevant auditory word (“Look” or “Hear”) that signaled either the same task as the visual instruction word (congruent cues) or the opposite task (incongruent cues). The irrelevant auditory instruction word was presented either at the same time as the relevant visual word (simultaneous condition) or 850 ms later (sequential condition). In cue-plus-target trials, a multisensory letter pair was presented 1.875 seconds after the relevant visual cue word. Participants were asked to identify the target letter (“X” or “O”) that appeared in the cued sensory modality while ignoring the distracter letter in the other modality. The distracter letter was either the same as the target letter in the cued modality (congruent target-distracter pairs) or different (incongruent target-distracter pairs). In cue-only trials, the cue was not followed by a target. These trials allowed us to isolate the neural correlates of attentional control processes that were specific to our cue stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 2000 ). We note that the simultaneous condition used here was also used in a different study from our laboratory ( Orr & Weissman, in press ), but that only the present study, which involved different participants, included both the simultaneous and the sequential presentation conditions. 
 The view that consciously perceived, irrelevant instruction words can activate irrelevant task objectives in working memory leads to four predictions. First, it predicts that the typical pattern of biasing activity in the sensory cortices for an audiovisual cued attention task (i.e., a relative enhancement of activity for “Look” versus “Hear” cue-only trials in the visual cortex, and the opposite effect in the auditory cortex) ( Weissman et al., 2004 ) should be observed more strongly for congruent than for incongruent cue-only trials. Second, it predicts larger effects of cue congruency in the simultaneous than in the sequential condition in left VLPFC regions that retrieve task sets from memory to guide subsequent performance ( Bunge, 2004 ). Third, it predicts cue congruency effects in DLPFC regions that maintain task sets in working memory ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ) and in dorsal ACC regions that detect and/or resolve conflict between relevant and irrelevant task sets ( Luks et al., 2002 ;  Orr and Weissman, in press ) and that the magnitude of these effects will not vary across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. And fourth, it predicts cue congruency effects in parietal regions that allocate attentional resources to behaviorally-relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 1998 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ). 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty University of Michigan students (10 female) between the ages of 18 and 30 participated in the study. All participants were right-handed, had normal or corrected to normal vision, and had no history of neurological disorders. Each received $20 per hour for participating, and the experiment lasted approximately 2 hours. Participants gave informed consent before the experiment in accordance with the University of Michigan Medical School Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
 Data acquisition 
 A Dell PC running Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems, Albany, CA) presented the experimental stimuli and recorded participants' responses. Visual stimuli were projected onto a screen at the back of the magnet's bore and were viewed through a mirror. Auditory stimuli were delivered through MR-compatible headphones. Headphone volume was adjusted for each participant separately, such that the auditory stimuli could be heard clearly over the background noise produced by the MR scanner. Participants' responses in the scanner were registered by an MR-compatible response box. 
 All MRI images were collected on a 3T Signa whole-body scanner equipped with a standard head coil. The blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal was measured using a reverse spiral imaging sequence (repetition time (TR), 1250ms; echo time (TE), 30ms; field of view (FOV) 22cm; flip angle, 70°; 27 contiguous 4.5-mm-thick slices; in-plane resolution 3.44 × 3.44 mm). Anatomical images were collected in the same axial orientation as the functional images, but with a T1-weighted gradient-echo (GRE) sequence (TR, 250 ms; TE, 5.4ms; flip angle, 90°; in-plane resolution 0.86 × 086 mm). Every participant completed six runs of the experimental task, each of which consisted of 96 trials over a period of 8 minutes and 10 seconds. During each functional run, 389 brain volumes were collected. The first six images from each run contained no trials and were discarded prior to analysis. 
 
 
 Task 
 Participants were instructed to maintain fixation on a small white dot (0.15° × 0.17°) presented at the center of the screen throughout each run. At the start of every trial, a relevant visual cue word (“LOOK”, 3.12° × 0.86°; or “HEAR” 3.12° × 0.86°) appeared on the screen for 350 ms ( Fig 1 , top). The visual cue word instructed participants either to maintain attention in the visual modality (i.e., “LOOK”) or to switch attention to the auditory modality (i.e., “HEAR”). An irrelevant (binaural) auditory word was also presented, either at the same time as the visual cue word (simultaneous condition) or 850 ms after the onset of the visual cue word (sequential condition). The irrelevant auditory word signaled either the same task as the relevant visual word (congruent cues; 50% of trials) or the opposite task (incongruent cues; 50% of trials). In cue-plus-target trials (66%), a briefly-presented multisensory letter pair (duration, 350 ms) appeared 1875 ms after cue onset ( Fig 1 , bottom). Each letter within this audiovisual letter pair was either an “X” or an “O” (in the visual modality, the “X” subtended 1.10° × 1.36° of visual angle and the “O” subtended 1.18° × 1.38° of visual angle). The distracter letter in the uncued modality was equally likely to be the same letter as the target (congruent target-distracter pairs;  Fig 1 , bottom left) or a different letter (incongruent target-distracter pairs;  Fig 1 , bottom right). In cue-only trials (33%), the cue was not followed by a multisensory letter pair, which allowed us to isolate brain activity that was specific to our cue stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 2000 ). 
 Participants were instructed to indicate whether the letter in the cued modality was an “X” or an “O” by pressing one of two response buttons as quickly and as accurately as possible, using either the index or the middle finger of their right hand. If a response was not detected within 1875 ms after target onset, an error was recorded. Decision-response mappings were counterbalanced across participants. In all trials, the fixation dot changed color from white to red 1875 ms after cue onset. Because this change was coincident with target presentation in cue-plus-target trials, in cue-only trials it signaled to participants that no target would occur and, hence, that they could cease attending ( Corbetta et al., 2000 ). At the end of each trial (i.e., 3750 ms after trial onset), the fixation dot reverted to white. 
 
 
 Design 
 For each participant, we interleaved three runs of the sequential condition with three runs of the simultaneous condition. Half of the participants started with the sequential condition (i.e., sequential, simultaneous, sequential, simultaneous, sequential, simultaneous) while the other half started with the simultaneous condition. Prior to entering the scanner, participants completed a training session in which they briefly practiced the sequential and simultaneous task conditions. Participants were required to achieve 90% accuracy over a 32-trial block for each task condition before performing the task in the scanner. Every participant achieved this criterion on the first attempt. 
 In each run, there were 12 trial types (four cue-only and eight cue-plus-target), each of which was presented eight times in a randomized order. Thus, there were a total of 96 trials per run. The four cue-only trial types consisted of the four possible combinations of Cued Modality (Look, Hear) and Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent). The eight cue-plus-target trial types consisted of the eight possible combinations of Cued Modality, (Look, Hear), Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent), and Target Congruency (congruent, incongruent). To optimize regression estimates of the BOLD responses that were produced by each of our 12 trial types, the inter-trial interval (ITI) was varied between zero and five TRs using a nearly exponential distribution that favored short ITIs ( Miezen et al., 2000 ). 
 
 
 Data analysis 
 The behavioral data were analyzed using SPSS ( SPSS, 2006 ). Next, the functional images were corrected for asynchronous slice acquisition, head movement, normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space (voxel size: 3.75 × 3.75 × 4.5 mm), and spatially smoothed with a three-dimensional Gaussian filter (8 mm full-width half-max) using SPM2 ( Friston, 1995 ). Due to head movements greater than 3 mm, two participants were excluded from further analyses, leaving a total of 18 participants. 
 The time series for each functional run was modeled using a finite impulse response model. This model empirically derives the stimulus-locked BOLD response across time to each trial type in an event-related design without assuming a canonical hemodynamic response shape, and has been validated in prior studies ( Ollinger et al., 2001a ;  Ollinger et al., 2001b ). We estimated 14 TRs (17.5 s) of the BOLD response for each trial type, yielding 168 regressors (12 trial types × 14 TRs) in the design matrix. We also included six motion regressors (i.e., SPM2 estimates of translation along and rotation around the x, y, and z axes) and two regressors for the linear trend and the  y -intercept term. For every participant, parameter estimates for each trial type were converted to units of percent signal change from baseline (i.e., the  y -intercept term) in each run and then averaged across runs of the same type (i.e., sequential or simultaneous). 
 
 
 Voxelwise analyses 
 We performed two random effects, one-sample t-tests. The first t-test localized voxels in which the cue congruency effect (i.e., greater peak activity for incongruent than for congruent cue-only trials) was significantly larger in the simultaneous condition than in the sequential condition. Peak activity was defined as the maximum fMRI signal between 3.75 and 6.25 seconds after stimulus onset. The second t-test localized voxels that showed significantly greater peak activity for incongruent than for congruent cue-only trials, averaging across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. Each of these directional t-tests was thresholded at t(17) = 3.63, p < 0.001 (one-tailed). 
 
 
 Region of interest analyses 
 Regions of interest (ROIs) in the left DLPFC, the right DLPFC, and the dorsal ACC were centered on coordinates that were localized in a prior study of cross-modal attention, which used the same multisensory target stimuli ( Weissman et al., 2004 ). All other ROIs were defined functionally, based on average activity for all cue-only or all cue-plus-target trials. We first performed a one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) across time (14 TRs) on the average stimulus-locked response to all types of cue-only trials. After the resulting F-map was height and extent thresholded (p < 0.01; five contiguous voxels), we defined ROIs in the right VLPFC and in the left middle/posterior VLPFC. Because we did not identify ROIs in either the superior parietal lobe (SPL) or the inferior parietal lobe (IPL) in the cue-only map, we next constructed an analogous F-map (height and extent thresholded to p < 0.01; five contiguous voxels) based on the average stimulus-locked BOLD response across time (14 TRs) to cue-plus-target trials. Using this map, we defined ROIs in the right SPL, the left SPL, and the left IPL (no right IPL region was identified). We also defined two ROIs in the sensory cortices: the top-activating region of visual (occipital) cortex and the top-activating region of auditory (temporal) cortex. The relatively liberal thresholds that were used to define our ROIs did not bias the outcome of our subsequent analyses because all subsequent ROI-level contrasts were orthogonal to the contrasts that we used to create the ROIs. Each ROI consisted of a 27-voxel cube centered on a local maximum (see  Table 1 ). 
 Parameter estimates for each trial type were averaged across all voxels in each ROI. Random effects analyses were then performed to contrast peak activity for different trial types. As in the voxelwise analyses, peak activity in cue-only trials was defined as the maximum fMRI signal between 3.75 and 6.25 seconds after cue onset. To allow for both task- and participant-related variability, peak activity was estimated separately for each trial type and participant. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavior 
 Mean reaction time and mean accuracy were analyzed in separate repeated-measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with four within-participants factors: Condition (simultaneous, sequential), Cued Modality (visual, auditory), Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent), and Target Congruency (congruent, incongruent). Two significant main effects replicated our findings from a prior study ( Weissman et al., 2004 ). First, participants were both faster (864 ms vs. 939 ms, F(1,17) = 59.01, p < 0.0001) and more accurate (97.8% vs. 96.5%, F(1,17) = 11.79, p < 0.003) when responding to congruent (versus incongruent) target-distracter pairs. Second, participants were both faster (865 ms vs. 938 ms, F(1,17) = 44.18, p < 0.0001) and more accurate (98.1% vs. 96.2%, F(1,17) = 8.789, p < 0.009) when responding to targets in the visual (versus the auditory) modality. 
 We also observed a significant interaction between Target Congruency (congruent, incongruent) and Cued Modality for accuracy, F(1,17) = 5.85, p < 0.027. Accuracy for congruent targets was always numerically higher than accuracy for incongruent targets, but this difference was significantly larger when participants were cued to “Hear” (97.3% vs. 95.1%; F(1,17) = 17.47, p < 0.001) than when they were cued to “Look” (98.4% vs. 97.7%; F(1,17) = 1.93, p > 0.18). No other behavioral effects were significant. 
 
 
 FMRI 
 
 Sensory Regions 
 Our first prediction was that the typical pattern of biasing activity in the sensory cortices for an audiovisual cued attention task ( Weissman et al., 2004 ) would be observed more strongly in congruent than in incongruent cue-only trials. Specifically, for congruent cues we predicted an interaction between Cued Modality (visual, auditory) and Brain Region (visual cortex ROI, auditory cortex ROI) indicating a relative enhancement of activity in the visual cortex for “Look” versus “Hear” cue-only trials, and a relative enhancement of activity in the auditory cortex for “Hear” versus “Look” cue-only trials. For incongruent cues, however, we predicted that this pattern would be significantly less pronounced, or possibly even reversed, consistent with a hijacking of the attentional network ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ). We tested these predictions in the regions of visual and auditory cortex that were most highly activated by our stimuli ( Fig 2a ; see  Materials and Methods ). 
 Consistent with our first prediction, we observed a significant three-way interaction among Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent), Cued Modality (visual, auditory) and Brain Region (visual cortex ROI, auditory cortex ROI), F(1,17) = 9.36, p < 0.0071 ( Fig 2b ). For congruent cues we observed a significant two-way interaction between Cued Modality and Brain Region, F(1,17) = 5.18, p < 0.036. As expected, this interaction reflected a relative enhancement of activity in the visual cortex for “Look” versus “Hear” cue-only trials, and a relative enhancement of activity in the auditory cortex for “Hear” versus “Look” cue-only trials ( Fig 2b , left). Neither of the simple effects associated with this interaction was significant (both p > 0.06, one-tailed). However, the nature of the significant interaction clearly indicates a relative shift of activity toward the sensory cortex corresponding to the cued modality. For incongruent cues, we also observed a significant interaction between Cued Modality and Brain Region, F(1,17) = 7.15, p < 0.016. As expected, this interaction reflected a relative enhancement of activity in the visual cortex for “Hear” versus “Look” cue-only trials, and a relative enhancement of activity in the auditory cortex for “Look” versus “Hear” cue-only trials ( Fig 2b , right). Neither of the simple effects associated with this interaction was significant (both p > 0.12, two-tailed). However, the nature of the significant interaction clearly indicates a relative shift of activity toward the task-irrelevant sensory cortex signaled by the irrelevant auditory word. These findings support our hypothesis that consciously perceived, irrelevant instruction words that signal a competing task set can hijack the attentional network, leading it to enhance the perceptual processing of irrelevant stimuli. 
 We also investigated whether the magnitude of the cue congruency effects above varied in the simultaneous and sequential conditions. The four-way interaction among Condition (simultaneous, sequential), Cued Modality (visual, auditory), Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent), and Brain Region (visual ROI, auditory ROI) did not achieve significance, F(1,17) < 1. Therefore, cue congruency effects in the sensory cortices did not differ for the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. 
 Finally, we investigated whether merely presenting the irrelevant auditory word simultaneously with (as compared to 850 ms after) the relevant visual cue might distract participants in a relatively general way, causing them to orient less attention to the cued sensory modality. To test this prediction, we defined an overall measure of positive biasing activity, which was the average of positive biasing activity in the visual cortex (i.e., activity for “Look” cue-only trials minus activity for “Hear” cue-only trials) and positive biasing activity in the auditory cortex (i.e., activity for “Hear” cue-only trials minus activity for “Look” cue-only trials). As expected, we found significantly less positive biasing activity in the simultaneous condition than in the sequential condition, F(1,17) = 5.29, p < 0.034 ( Fig 2c ). Thus, independent of cue congruency, presenting the irrelevant auditory word simultaneously with (versus after) the visual cue interfered with orienting attention to the cued sensory modality. 
 
 
 Frontal Regions 
 Our next two predictions concerned activity in frontal regions. Our second prediction was that left VLPFC regions that retrieve task sets from memory would show a cue congruency effect that was significantly larger in the simultaneous than in the sequential condition. Our third prediction was that activity in DLPFC regions involved in maintaining task sets in working memory and activity in dorsal ACC regions that detect or resolve conflict between relevant and irrelevant task sets would be greater for incongruent than for congruent cue-only trials, and that the magnitude of these effects would not differ for the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. 
 
 
 
 Voxelwise Analyses 
 To test our second prediction about the left VLPFC, we performed a voxelwise t-test to locate brain regions in which the cue congruency effect was significantly larger in the simultaneous than in the sequential condition. This analysis revealed no significant activations, t(17) = 3.63, p < 0.001 and 8 contiguous voxels. 
 To test our third prediction about the DLPFC and the dorsal ACC, we performed a voxelwise, random-effects t-test to localize brain regions that showed greater activation for incongruent cue-only than for congruent cue-only trials, averaging across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions, t(17) = 3.63, p < 0.001 and 8 contiguous voxels. This analysis revealed two activations in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus (center of mass coordinates in MNI space: x = -57, y = -42, z = 8, Brodmann Area (BA) 22, cluster size, 10 voxels; center of mass: x = -65, y = -53, z = 10, BA 22, cluster size, 8 voxels) and one activation in the culmen (i.e., anterior vermis) of the cerebellum (center of mass: x = 9, y = -42, z = -10; cluster size, 8 voxels). No other activations were observed. 
 
 
 ROI Analyses 
 As noted above, our voxelwise analyses did not reveal significant activations in either frontal or parietal regions. Thus, we functionally defined ROIs in bilateral regions of the middle/posterior VLPFC, the left superior parietal lobe (SPL), the right SPL, and the left inferior parietal lobe (IPL) and defined ROIs in bilateral regions of the DLPFC and the dorsal ACC using coordinates from one of our prior studies ( Weissman et al., 2004 ) (see  Materials and Methods ,  Table 1 , and  Fig. 3a ). 
 Consistent with our second prediction, in the left middle/posterior VLPFC ( Fig. 3b , top left) we observed a significant interaction between Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent) and Condition (simultaneous, sequential), F(1,17) = 9.24, p < 0.008. As hypothesized, this interaction occurred because there was significantly greater peak activity in incongruent than in congruent cue-only trials in the simultaneous condition, t(17) = 2.80, p < 0.0062, but not in the sequential condition, t(17) = 1. In the right VLPFC ( Fig. 3b , top right), which may play a role in inhibiting irrelevant task sets ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004a ), we observed significantly greater peak activity in incongruent than in congruent cue-only trials, t(1,17) = 3.08, p < 0.004 (averaged across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions), but there was no significant interaction between Cue Congruency and Condition, F(1,17) = 1.22, p > 0.28. Thus, as predicted, cue congruency effects in the left VLPFC were significantly larger in the simultaneous than in the sequential condition, in line with models suggesting a role for this region in retrieving task sets from memory. 
 Consistent with our third prediction, we observed significantly greater peak activity in incongruent than in congruent cue-only trials in bilateral regions of the DLPFC (left DLPFC: t(17) = 1.88, p < 0.04;  Fig. 3b , bottom left; right DLPFC: t(17) = 1.87, p < 0.04;  Fig. 3b , bottom middle). Moreover, the size of the cue congruency effect did not vary significantly across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions (left DLPFC: F(1,17) = 2.28, p > 0.149; right DLPFC: F (1,17) < 1). Also as predicted, we observed the same pattern in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex ( Fig. 3b , bottom right). Specifically, we observed significantly greater peak activity in incongruent than in congruent cue-only trials, t(17) = 1.75, p < 0.05 (averaged across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions), and the size of this effect did not vary significantly across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions, F (1,17) < 1. These findings are consistent with a role for the DLPFC in maintaining task sets in working memory and with a role for the dorsal ACC in detecting or resolving conflict between relevant and irrelevant task sets. 
 
 Parietal Regions 
 Our fourth prediction was that cue congruency effects would be observed in superior and inferior parietal regions that allocate attentional resources to behaviorally relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 1998 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ). However, ROI analyses in parietal regions revealed neither an overall cue congruency effect (i.e., averaged across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions) nor an interaction between Cue Congruency (congruent, incongruent) and Condition (simultaneous, sequential). Exploratory analyses, which should be interpreted with caution, revealed significant effects of Cue Congruency in the simultaneous condition (left SPL: t(17) = 1.827, p < 0.043; right SPL: t(17) = 1.880, p < 0.039; left IPL, t(17) = 2.078, p < 0.027), but not in the sequential condition (left SPL, t(17) < 1; right SPL, t(17) <1; left IPL, t(17) < 1). 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 We often become distracted from performing a primary task (e.g., reading) when an irrelevant stimulus (e.g., a television commercial) activates representations of an irrelevant task in working memory (e.g., watching a movie). Consistent with such everyday experiences, current models of selective attention posit that a major source of distraction during task performance stems from the activation of irrelevant task objectives in working memory ( MacLeod, 1991 ;  Wagner et al., 2001 ). In line with such models, we found that consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues that were strongly associated with an irrelevant task hijacked the attentional network, as indexed by heightened activity in (a) frontal regions that control attention and (b) sensory cortices that underlie the perceptual processing of irrelevant stimuli. Moreover, we found that effects of irrelevant instructional cues on activity in the left middle/posterior VLPFC varied with whether a relevant and an irrelevant instructional cue were presented simultaneously or sequentially. These findings have important implications for our understanding of the functional neuroanatomy of selective attention in both neurologically-intact ( Ventura et al., 2005 ) and clinical ( Casey et al., 1997 ;  Max et al., 2005 ;  Vaidya et al., 2005 ) populations. 
 Consistent with our first prediction, we observed strong evidence in the sensory cortices that consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional stimuli can hijack the attentional network. Cueing participants to attend for a possibly upcoming target that is defined by its spatial location ( Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Woldorff et al., 2004 ), color ( Giesbrecht et al., 2003 ), or sensory modality ( Weissman et al., 2004 ) often leads to a relative enhancement of activity in sensory regions that process the attended attribute, even before the target is presented ( Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ). In line with such findings, we observed a relative enhancement of activity in the sensory cortex corresponding to the cued modality for congruent cues, in which the relevant visual cue and the irrelevant auditory word signaled the same task (e.g., “Hear”). However, for incongruent cues, in which the irrelevant auditory word (e.g., “Look”) signaled the opposite sensory modality as the relevant visual cue (e.g., “Hear”), we observed a relative enhancement of activity in the sensory cortex corresponding to the modality that was signaled by the irrelevant auditory word. Since the irrelevant auditory words were played at the same volume as the auditory targets that participants successfully identified, our findings show that consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional stimuli can hijack the attentional network. 
 Other results in the sensory cortices indicated that merely presenting the irrelevant auditory word simultaneously with (versus after) the visual cue interfered with attention-orienting processes in a relatively general way that did not depend on cue congruency. Specifically, regardless of cue congruency, there was significantly less positive biasing activity in the sensory cortices (i.e., greater activity for “Look” than for “Hear” cue-only trials in the visual cortex and greater activity for “Hear” than for “Look” cue-only trials in the auditory cortex) in the simultaneous than in the sequential presentation condition. This finding fits nicely with prior work indicating that presenting any sort of task-related information at an irrelevant stimulus dimension can be distracting ( Milham et al., 2002 ). 
 In line with our second prediction, in the left middle/posterior VLPFC we observed a significantly larger cue congruency effect when the irrelevant auditory word was presented simultaneously with (versus after) the relevant visual cue. This result is highly consistent with models in which the left middle/posterior VLPFC participates in retrieving from memory either (a) task sets or (b) stimulus-response mappings that are associated with task sets ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004a ;  Bunge, 2004 ). Given that a task set can be retrieved in well under a second ( Monsell and Mizon, 2006 ), such retrieval processes likely operate relatively early in the cue-target interval. Moreover, demands on such processes are likely greater when a simultaneously presented irrelevant instructional cue signals a competing (versus the same) task set as a relevant cue. In light of the hijacking effects that we observed in the sensory cortices, the larger cue congruency effect in the simultaneous (versus sequential) condition might also index the retrieval of both the relevant and the irrelevant task set into working memory ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ). Future studies might therefore be aimed at determining whether cue congruency effects in the left middle/posterior VLPFC reflect processes that work harder to retrieve a relevant task set under conditions of distraction or, alternatively, processes that erroneously retrieve an irrelevant task set. 
 Our results in the left middle/posterior VLPFC may also be accounted for by models in which this region selects relevant semantic information in the context of competing semantic distracters ( Badre et al., 2005 ;  Badre and Wagner, 2007 ). Indeed, such models readily account for our finding that cue congruency effects were larger in the simultaneous condition, in which the relevant task representation needed to be selected in the context of a competing task representation, than in the sequential condition, in which the relevant task representation could be selected before the irrelevant task representation was retrieved. Also consistent with such models, the specific region of left VLPFC that we have identified is highly proximal to a region of the left middle/posterior VLPFC that has previously been linked to semantic selection ( Badre et al., 2005 ). Future studies will be needed to determine whether cue congruency effects in the left middle/posterior VLPFC reflect processes that retrieve task sets from memory ( Bunge, 2004 ) or processes that operate on such task sets after they are retrieved in order to select relevant task sets among competing ones ( Badre et al., 2005 ;  Badre and Wagner, 2007 ). 
 Consistent with our third prediction, we also observed cue congruency effects in bilateral regions of the DLPFC, the dorsal ACC, and the right VLPFC, and the magnitude of these effects did not significantly differ in the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. Cue congruency effects in the DLPFC may reflect increased demands on processes that maintain relevant representations in working memory after an irrelevant stimulus activates competing representations ( Sakai and Passingham, 2002 ;  Sreenivasan and Jha, 2007 ). Given the hijacking effects that we observed in the sensory cortices, cue congruency effects in the DLPFC may also index the maintenance of both a relevant and an irrelevant task set in incongruent cue-only trials ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ). Cue congruency effects in the dorsal ACC may reflect processes that detect or resolve conflict between relevant and irrelevant task sets ( Luks et al., 2002 ;  Orr and Weissman, in press ). Finally, cue congruency effects in the right VLPFC may reflect increased demands on processes that inhibit irrelevant task sets that become activated in working memory during the processing of incongruent cues ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004a ). Future studies will be necessary to distinguish among these and other possible interpretations of the cue congruency effects that we have observed. Nonetheless, our findings are important because they provide some initial insight into which frontal regions are hijacked by consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues. Moreover, they both replicate and extend our findings from a prior experiment with different participants, the design of which included only a simultaneous presentation condition ( Orr and Weissman, in press ), by demonstrating that cue congruency effects in the DLPFC and the dorsal ACC do not vary with whether relevant and irrelevant task cues are presented simultaneously or sequentially. 
 In line with our fourth prediction, we also observed cue congruency effects in bilateral regions of the superior parietal lobe and in the left inferior parietal lobe. More specifically, exploratory analyses in these regions revealed greater activity for incongruent than for congruent cue-only trials in the simultaneous (but not the sequential) condition. Parietal regions are thought to allocate attention to behaviorally relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al., 1998 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ). Thus, cue congruency effects in parietal regions may index the effect of activating irrelevant task objectives in frontal regions on processes that orient attention. 
 Finally, we observed cue congruency effects in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus and in the anterior vermis (i.e., culmen) of the cerebellum. Activity in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus (BA 22) is thought to increase with demands on phonological processes ( Graves et al., 2008 ;  Rumsey et al., 1997 ). To the extent that participants sub-vocalized the visual cue word, demands on phonological processes were likely greater in incongruent than in congruent cue-only trials. Indeed, only in incongruent cue-only trials did the irrelevant auditory word activate phonological representations that conflicted with those needed to sub-vocalize the relevant visual word. Activity in the anterior vermis is thought to underlie processes related to response preparation and response inhibition ( Desmond et al., 1997 ;  Simmonds et al., 2008 ). We speculate that incongruent cue-only trials imposed greater demands than congruent cue-only trials on inhibitory processes that prevented participants from subvocalizing the irrelevant auditory word. In sum, we observed cue congruency effects in left posterior superior temporal and anterior vermis regions which underlie, respectively, phonological and motor processes that were likely recruited by our verbal cue stimuli. 
 Our finding that consciously perceived, irrelevant instructional cues can hijack the attentional network stands in stark contrast to the findings from two previous fMRI studies ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004b ;  Lau and Passingham, 2007 ). In these studies, hijacking occurred only when the irrelevant instructional cues that signaled an irrelevant task were presented below the threshold of conscious perception. Notably, the simple geometric forms (e.g., squares and diamonds) that served as irrelevant instructional cues in these prior studies were not strongly associated with the irrelevant task objectives they were meant to activate in working memory. It is well known, however, that consciously perceived distracters in selective attention tasks produce the greatest interference when they are strongly associated with irrelevant semantic and response representations ( MacLeod, 1991 ). For example, irrelevant words in the Stroop task are thought to produce especially large interference effects because words have been automatically associated with their meanings and vocal responses through extensive language training. The present finding that consciously perceived auditory words (“Look” and “Hear”) can hijack the attentional network is thus highly consistent with the existing literature on selective attention 
 Our data indicating that cue congruency effects in the left VLPFC were more pronounced in the simultaneous than in the sequential presentation condition is also generally consistent with the literature on selective attention. A predominant finding in this literature is that interfrence from irrelevant stimuli is greater when those stimuli are presented simultaneously with (versus after) target stimuli (for a review, see  MacLeod, 1991 ). Such data clearly indicate that temporal overlap in the processing of relevant and irrelevant stimuli plays an important role in determining the efficiency of selective attention when only a single task set is activated. Here, we have shown that temporal overlap in the processing of relevant and irrelevant stimuli can also influence whether irrelevant stimuli can activate irrelevant task sets in working memory. Thus, our findings further underscore the importance of temporal factors in determining the efficiency of selective attention. 
 A limitation of the present study is that we did not observe significant effects of cue congruency on behavioral measures of performance. The lack of such behavioral effects makes it difficult to determine whether frontal and parietal regions whose activity is influenced by cue congruency participate in “protecting” a relevant task set from distraction ( Jha et al., 2004 ;  Sakai and Passingham, 2002 ) or, alternatively, in orienting attention to irrelevant stimuli ( Lau & Passingham, 2007 ). Given that behavioral performance following incongruent (versus congruent) cues is impaired for only about 300 ms ( Mattler, 2005 ), the absence of behavioral cue congruency effects in the present study (which featured a 1.875 second cue-target interval) is unsurprising. Due to the relatively short temporal duration of behavioral cue congruency effects, brain imaging techniques that offer higher temporal resolution than fMRI, such as, for example, magnetoencephalography (MEG), may be especially useful for dissociating brain regions that “protect” a relevant task set under conditions of distraction from brain regions that orient attention to irrelevant stimuli. 
 The present work may also be relevant to our understanding of attentional impairments in various clinical syndromes, such as drug addiction and attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder. Patients with these syndromes are often highly distracted by consciously perceived stimuli that activate irrelevant task objectives in working memory ( Casey et al., 1997 ), and in some cases this heightened distraction has been linked to activity in the fronto-parietal attentional network ( Arnsten, 2006 ;  Bonson et al., 2002 ;  Garavan et al., 2000 ). For example, drug stimuli can trigger craving and relapse in addicts who are trying to quit ( Hollander and Carelli, 2007 ). Although the precise manner in which the attentional network is hijacked may differ across various syndromes, our findings may provide some general insight into the neural and psychological mechanisms that are involved. 
 In conclusion, we have found that irrelevant instructional cues can hijack the attentional network even when they are consciously perceived. Moreover, we have found that the relative timing with which relevant and irrelevant instructional cues are presented influences the extent of this hijacking in certain regions of the attentional network. Future studies will be important for advancing our understanding of how irrelevant task objectives become activated in working memory and for revealing the behavioral and neural consequences of activating such representations in both neurologically-intact and clinical populations. 
 
 
 
 Figures and Table 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental task. In each trial, a visual cue (‘LOOK’ or ‘HEAR’) instructed participants to attend to and identify either the visual letter (‘X’ or ‘O’) or the auditory letter (‘X’ or ‘O’) of a possibly upcoming audiovisual letter pair. An irrelevant auditory word signaled either the same task as the visual cue or the opposite task. In the simultaneous condition, the irrelevant auditory word was presented at the same time as the visual cue. In the sequential condition, the irrelevant auditory word was presented 850 ms after the visual cue. In cue-plus-target trials, an audiovisual target-distracter letter pair was presented 1.875 seconds following the onset of the relevant visual cue. The distracter letter was presented in the opposite modality as the target letter and was equally likely to be the same letter as the target (congruent target-distracter pairs) or a different letter (incongruent target-distracter pairs). In cue-only trials (33%, not shown), the relevant visual cue was not followed by a target-distracter letter pair. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Peak activity in cue-only trials in visual and auditory cortex regions of interest.  (a)  Axial slices of visual and auditory cortex regions of interest overlaid on an MNI-normalized anatomical brain. In this and subsequent figures, z coordinates refer to MNI space.  (b)  Peak activity in cue-only trials as a function of Brain Region (visual cortex, auditory cortex), Cued Modality (visual, auditory) and Cue Congruency (congruent cues, incongruent cues) averaged across the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. Asterisks indicate significant simple effects or interactions. Notice that the pattern of biasing activity that is typical for an audiovisual cued attention task (i.e., greater activity for “Look” than for “Hear” cues in the visual cortex and greater activity for “Hear” than for “Look” cues in the auditory cortex) was observed for congruent cues while the reverse pattern was observed for incongruent cues.  (c)  Positive biasing activity in the visual cortex (i.e., activity for “Look” cue-only trials minus activity for “Hear” cue-only trials) averaged with positive biasing activity in the auditory cortex (i.e., activity for “Hear” cue-only trials minus activity for “Look” cue-only trials), plotted separately for the simultaneous and the sequential conditions. Notice that there was significantly more positive biasing activity in the sequential condition than in the simultaneous condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Activity in cue-only trials plotted in frontal and parietal regions of interest.  (a)  Axial slices showing regions of interest on the MNI-normalized brain. These regions include the left VLPFC, the right VLPFC, the left DLPFC, the right DLPFC, and the dorsal ACC.  (b)  Activity in cue-only trials plotted as a function of Condition (sequential, simultaneous) and cue congruency (congruent, incongruent) in each region of interest. In the left VLPFC (but not in the other regions), cue congruency effects were significantly larger in the simultaneous condition than in the sequential condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Regions of interest in the present study. 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Interest 
 Brodmann Area 
 MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 9 
 -48 
 15 
 31 
 
 
 Right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 9 
 48 
 19 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 9/44 
 -41 
 8 
 32 
 
 
 Right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 9/44 
 53 
 12 
 36 
 
 
 Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex 
 32 
 -2 
 6 
 52 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe 
 7 
 34 
 -68 
 45 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe 
 7 
 -15 
 -75 
 54 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe 
 7 
 -34 
 -60 
 45 
 
 
 Right middle occipital gyrus 
 17/18 
 34 
 -90 
 -5 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus 
 42 
 -53 
 -34 
 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by an NIH grant to D. H. Weissman (1R03DA021345-01) and by a National Science Foundation graduate fellowship to K. S. Moore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arnsten 
 AFT 
 
 
 2006 
 Fundamentals of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Circuits and pathways 
 Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 
 67 
 7 
 12 
 16961424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Paré-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Insler 
 RZ 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2005 
 Dissociable controlled retrieval and generalized selection mechanisms in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 Neuron 
 47 
 907 
 918 
 16157284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Atchley 
 RA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Webb 
 A 
 
 
 Wszalek 
 T 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Liang 
 ZP 
 
 
 Barada 
 V 
 
 
 Gullett 
 D 
 
 
 Shah 
 C 
 
 
 Brown 
 C 
 
 
 2000 
 Prefrontal regions play a predominant role in imposing an attentional ‘set’: Evidence from fMRI 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 10 
 1 
 9 
 10978687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berger 
 A 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 2000 
 Pathologies of brain attentional networks 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 24 
 3 
 5 
 10654653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonson 
 KR 
 
 
 Grant 
 SJ 
 
 
 Contoreggi 
 CS 
 
 
 Links 
 JM 
 
 
 Metcalfe 
 J 
 
 
 Weyl 
 HL 
 
 
 Kurian 
 V 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 London 
 ED 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural systems and cue-induced cocaine craving 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 26 
 376 
 386 
 11850152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004a 
 Decomposing components of task preparation with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 609 
 620 
 15165351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004b 
 Selection for cognitive control: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study on the selection of task-relevant information 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 8847 
 15470151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 2004 
 How we use rules to select actions: a review of evidence from cognitive neuroscience 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 4 
 564 
 579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Marsh 
 WL 
 
 
 Hamburger 
 SD 
 
 
 Schubert 
 AB 
 
 
 Vauss 
 YC 
 
 
 Vaidtuzis 
 AC 
 
 
 Dickstein 
 DP 
 
 
 Sarfatti 
 SE 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 1997 
 Implication of right frontostriatal circuitry in response inhibition and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 36 
 374 
 383 
 9055518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 O 
 JM 
 
 
 Drury 
 HA 
 
 
 Linenweber 
 MR 
 
 
 Peterson 
 SE 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 1998 
 A common network of functional areas for attention and eye movements 
 Neuron 
 21 
 761 
 773 
 9808463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2000 
 Voluntary orienting is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 3 
 292 
 297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Ginier 
 BL 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 1997 
 Lobular patterns of cerebellar activation in verbal working-memory and finger-tapping tasks as revealed by functional MRI 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 17 
 9675 
 9685 
 9391022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 2000 
 Interactions between visual working memory and selective attention 
 Psychological Science 
 11 
 467 
 473 
 11202491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dunbar 
 K 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 CM 
 
 
 1984 
 A horse race of a different color: Stroop interference patterns with transformed words 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 10 
 622 
 639 
 6238123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folk 
 CL 
 
 
 Leber 
 AB 
 
 
 Egeth 
 HE 
 
 
 2002 
 Made you blink! Contingent attentional capture produces a spatial blink 
 Perception and Psychophysics 
 64 
 741 
 753 
 12201333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folk 
 CL 
 
 
 Remington 
 RW 
 
 
 Johnston 
 JC 
 
 
 1992 
 Involuntary covert orienting is contingent on attentional control settings 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 18 
 1030 
 1044 
 1431742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1995 
 Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: a general linear approach 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2 
 189 
 210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Pankiewicz 
 J 
 
 
 Bloom 
 A 
 
 
 Cho 
 JK 
 
 
 Sperry 
 L 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Salmeron 
 BJ 
 
 
 Risinger 
 R 
 
 
 Kelley 
 D 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 2000 
 Cue-induced cocaine craving: Neuroanatomical specificity for drug users and drug simuli 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 157 
 1789 
 1798 
 11058476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giesbrecht 
 B 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural mechanisms of top-down control during spatial and feature attention 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 496 
 512 
 12880783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Grabowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 Metha 
 S 
 
 
 Gupta 
 P 
 
 
 2008 
 The left posterior superior temporal gyrus participates specifically in accessing lexical phonology 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 1698 
 1710 
 18345989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hills 
 AE 
 
 
 2006 
 Neurobiology of Unilateral Spatial Neglect 
 The Neuroscientist 
 12 
 153 
 163 
 16514012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hollander 
 JA 
 
 
 Carelli 
 RM 
 
 
 2007 
 Cocaine-associated stimuli increase cocaine seeking and activate accumbens core neurons after abstinence 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 27 
 3535 
 3539 
 17392469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 2000 
 The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 3 
 284 
 291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jha 
 AP 
 
 
 Fabian 
 SA 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 2004 
 The role of prefrontal cortex in resolving distractor interference 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 4 
 517 
 527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Wojciulik 
 E 
 
 
 2000 
 Visual attention: Insights from brain imaging 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 1 
 91 
 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 De Weerd 
 P 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 1998 
 Mechanisms of directed attention in the human extrastriate cortex as revealed by functional MRI 
 Science 
 282 
 108 
 111 
 9756472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Pinsk 
 MA 
 
 
 De Weerd 
 P 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 1999 
 Increased activity in human visual cortex during directed attention in the absence of visual stimulation 
 Neuron 
 22 
 751 
 761 
 10230795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lau 
 HC 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2007 
 Unconscious activation of the cognitive control system in the human prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 27 
 5805 
 5811 
 17522324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luks 
 TL 
 
 
 Simpson 
 GV 
 
 
 Feiwell 
 RJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 WL 
 
 
 2002 
 Evidence for anterior cingulate cortex involvement in monitoring preparatory attentional set 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 792 
 802 
 12377154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 
 
 1991 
 Half a century of research on the stroop effect: an integrative review 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 109 
 163 
 203 
 2034749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 CM 
 
 
 Dunbar 
 K 
 
 
 1988 
 Training and Stroop-like interference: Evidence for a continuum of automaticity 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 14 
 126 
 135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mattler 
 U 
 
 
 2005 
 Inhibition and decay of motor and nonmotor priming 
 Perception and Psychophysics 
 67 
 285 
 300 
 15971692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Max 
 JE 
 
 
 Manes 
 FF 
 
 
 Robertson 
 BAM 
 
 
 Mathews 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 J 
 
 
 2005 
 Prefrontal and executive attention network lesions and the development of attention-deficit/hyperactivity symptomatology 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 44 
 443 
 450 
 15843766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2004 
 A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral neglect 
 Annals of Neurology 
 10 
 309 
 315 
 7032417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miezen 
 FM 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 L 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Peterson 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Characterizing the hemodynamic response: Effects of presentation rate, sampling procedure, and the possibility of ordering brain activity based on relative timing 
 Neuroimage 
 11 
 735 
 759 
 10860799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Barada 
 V 
 
 
 2003 
 Competition for priority in processing increases prefrontal cortex's involvement in top-down control: an event-related fMRI study of the stroop task 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 17 
 212 
 222 
 12880892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Erickson 
 KI 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Webb 
 A 
 
 
 Wszalek 
 T 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2002 
 Attentional control in the aging brain: insights from an fMRI study of the stroop task 
 Brain and Cognition 
 49 
 277 
 296 
 12139955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monsell 
 S 
 
 
 Mizon 
 GA 
 
 
 2006 
 Can the task-cuing paradigm measure an endogenous task-set reconfiguration process? 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 32 
 493 
 516 
 16822121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2001a 
 Separating processes within a trial in event-related functional MRI - II. Analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 218 
 229 
 11133324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2001b 
 Separating processes within a trial in event-related functional MRI - I. The method 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 210 
 217 
 11133323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orr 
 JM 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 in press 
 Anterior cingulate cortex makes 2 contributions to minimizing distraction 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 Advance Access published on July 24, 2008;  
 10.1093/cercor/bhn119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JM 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 Donohue 
 BC 
 
 
 Nace 
 K 
 
 
 Maisog 
 JM 
 
 
 Andreason 
 P 
 
 
 1997 
 Phonological and orthographic components of word recognition. A PET-rCBF study 
 Brain 
 120 
 739 
 759 
 9183247 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2002 
 Prefrontal interactions reflect future task operations 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 75 
 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Shomstein 
 S 
 
 
 Leber 
 AB 
 
 
 Golay 
 X 
 
 
 Egeth 
 HE 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2005 
 Coordination of volutary and stimulus-driven attentional control in human cortex 
 Psychological Science 
 16 
 114 
 122 
 15686577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Peterson 
 SE 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 Areas involved in encoding and applying directional expectations to moving objects 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 19 
 9480 
 9496 
 10531451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 2008 
 Meta-analysis of Go/No-go tasks demonstrating that fMRI activation associated with response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 224 
 232 
 17850833 
 
 
 
 
 SPSS 
 2006 
 SPSS for Windows, Rel. 15.0.0 
 SPSS Inc 
 Chicago 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sreenivasan 
 KK 
 
 
 Jha 
 AP 
 
 
 2007 
 Selective attention supports working memory maintenance by modulating perceptual processing of distractors 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 19 
 32 
 41 
 17214561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Theeuwes 
 J 
 
 
 1994 
 Stimulus-driven capture and attentional set: Selective search for color and visual abrupt onsets 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 20 
 799 
 806 
 8083635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsushima 
 Y 
 
 
 Sasaki 
 Y 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 T 
 
 
 2006 
 Failure of inhibitory control on an ambiguous distractor 
 Science 
 314 
 1786 
 1788 
 17170308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Dudukovic 
 NM 
 
 
 Zalecki 
 CA 
 
 
 2005 
 Altered neural substrates of cognitive control in childhood ADHD: Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 162 
 1605 
 1613 
 16135618 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ventura 
 R 
 
 
 Alcaro 
 A 
 
 
 Puglisi-Allegra 
 S 
 
 
 2005 
 Prefrontal cortical norepinephrine is critical for morphine-induced reward, reinstatement and dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 15 
 1877 
 1886 
 15728739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Bjork 
 RA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2001 
 Prefrontal contributions to executive control: fMRI evidence for functional distinctions within lateral Prefrontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 1337 
 1347 
 11707089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Warner 
 LM 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 2004 
 The neural mechanisms for minimizing cross-modal distraction 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 10941 
 10949 
 15574744 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Hazlett 
 CJ 
 
 
 Fichtenholtz 
 HM 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional parcellation of attentional control regions in the brain 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 149 
 165 
 15006044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Hillstrom 
 AP 
 
 
 1994 
 Stimulus-driven attentional capture: Evidence from equiluminant visual objects 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 20 
 95 
 107 
 8133227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeung 
 N 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Aronson 
 JA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2006 
 Between-task competition and cognitive control in task switching 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 1429 
 1438 
 16452666 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
