
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 19465137 
 3275821 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.043 
 NIHMS162254 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses to social threat, Part I: Reciprocal dorsal and ventral sub-regions of the medial prefrontal cortex and heart-rate reactivity 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 Tor D. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Waugh 
 Christian E. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 Martin 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Noll 
 Doug C. 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Fredrickson 
 Barbara L. 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 Stephan F. 
 
 6 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Columbia University 
 2 Department of Psychology, Stanford University 
 3 Department of Statistics, Columbia University 
 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan 
 5 Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
 6 Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan 
 
 Please address correspondence to: Tor D. Wager, Department of Psychology, Columbia University, 1190 Amsterdam Ave., New York, NY 10027,  tor@psych.columbia.edu , Telephone: (212) 854-5318 
 
 
 1 
 12 
 2009 
 
 
 22 
 5 
 2009 
 
 
 9 
 2009 
 
 
 9 
 2 
 2012 
 
 47 
 3 
 821 
 835 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Social threat is a key component of mental “stress” and a potent generator of negative emotions and physiological responses in the body. How the human brain processes social context and drives peripheral physiology, however, is relatively poorly understood. Human neuroimaging and animal studies implicate the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), though this heterogeneous region is likely to contain multiple sub-regions with diverse relationships with physiological reactivity and regulation. We used fMRI combined with a novel multi-level path analysis approach to identify brain mediators of the effects of a public speech preparation task (social evaluative threat, SET) on heart rate (HR). This model provides tests of functional pathways linking experimentally manipulated threat, regional fMRI activity, and physiological output, both across time (within person) and across individuals (between persons). It thus integrates time series connectivity and individual difference analyses in the same path model. The results provide evidence for two dissociable, inversely coupled sub-regions of MPFC that independently mediated HR responses. SET caused activity increases in a more dorsal pregenual cingulate region, whose activity was coupled with HR increases. Conversely, SET caused activity  decreases  in a right ventromedial/medial orbital region, which were coupled with HR increases. Individual differences in coupling strength in each pathway independently predicted individual differences in HR reactivity. These results underscore both the importance and heterogeneity of MPFC in generating physiological responses to threat. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 One of the most remarkable features of the mammalian nervous system is its ability to mount coordinated behavioral and physiological responses to environmental demands. For example, when environmental cues signal a potential threat to an organism’s well being, the brain produces a coordinated set of behavioral, autonomic, and metabolic changes that promote an adaptive response. As Walter Cannon ( Cannon, 1932 ) and many others since have described, output from the brain to the peripheral autonomic nervous system and endocrine system prepares us to respond rapidly and effectively to impending threats. For example, the classic “fight or flight” response involves increases in heart rate, blood flow to the limbs, pupil dilation, slowed digestion, and other changes ( Bandler, Keay, Floyd, & Price, 2000 ;  Obrist, 1981 ). The brain systems that regulate the various organ systems of the body have evolved from survival-related brainstem circuits, but also include cortical and subcortical systems central to social and emotional processes ( Bandler & Shipley, 1994 ;  Craig, 2003 ;  Porges, 2003 ). Thus, understanding these brain-body information transfer systems may provide clues into the neural organization of social and emotional behavior and its consequences for the body. 
 Threat is one of the oldest and presumably most basic brain processes that strongly influences the body. Threat responses can be triggered by the presence of individual, simple cues (e.g., a light or tone) acting through defined circuitry in the amygdala, periaqueductal gray (PAG), and other regions ( Davis, 1992 ;  LeDoux, 2000 ). However, threat responses are much more often triggered by patterns of cues and conceptual knowledge stored in memory that fit together into a situational “schema,” which strongly suggests the involvement of a more complex set of cortical and subcortical processes. For example, darkness, shadows that look like human forms, the sound of a mechanical click in the silence, and the knowledge that one is walking alone in a dangerous part of the city may all combine to trigger a schema that one might call “impending threat.” Threat responses can also be triggered by social situations that involve complex appraisals of social relationships, including an individual’s status, competence, and value in the eyes of others. Indeed, threats in modern human life are usually abstract and often related to the maintenance of our self-esteem, social status, and long-term prospects for mating and longevity. Threats generated by social or other cognitive processes are particularly under-studied in neuroscience, but they can offer important clues about the brain pathways involved in common types of threat in contemporary society. 
 The study of threat systems in the brain has important implications for health. While advantageous in the short term, threat responses that persist over time can have deleterious effects on the brain and body. Chronic perception of threat has been shown to increase the risk of heart disease ( Bosma, 1998 ;  Jain, Joska, Lee, Burg, & Lampert, 2001 ;  Rozanski et al., 1988 ;  Sheps, 2002 ), cause hippocampal deterioration ( Smith, Makino, Kvetnansky, & Post, 1995 ;  Stein-Behrens, Mattson, Chang, Yeh, & Sapolsky, 1994 ;  Watanabe, Gould, & McEwen, 1992 ) and impairments in declarative memory ( McEwen & Sapolsky, 1995 ), promote pro-inflammatory immune responses ( Kiecolt-Glaser & Glaser, 2002 ), and contribute to cognitive and physical aging ( Mcewen, 2007 ), among other adverse effects. Both threat states and their negative connotations for health are captured in early concepts of “stress” ( Selye, 1956 ) and the more recent concept of “allostatic load” ( Mcewen, 2007 )— the notion that a) the brain actively maintains homeostasis through the activation of brain, autonomic, and endocrine systems, and b) chronic load on these systems by persistent threat has deleterious effects on the brain and body, contributing to a variety of health problems ( Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire, Robles, & Glaser, 2002 ). 
 The brain mechanisms underlying social threat responses are just now beginning to be addressed using neuroimaging techniques. Much progress has been made in understanding the neural substrates of threat and stress in animals, but surprisingly little is known about how social and performance “stressors” affect the human brain. The goal of the present study, and its companion ( Wager et al., submitted ), was to investigate the cortical and subcortical systems involved in generating physiological responses to a well-validated laboratory manipulation of social threat. These studies complement and extend a small but growing literature on the neural bases of social and performance stress ( Critchley, 2003 ;  Dedovic et al., 2005 ;  Eisenberger, Taylor, Gable, Hilmert, & Lieberman, 2007 ;  P. J. Gianaros, F. M. Van Der Veen, & J. R. Jennings, 2004 ;  Kern et al., 2008 ). 
 
 Speech preparation as a model of social threat 
 In human laboratory studies social status-related threats have been studied in the context of  social evaluative threat  (SET)—the condition of being judged unfavorably by other individuals in a public setting. SET has been shown to be the most potent human laboratory elicitor of a canonical feature of stress in animal models: the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis response ( Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004 ;  Kirschbaum, Pirke, & Hellhammer, 1993 ). Threats to the ‘social self’ in particular elicit HPA-axis responses ( Dickerson, Gruenewald, & Kemeny, 2004 ). Remarkably, inter-correlated autonomic, endocrine, and immune changes are produced by even acute SET challenges ( Cacioppo, 1994 ;  Cohen et al., 2000 ;  Kiecolt-Glaser, Cacioppo, Malarkey, & Glaser, 1992 ;  Sgoutas-Emch et al., 1994 ). These effects are clinically relevant as well. SET challenges in patients with coronary artery disease have been shown to induce myocardial ischemia ( Rozanski et al., 1988 ) and affect clinical measures of cardiac dysfunction, including left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ( Jain et al., 2001 ;  Jain et al., 1998 ). Ischemic responses to SET have been shown to predict the incidence of fatal and non-fatal cardiac events over a 5-year follow-up ( Jiang et al., 1996 ;  Sheps, 2002 ). 
 In this study, we assess fMRI activity elicited by public speech preparation, a component of well-studied laboratory SET challenges, and its relationship with heart rate (HR). Both preparing and giving a speech before a critical audience induces robust cardiovascular engagement, including increased blood pressure and heart rate (HR) ( Berntson et al., 1994 ;  Cacioppo et al., 1995 ;  Gramer & Saria, 2007 ;  Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004 ;  Uchino, Cacioppo, Malarkey, & Glaser, 1995 ) that results from both increased sympathetic output and reduced parasympathetic output to the heart ( Berntson et al., 1994 ). Public speaking stressors have produced larger cardiac chronotropic responses than math performance and reaction-time based stressors ( Al'Absi et al., 1997 ;  al'Absi, Bongard, & Lovallo, 2000 ;  Berntson et al., 1994 ), though HR responses are comparable whether participants are giving the speech or only preparing it ( Feldman, Cohen, Hamrick, & Lepore, 2004 ;  Gramer & Saria, 2007 ;  Waugh, Panage, Mendes, & Gotlib, 2008 ). 
 We focused on HR as an outcome measure for several reasons. First, HR increases are robustly elicited by SET, though they vary across individuals ( Berntson et al., 1994 ). They are substantially more robust than more pure measures of sympathetic and parasympathetic activity collected over short time intervals ( Berntson et al., 1994 ;  Cacioppo et al., 1994 ). Studies of stressor-induced HR reactivity have estimated its internal consistency above alpha = .95 and test-retest reliability around r = .6 after one year ( Cacioppo, 1994 ;  Uchino et al., 1995 ). Second, they can be measured on a roughly second-by-second basis, providing the ability to analyze effective connectivity among key brain regions and HR across time. Third, HR reactivity and cardiovascular reactivity more generally predict other health-related effects of stressors on the body. Cardiovascular reactivity is heritable ( Carroll, Hewitt, Last, Turner, & Sims, 1985 ) and is correlated with stressor-induced changes in cortisol release ( Al'Absi et al., 1997 ;  Lovallo, Pincomb, Brackett, & Wilson, 1990 ) and immune function ( Cacioppo, 1994 ;  Cacioppo et al., 1995 ;  Sgoutas-Emch et al., 1994 ;  Uchino et al., 1995 ). Finally, cardiovascular reactivity measures related to HR, such as heart-rate variability and LVEF, are risk factors for cardiac dysfunction and mortality ( Thayer & Lane, 2007 ). 
 
 
 Cortical and subcortical systems linked to threat responses 
 The most likely locations for brain generators of cardiovascular and other peripheral responses to SET are in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), which projects reciprocally to a set of interconnected “limbic” cortical regions and subcortical nuclei, including the insula, medial temporal lobes, amgydala, ventral striatum (ventral caudate and putamen), mediodorsal thalamus, hypothalamus, and PAG, as well as other important brainstem nuclei ( An, Bandler, Ongür, & Price, 1998 ;  Bandler et al., 2000 ;  Bandler & Shipley, 1994 ;  Barbas, Saha, Rempel-Clower, & Ghashghaei, 2003 ;  Hsu & Price, 2007 ;  Kondo, Saleem, & Price, 2003 ,  2005 ;  Price, 1999 ;  Saleem, Kondo, & Price, 2008 ). MPFC has been broadly associated with emotional processes ( T. Wager et al., 2008 ), with dorsomedial and pregenual regions linked to PAG activation, and tasks that engage self-evaluation ( Northoff et al., 2006 ). 
 In human imaging studies, the dorsal cingulate/MPFC has been linked consistently with stress-induced increases in HR and blood pressure ( Critchley, Corfield, Chandler, Mathias, & Dolan, 2000 ;  Critchley et al., 2003 ;  Critchley, Tang, Glaser, Butterworth, & Dolan, 2005 ;  P. Gianaros, F. M. Van Der Veen, & J. R. Jennings, 2004 ;  Gianaros, Jennings, Sheu, Derbyshire, & Matthews, 2007 ;  Gianaros et al., 2008a ) and cortisol ( Eisenberger et al., 2007 ). More rostral and ventral areas have been associated with reduced cortisol reactivity ( Eisenberger et al., 2007 ;  Kern et al., 2008 ), implying a role in successful regulation or protection from stress reactivity. These studies mark an important milestone in the interrelation of human brain activity and physiology, and have confirmed and extended findings from animal models implicating the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate (ACC), and anterior insula (aINS)—the same regions thought to be most critical for emotional appraisal—in physiological responses to social threat. 
 One limitation is that nearly all of the studies cited above (and most others) have relied primarily on between-subject correlations to make inferences about brain-physiology relationships. For example,  Eisenberger et al. (2007)  related individual differences in cortisol responses to brain activity responses in a separate social exclusion task. Though a promising way to examine individual differences, such correlations do not take full advantage of the capability of fMRI to make many repeated measurements of brain activity over time (typically 200–1500 per individual). Thus, these studies are limited in power by the sample size (though the Eisenberger study was particularly large compared to other fMRI studies). In addition, between-subject correlations are subject to a number of confounds related to individual differences in age, neurovascular coupling, brain morphometry, and other variables. Other studies have assessed relationships between brain activity and physiological changes across time, and tested whether these relationships are consistent across participants ( Critchley et al., 2005 ;  P. J. Gianaros et al., 2004 ;  Lane et al., 2009 ). For example, in a particularly large study,  Gianaros et al. (2004)  mapped brain regions in which task-evoked heart period changes across a series of working memory tasks correlated with variation in task-evoked brain activity. 
 In this study, we extend these results by using a new kind of analysis—multi-level mediation effect parametric mapping—that is specifically designed to link experimental manipulations, brain activity, and physiological output in a single path model. A single-level version of the model was used in ( Wager, Hughes, Davidson, Lindquist, & Ochsner, 2008 ). One advantage of the multi-level model is that it can incorporate both within-subjects longitudinal effects across time and between-subjects effects of individual differences in the same model. The first, within-subject level of the two-level model utilizes the rapid sampling capabilities of fMRI to estimate brain-physiology relationships across time. The second, between-subject level captures how activity and connectivity relate to other measures of individual differences. In addition, it can provide tests of mediation that standard general linear model-based analyses cannot. 
 We experimentally manipulated SET by asking participants to silently prepare a speech under time pressure ( Figure 1A ). Participants believed that they would have to give their speech (they did not), which would be audiotaped during scanning and judged later by fellow students. We monitored HR continuously during fMRI imaging, and our analyses focused on establishing pathways that link the experimental SET manipulation with variations in brain activity and HR. 
 The overall inference that a region is critical for generating HR responses to SET includes tests at two levels of analysis. The  first level  of analysis tests associations between SET, brain activity, and HR across time within individuals. At this level, a region involved in generating HR responses to threat should show the following three characteristics. Activity in a brain region should: 1) increase (or decrease) in response to the SET challenge (Path  a  in  Figure 2 ); 2) predict HR changes over time, controlling for the SET manipulation (Path b in  Figure 2 ); and 3) Mediate the SET-HR covariance. This latter criterion can be evaluated using a mediation test, which formally tests whether the brain region explains a significant proportion of the SET-HR covariance. The  second level  of analysis concerns HR reactivity. If a particular brain region is a mediator of the SET-HR relationship, and this relationship underlies individual differences in HR reactivity, then the first-level  a  and  b  path strengths should be predicted by HR reactivity. That is, for those who show robust HR increases to the SET challenge, brain activity in mediating regions should be more strongly associated with both SET and HR. Inferences about brain regions that link social threat with autonomic activation draw on each of these five hypotheses (three related to dynamic co-variation across time and two related to individual differences.) 
 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Thirty healthy, right-handed, native English speakers were recruited at the University of Michigan (mean age 20.3 years, 10 males) and participated in this experiment. Potential participants were initially pre-screened for scoring in the upper or lower quartile of an emotional resilience measure (ER-89)( Block & Kremen, 1996 ). However, none of the results presented in this paper were related to this personality trait (p > .5), so the two subgroups were combined in all analyses. Resilience-related results from this sample on a different task are presented elsewhere ( Waugh, Wager, Fredrickson, Noll, & Taylor, 2008 ). Participants were excluded who reported a prior history of neurological or psychiatric illness, current or prior psychoactive medication, claustrophobia, or other standard contraindications for fMRI, and were asked to abstain from tobacco and caffeine use 24 hours prior to scanning. All participants gave written informed consent as approved by the University of Michigan institutional review board. Two participants were excluded due to excessive head motion (> 3 mm), two were excluded because sufficient anatomical warping quality could not be achieved, and two additional participants did not have complete HR data, leaving a final sample of 24 participants. 
 
 
 Procedure and fMRI task design 
 A schematic description of the 7-min long task is depicted in  figure 1A . After an initial anatomical scan, participants were instructed that they were to prepare a speech that would be audiotaped in the scanner and then judged by fellow students on persuasiveness, organization and intellectual quality. Participants were given headphones with a microphone attached. They were also told that there was a slight possibility that they would not have to give the speech. After reading these instructions, the participants were told to relax and focus on a fixation cross for two minutes, during which we acquired baseline physiological and fMRI data. At the end of two minutes, the speech topic “Why am I a good friend” was presented for 15 seconds, and the participants were told they would have two minutes to prepare their speech, which should be 7 min long, and they should prepare to speak for the full 7 min. After a 2-min preparation period, participants were instructed that they were randomly selected to not give a speech, and asked to relax for the remaining 2.5 minutes of fMRI scanning. We presented computerized instructions during all phases using E-prime software (Psychology Software Tools). 
 Although this design has been used several times in psychophysiology studies, this is an unusual design for an fMRI study because it involves only a single, relatively sustained SET challenge. Allowing participants a sustained 2-min period to develop emotional and physiological responses was a key design feature. Because most people cannot easily switch rapidly among emotional states, traditional block or event-related designs dilute emotional experience in favor of repeated occurrences of artificially manipulated epochs. The present task employed a novel analysis method, mutli-level mediation especially suited for capturing brain activity reflecting a more ecologically-valid emotional experience. We discuss this type of design more fully in the companion paper ( Wager et al., submitted ). 
 
 
 Data acquisition and preprocessing 
 Heart rate was collected continuously during scanning using a photo-plethysmograph on the left index finger (100 Hz sampling). Using customized software from the James Long Company, we first identified and removed outliers from the data (using a custom algorithm blind to task condition). Inter-beat intervals were then calculated from the remaining R-waves, and HR was averaged into 2 s bins (the scan repetition time, TR). HR reactivity was calculated as each participant’s mean HR during speech preparation (from the presentation of the speech topic to the presentation of the “relax” cue), compared with pre- and post-stress rest periods. 
 MRI images were collected on a 3.0T GE whole-body scanner (GE Medical Systems). Structural images were acquired using high-resolution T1 spoiled gradient recall images (SPGR) for anatomical localization and warping to a standard space. Functional blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) images were acquired with a T2*-sensitive spiral in-out sequence ( Glover & Law, 2001 ) (TR = 2000 ms, TE = 40 ms, flip angle = 90°, 24 slices in ascending sequential sequence, 4.5 × 3.4375 × 3.475 mm voxels). An LCD projector displayed stimuli on a back-projection screen placed in the scanner room. 
 Functional images were subjected to a standard preprocessing sequence. Slice-timing acquisition correction using sync interpolation was performed using custom software written by Dr. Luis Hernandez, and realignment of the functional images to correct for head movement was performed using the Automated Image Registration tools ( Woods, Grafton, Holmes, Cherry, & Mazziotta, 1998 ). The remaining preprocessing steps were performed using the Statistical Parametric Mapping analysis package (SPM2, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). SPGR images for each participant were coregistered to the mean functional image. SPGR images were normalized to the anatomical space of the 152-brain template provided by the Montreal Neurological institute (MNI), and parameters were applied to the functional images. Finally, the normalized functional images were smoothed with an 8-mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel. This set of data is referred to as “raw” data in analyses and figures. 
 Prior to analysis, multiple regression was used to estimate and remove linear effects of a number of known nuisance covariates (see  Figure 1B ). These included, for each participant, a) 6 estimated head movement parameters from realignment, their mean-zeroed squares, their derivatives, and squared derivatives; b) the whole-brain global signal time series ( Vincent et al., 2006 ) (note that this is not the same as “global scaling” in SPM software and does not suffer from the same problems because it is not a re-scaling of the data ( Aguirre, Zarahn, & D'Esposito, 1998 )); c) indicator vectors for outlier time points identified based on their multivariate distance from the other images in the sample; and d) linear drift across time. These covariates were removed prior to analysis to ensure that the main analyses were not confounded by these variables. Global outliers (c above) were identified by computing both the mean and the standard deviation of values in each image for each slice. Mahalanobis distances for the matrix of mean values (one per slice) × functional volumes were computed, and images with a value above 3 standard deviations were considered outliers. The same procedure was used for standard deviation values. Typical numbers of outliers ranged between zero and four images per participant. All analyses described below were conducted on data after removing these covariates. Analyses conducted separately on the “raw” preprocessed data showed similar, but less spatially specific, effects (data not shown). 
 
 
 Statistical analysis: Multi-level path modeling 
 The multi-level path modeling approach we employed assesses relationships between experimental manipulations ( X ), brain activity ( M ), and physiology ( Y ) in the context of a single structural equation model (see  Figure 2 , and  Supplementary Methods 1  for details). Unlike most standard structural models, though, it was formulated to test within-subjects relationships between  X ,  M , and  Y  in a two-level mixed-effects framework. Because it is a mixed-effects model, it incorporates both “first-level” (within-subjects) and “second-level” (between-subjects) effects (individual differences in brain responses and HR reactivity). The advantages of using the structural model over a standard GLM approach are that: 1) It can provide tests of mediation effects; 2) It estimates several GLM equations in the context of a single path model, making it easy to localize regions that show a pattern of interest across multiple effects; and 3) within-subject measurement error is taken into account when conducting group analyses, providing increased efficiency if data quality is better for some subjects. 
 In this experiment, the initial variable ( X ) in the path model is experimentally manipulated SET (i.e., the contrast vector [SpeechPrep – (Pre + Post Baselines)], with a value of 0 during baseline periods and 1 during speech preparation). Pre- and post-threat baselines were not reliably different physiologically. The mediating variable ( M ) is the time series of brain activity in a single voxel, for each subject. The outcome variable ( Y ) is HR across time, for each subject. In addition, participants’ HR reactivity scores were entered as a second-level predictor. 
 The standard analysis of experimental effects on fMRI activity (i.e., the [SpeechPrep – Baseline] contrast) is captured by the X->M relationship in the model, which we refer to as Path  a  (see  Figure 2 ). A second effect of interest is the association between brain activity ( M ) and HR ( Y ), which we refer to as Path  b . As is standard in directed path models, Path  b  is assessed while controlling for  X  (SET), so that any relationships between brain activity and HR cannot be attributed to the experimental manipulation as a third variable ( Baron & Kenny, 1986 ;  MacCorquodale & Meehl, 1948 )—i.e., the brain-heart connectivity is not a side-effect of the common influence of SET. This analysis would typically be undertaken in a separate “effective connectivity” analysis. Finally, a  mediation test  provides inference on whether the inclusion of brain activity ( M ) in the model accounts for a substantial amount of the SET ( X ) to HR ( Y ) relationship. This is equivalent to testing the product of the path coefficients  a*b . 
 Inferences at the second (group) level provide a “random effects” test of significance for each of these within-subjects effects. In addition, the model provides inferences about whether the strength of each effect ( a ,  b , and  a*b ) is predicted by individual differences in HR reactivity. These effects would typically be estimated in separate brain-behavior correlation analyses. 
 Analyses are still performed using data from each brain voxel in a separate analysis (i.e., voxels are treated independently), so that the full path model and effects of interest are tested substituting each brain voxel’s data for  M 1 . This approach, which we refer to as Mediation Effect Parametric Mapping ( T. D. Wager et al., 2008 ), retains the flexibility of the statistical parametric mapping approach in locating voxels that show particular effects of interest, but extends it to evaluating effects of interest in a simple structural equation model. In order to correct for multiple comparisons, we calculated the experiment-wise false discovery rate (FDR) ( Genovese, Lazar, & Nichols, 2002 ) at  q  < .05 across all effects of interest, including the first- and second-level  a ,  b , and  a*b  coefficients (equivalent to P < .00037 uncorrected). 
 
 Analysis strategy 
 In this paper, we used a whole-brain, voxel-wise search to identify regions that showed overlapping Path  a  (SET responses) and Path  b  (HR connectivity) effects at the first level ( Figure 2 ). We also report results from voxel-wise search for second-level, HR reactivity effects. Thus, inferences localizing regions related to both SET and HR ([Path  a , Path  b ] overlap regions,  Figure 3 ) were drawn from a multi-voxel brain mapping approach, with correction for multiple comparisons. 
 We conducted additional analyses on first-level [Path  a , Path  b ] overlap regions and amygdala regions of interest (ROIs) defined  a priori  to characterize the nature and pattern of effects in these regions ( Figure 3 ). We identified four sub-regions of the amygdala defined by Amunts et al. ( Amunts et al., 2005 ) and labeled in the SPM anatomy toolbox v1.5 ( Eickhoff et al., 2005 ), including the left and right corticomedial group (superior amgydala) reported most frequently in imaging studies of emotion ( T. Wager et al., 2008 ) and the larger left and right basolateral complex. 
 Within these regions, we conducted two kinds of analyses. For these analyses, fMRI data were averaged over contiguous voxels in each region within each participant, yielding a single brain time-series per region per participant. First, we tested the full multi-level path model on each region. For the [Path  a , Path  b ] overlap regions, this analysis simply duplicated the Path  a  and Path  b  effects used to select voxels (thus, the results are merely descriptive), but the model provided additional new information on the mediation ( a*b ) effect (see below) and on the second-level relationships with HR reactivity. We tested separate path models that included only one brain region as a mediator (M) variable. We also tested a single path model that included multiple key [Path  a , Path  b ] overlap regions in the same model. The results from both types of model were qualitatively identical, in that the significance of the path coefficients was not affected by whether other mediators were included in the model. Thus, we focus on the results of the combined path model, which demonstrates independent mediation by multiple brain regions. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Physiological effects of SET 
 HR changes over time were a primary outcome measure of the SET challenge. Compared with pre-threat baseline and post-threat recovery, speech preparation induced reliable increases in HR (9.54 beats per minute, BPM, t = 4.88, p < .0001), as shown in  Figure 1C . This effect was significant when preparation was compared separately with each of the first (8.16 BPM, t = 4.18, p = .0004) and second baseline periods (10.92 BPM, t = 5.27, p < .0001). HR was lower during the post-preparation recovery period than during the first baseline (2.76 BPM, t = 2.91, p = .008) 2 . There were 22 degrees of freedom for each planned test. HR reactivity was uncorrelated with ego resilience (r = .01, P > .5) or other measures collected in the sample reported in  Waugh et al. (2008) , including sex, ethnicity, income, age, and several other trait personality measures (all P > .09). 
 
 
 Brain responses to SET (Path  a ) 
 Figure 2  shows a path diagram that links Speech Prep (the experimental manipulation of SET), brain activity, and HR variation. The first within-subjects effect we tested localized brain regions activated by the SET challenge ([SpeechPrep – Baseline], Path  a  in  Figure 2 ). This contrast was expected to show significant responses in a broad set of regions, including those critical for generating autonomic responses, visual responses to task instructions, and others. 
 Increases in activity to Speech Prep were found most prominently in the MPFC, and in particular the pre-genual anterior cingulate cortex (pgACC), extending into the right caudate, as well as several temporal and occipital cortical regions (yellow/red in  Figure 2A ). All significant regions are reported in  Table 1 . Decreases in activity related to SET were found prominently in the OFC, as well as the right putamen, ventral anterior insula, temporal cortex, and posterior cingulate cortex. 
 The Path  a  effect at the second level tested the correlation between the [SpeechPrep – Baseline] effect and HR reactivity. The results are shown in  Figure 2C  and  Table 1 . Positive effects, indicating positive correlations with HR reactivity, were found in a subset of regions showing first-level effects, including pgACC, extending into the right caudate nucleus, and right ventral temporal cortex (shown in warm colors). Negative correlations between SET and HR reactivity were found in bilateral OFC and right putamen (shown in cool colors). 
 
 
 Brain correlates of HR (Path  b ) 
 The second test for identifying brain regions that mediate the response of threat on HR is to identify regions that predict HR changes, both across time (first-level) and at the individual differences level (second-level). The brain-HR relationship was tested controlling for the Speech Prep indicator—a standard technique in path modeling to establish a mediator-outcome (here, brain-HR) relationship independent of task demand— and is depicted as Path  b  in  Figure 2 . At the first level, brain time series were correlated positively with HR variations across time most prominently in the pgACC, extending into the rostral dorsal anterior cingulate (rdACC), vmPFC, and right caudate head, as well as in the left DLPFC (middle frontal gyrus) and right caudate body. Negative correlations with HR were found in the right medial and lateral OFC, right inferior frontal gyrus, right putamen and ventral insula, and bilateral temporal pole and parahippocampal cortex. Coordinates and statistics for all Path  b  effects are reported in  Table 2 , and group-averaged time series data for key regions are shown in  Figure 2 . 
 At the second level, the slope of brain-heart connectivity (Path  b ) was positively moderated by HR reactivity in several regions, including the pgACC, rdACC, and left caudate ( Table 2 ). That is, in these regions, the magnitude of an individual’s HR reactivity to Speech Prep was correlated with the strength of the brain-HR coupling (controlling for SET). All of the regions listed above showed reliable first-level effects as well, indicating reliable brain-HR correlations in the group as a whole. In addition, another set of regions showed second-level moderation but did not show reliable brain-HR (Path b) correlation in the group. These regions may thus be associated with positive brain-HR connectivity in high HR responders, but negative brain-HR connectivity in low HR responders. These regions included the pre-SMA, superior frontal cortex, and additional areas of the right caudate. 
 Negative second-level correlations between brain-heart connectivity and HR reactivity included several areas showing negative brain-heart correlations at the first level: right OFC, right putamen, and left temporal pole ( Table 2 ). Thus, these regions showed a negative time series correlation (Path  b ) that was stronger (more negative) in high HR responders. Additional negative moderation was found in other regions that did not show significant first-level effects, including left OFC, vmPFC, several temporal cortical regions, and brainstem regions including the midbrain and hypothalamus. Because the second-level moderation analysis tests the relationship between brain-heart regression  slopes  and HR reactivity, these regions showed negative brain-heart associations in the high HR responders, and positive brain-heart associations in the low HR responders. 
 
 
 ROI analysis of the amgydala 
 Notably, the pattern of results described above did not include the amygdala, which was recently implicated in a performance threat by Gianaros et al. ( Gianaros et al., 2008a ) and has been a focus of attention in studies of conditioned fear and other negative affective processes ( Etkin & Wager, 2007 ;  Phelps, Delgado, Nearing, & LeDoux, 2004 ;  T. Wager et al., 2008 ;  T. D. Wager et al., 2008 ). We performed ROI analyses on anatomically defined amygdala subregions (see Methods) including the left and right corticomedial group (superior amgydala) and basolateral complex. No positive associations with SET or HR (Path a or b) at either the first or second levels were found in any regions. All subregions showed significant or near-significant de-activations during Speech Preparation (negative Path a effects; see  Table 3 ). Only in the right basolateral amygdala was brain activity predictive of HR, as indicated by negative Path b effects at first- and second-levels ( Table 3 ). A trend towards significant mediation (a*b) was found in this area. Significant mediation was found in the right corticomedial group, but in the absence of significant average a and b effects, this finding indicates the presence of a reliable pathway that differs across individuals in whether increases or decreases lead to HR increases. The group-average time course plot from the right basolateral amygdala is shown in  Figure 3 . Overall, the results suggest that amygdala increases are not a feature of speech task-related SET, differentiating it from the performance threat results of Gianaros et al. (2008) and other paradigms that elicit negative emotional experience, such as conditioned fear. 
 
 
 Overlap of SET and HR effects (Path  a  and Path  b  conjunction) 
 The key regions that link social threat with HR changes should show both SET responses (Path  a ) and HR correlations controlling for SET (Path  b ; see Methods).  Figure 3  shows the regions with significant results in both tests (at q < .05 FDR in each), along with their group-average time series (using methods described in ( Lindquist, Waugh, & Wager, 2007 ); see the figure legend for details). Statistical details are listed in Table 4. In  Figure 3 , regions showing positive first-level Path  a  and  b  effects in red, and negative first-level Path  a  and  b  effects in blue. The pgACC and right caudate head were the only regions that showed positive effects in both tests. The right OFC and putamen showed negative effects in both tests, indicating that they are de-activated by SET and that the degree of de-activation predicts HR increases across time. 
 Thus, the pattern of results presented thus far suggests that there are bi-valent effects of SET that are linked with HR increases, including activation in the pgACC and de-activation in the OFC and striatum. Notably, each of these regions showed second-level individual differences effects consistent with the first-level time series analyses. Strong HR “reactors” showed larger (more positive) SET-pgACC and pgACC-HR effects, and also larger (more negative) SET-OFC, OFC-HR, SET-putamen, and putamen-HR effects (see  Table 1  and  Table 2 ). 
 
 
 Does the brain track individual profiles of HR changes across time? Detailed analysis of pgACC, OFC, and putamen 
 We found reliable relationships between brain and HR in several key regions (pgACC, mOFC, and right putamen), both in time series correlations and in correlations with HR reactivity. However, there are a number of potentially confounding processes, such as internal sub-vocalization or cognitive planning activity, that are potentially correlated with HR and not captured completely by the box-car Speech Prep indicator variable. Thus, to more firmly establish the relationship between brain activity and HR, it is important to test how tightly coupled brain time series are with individual patterns of HR. 
 We first visualized the data in the key regions to assess the strength of the relationship between brain time series and HR changes across time. Detailed plots of the data for the pgACC are shown in  Figure 4 .  Figures 4A and 4B  show superimposed plots of the group-average brain and HR time series for the raw data and with covariates removed, respectively. Other regions showed similar data quality, but are not shown for space reasons. In addition, the relationship was apparent for individual participants, as shown in  Figure 4C . Additional analyses, presented in Supplemental Analysis 1 (see  Supplementary Material ), demonstrated that brain responses tracked individual profiles of HR increases, and suggests that general task demands that vary across time are unlikely to explain the brain-HR relationships. 
 
 
 Multilevel mediation analyses of key regions 
 The full multi-level path model was tested on regions that showed both first-level SET (Path a) and HR (Path b) effects. This analysis provides only descriptive reports of statistics for the first-level  a  and  b  effects used to select voxels (since inferences on these regions was already provided by the voxel-wise search), but it provides new inferences on the significance of the formal mediation ( a*b ) effect and the second-level relationships with HR reactivity. The test of mediation amounts to a test of whether controlling for each brain mediator explains a significant amount of the co-variance between the SpeechPrep predictor and the HR time series (see Methods). 
 We tested both path models with only a single brain mediator (the pgACC, mOFC, or putamen) and a path model with all three regions entered as mediators in the same path model. The significance of the individual regions’ path coefficients was qualitatively the same in both cases. For illustrative purposes, we show plots and statistics for the path model with the pgACC as the only mediator in  Figure 5 . The left panels (A) shows plots for the first- and second- level results for Path  a  (P < .001 at both levels), and the right panels (B) shows plots for Path  b  (P < .001 at both levels). The line plots in  Figure 5  show first-level regression slope estimates for each participant as blue lines, and the group average with its standard error in gray. The second-level moderation scatterplots show the relationship between path amplitude and HR reactivity. Notably, the mediation effect was significant ( a*b  = 0.29, t(21) = 5.22, P < .001), and second-level analyses showed that HR reactivity positively predicted Path  a , Path  b , and Path  a*b  slopes. That is, the functional pathway from SET to brain to HR was strongest in those with high HR reactivity. 
 The path model with all three regions entered as mediators is shown in  Figure 6 . This analysis was designed to distinguish between two alternative hypotheses. First, if the pgACC, OFC, and putamen are independent mediators of threat effects on the heart, then they should be significant mediators even when other regions are included (and their activity controlled for) in the model. Alternatively, activity in these regions could be part of a single bi-valent pattern or distributed “mode”; that is, each region may carry redundant information. If the dorsal and ventral MPFC are relatively specialized for sympathetic and parasympathetic control, respectively, as previous analyses have suggested ( P. J. Gianaros et al., 2004 ;  Lane, Reiman, Ahern, & Thayer, 2001 ), then we might expect the first case. 
 The results showed that each of the brain regions was an independent mediator of SET-HR covariance. As listed in Table 5, first-level  a  and  b  path coefficients remained significant for each of the three regions (P < .05 in all cases), and the first-level mediation effect was significant for each region as well (P < .005 in each). Thus, each region independently mediated some of the relationship between experimentally manipulated SET and HR profiles across time. At the second level, HR reactivity moderated the strength of all first-level effects (P < .05 in all cases), with the sole exception of a non-significant moderation of the putamen-HR partial path coefficient. Thus, the degree to which a participant was an overall autonomic “responder” moderated each of these functional SET-brain-HR pathways. Partial regression plots are shown in  Figure 6  for the pgACC and mOFC. 
 In  Figure 6 , significant effects are shown as black arrows, and non-significant effects shown as light gray arrows. The intrinsic “effective connectivity” among these three regions was assessed by regressing each brain region on the others using the multi-level path modeling framework (see Methods), controlling for indirect effects of the SpeechPrep predictor and fMRI time series from other regions. These analyses showed that the pgACC was functionally coupled with both mOFC (t = −6.53, p < .0001) and putamen (t = −6.26, p < .0001), but mOFC and putamen were not significantly coupled (t = 1.50, p = .15). This suggests that there are functional relationships between the regions that show activation and deactivation in response to SET, but that these relationships are not sufficiently strong that the information about HR contained in the regions is redundant. 
 These path models do not take relative hemodynamic or neural latency differences across regions into account. We also conducted additional, supplementary cross-correlation analyses to examine the relative timing of signals in key regions. The results, shown in Supplementary Analysis 2 and  Supplementary Figure S2  (see  Supplementary Material ), showed evidence that right mOFC activity preceded that of the other regions, consistent with an association between mOFC and fast, possibly predominantly parasympathetic effects on the heart. It is also worth mentioning that the optimal lag for brain-HR connectivity in each region was less than 300 ms (from zero-lag). Thus, correlation between brain and HR time series without convolution of the HR with an HRF signal is appropriate, and any convolution or lag is not likely to improve the strength of brain-HR connectivity estimates. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Social status and perceived social and intellectual competence are extremely important factors in modern human life ( Fiske, Cuddy, & Glick, 2007 ). Threats to self-esteem and negative evaluation—or social evaluative threat (SET)—relate to social status and are among the most potent laboratory and real-life stressors in contemporary society. Because SET often arises from a complex analysis of inter-personal relationships, rather than the presence of any particular simple sensory cue, it is likely to be generated by high-level appraisal processes involving the frontal cortex. Thus, SET is a good model for studying the cortical and subcortical brain networks associated with peripheral physiological changes. We used silent speech preparation, a component of a common laboratory stressor that produces robust HR responses ( Berntson et al., 1994 ;  Kirschbaum et al., 1993 ) and other clinically relevant cardiac events ( Rozanski et al., 1988 ), as a SET manipulation during scanning. 
 In this study, we have found evidence for multiple independent mediators of social threat effects on HR. Specifically, we found that a particular pattern of cortical activity is tightly coupled with HR reactivity to speech preparation. This pattern includes reciprocal activation changes in two sub-regions of the MPFC—pgACC and vmPFC/mOFC—and the right putamen, a portion of the striatum. SET was associated with increases in pgACC (Path  a ), and those increases predicted HR variations across time (Path  b ). SET was associated with decreases in vmPFC/mOFC and striatum (negative Path  a ), and the larger the brain  decreases , the higher the HR (negative Path  b ). These results suggest that changes in brain activity predict the evolution of HR responses to the SET challenge over time. 
 In addition, individual differences in SET-brain and brain-HR coupling predicted the magnitude of HR reactivity. This is evidenced by results from the second level in the multi-level path model. Stronger HR “reactors” expressed the pattern of increases in pgACC and decreases in vmPFC and striatum more strongly than non-responders (moderation of Path  a  by HR reactivity). Stronger HR “reactors” also showed stronger coupling between pgACC increases and HR and between vmPFC decreases and HR (moderation of Path  b  by HR reactivity). Overall, the pattern is consistent with the notion that some individuals did not show strong reactions, and thus showed little task-driven variability in both brain activity and HR. Combined, the within-subjects and between-subjects results provide evidence for a dual-process model of HR control in different medial prefrontal sub-regions. 
 The pgACC is a distinct subdivision of the anterior cingulate from the more ventral subgenual region and the more dorsal anterior mid-cingulate cortex according to Vogt ( Palomero-Gallagher, Vogt, Schleicher, Mayberg, & Zilles, 2008 ;  Vogt, 2005 ). The pgACC and rdACC are together associated with diverse emotional processes ( T. Wager et al., 2008 ), such as in the context-driven modulation of emotion and pain ( Petrovic et al., 2005 ;  Porro, 2003 ;  Wager, Scott, & Zubieta, 2007 )(Faymonville, submitted). In a companion paper ( Wager et al., submitted ), we have replicated this basic finding in a separate sample, and have extended these results with several additional analyses, including analyses of brainstem mediators of the cortex-HR relationship. This study, conducted using a different fMRI pulse sequence, found comparable results in a slightly more dorsal area in the anterior portion of the anterior mid-cingulate cortex, which we refer to as the rostral dorsal cingulate (rdACC). Results in both studies were statistically quite strong and survived correction for multiple comparisons in multiple effects (Path  a , Path  b , and the mediation  a*b  effect). It is possible that the results from this study also showed effects in subgenual cingulate, as the activated region covers this area, but based on the weight of evidence from other studies, we believe that pgACC is the best overall descriptor. 
 
 Medial prefrontal subregions, emotion, and autonomic control 
 A wealth of non-human animal literature supports a connection between MPFC and autonomic control of the heart ( Bandler et al., 2000 ;  Barbas et al., 2003 ;  Devinsky, Morrell, & Vogt, 1995 ;  Saper, 2002 ), and MPFC has been referred to as “visceromotor cortex,” in contrast to lateral orbital “viscerosensory” areas ( Price, 1999 ). Interestingly, vmPFC has been linked to higher-order contextual control over stress responses as well, providing a conceptual link with the cognitive generation and regulation of stress responses in humans. For example, a recent series of studies has shown that rat vmPFC inactivation abolishes the beneficial effects of stressor controllability on fear responses ( Amat et al., 2005 ), whereas vmPFC activation mimics the effects of control ( Amat, Paul, Watkins, & Maier, 2008 ). vmPFC inactivation also blocked the “immunizing” effects of prior exposure ( Amat, Paul, Zarza, Watkins, & Maier, 2006 ) on stressor reactivity. Another series of experiments has shown that inactivation of the vmPFC or hippocampus prevents consolidation of fear extinction ( Corcoran & Quirk, 2007b ;  Sierra-Mercado, Corcoran, Lebron-Milad, & Quirk, 2006 ), which is considered to be another type of safety-related context learning ( Davis, 1992 ). Conversely, vmPFC stimulation potentiates or mimics extinction memory ( Milad & Quirk, 2002 ;  Milad, Vidal-Gonzalez, & Quirk, 2004 ). 
 Recent neuroanatomical, lesion, and electrophysiological evidence also supports a functional distinction between dorsal and ventral MPFC sub-regions ( Quirk & Beer, 2006 ). A potential rat homologue of the pgACC/mOFC distinction is the difference between the dorsal pre-limbic (PL) and ventral infralimbic (IL) medial frontal cortices. These two structures project to different subcortical nuclei ( Gabbott, Warner, Jays, Salway, & Busby, 2005 ;  Hoover & Vertes, 2007 ;  McDonald, Mascagni, & Guo, 1996 ;  Vertes, 2004 )—the PL to the basolateral amygdala, associated with fear learning, and the IL to intercalated inhibitory neurons in the amygdala ( Vertes, 2004 ), which are associated with the suppression of fear behavior during extinction. It is IL in particular in which stimulation potentiates fear extinction and lesions reduce it ( Milad & Quirk, 2002 ;  Quirk, Russo, Barron, & Lebron, 2000 ). In addition, stress induces dendritic retraction in IL (but not PL), an effect associated with impaired fear extinction ( Izquierdo, Wellman, & Holmes, 2006 ). IL lesions also reduce stress-induced activity in hypothalamic pre-autonomic neurons, whereas PL lesions do not ( Radley, Arias, & Sawchenko, 2006 ). Instead, PL activity is related to the expression of learned fear responses ( Corcoran & Quirk, 2007a ). All of the abovementioned information is consistent with the view that PL activity promotes autonomic responses to stress, perhaps by mediating cognition and memory-related processes ( Gabbott, Warner, Jays, & Bacon, 2003 ;  Vertes, 2006 ), whereas IL activity inhibits them. The general pattern across these results matches the pattern of reciprocal control of HR in our study. 
 The pattern of reciprocal dorsal and ventral predictors of HR (though “dorsal” in this case is still relatively ventral, in the pgACC) replicates and extends findings from earlier human neuroimaging papers of stressful tasks. For example, in a large study with nearly 100 participants, Gianaros et al. ( P. Gianaros et al., 2004 ) found positive and negative correlations with HR 3  in the dorsal MPFC and vmPFC/mOFC, respectively. Critchley et. al ( Critchley et al., 2000 ), in an important early study, investigated correlations between brain activity and HR and blood pressure increases with mental arithmetic stress and hand exercise. Increases during the two "stressor" tasks were found in the dorsal cingulate, and increases were positively correlated with blood pressure. Conversely, OFC showed decreases with the stressor tasks, and mOFC in particular was negatively correlated with blood pressure. 
 A similar dorsal/ventral distinction has emerged in studies of fear conditioning in humans and other animals, supporting the idea that these different MPFC sub-regions play opposing roles in the generation of affective states. Several human fear conditioning studies have found increases in the dorsal MPFC and reductions in mOFC when cues associated with shock (conditioned stimuli) are presented ( Delgado, Nearing, Ledoux, & Phelps, 2008 ;  Phelps et al., 2004 ;  Schiller, Levy, Niv, LeDoux, & Phelps, 2008 ). In rats, PL shows increases electrophysiological responses during trace conditioning to aversive cues, whereas activity in the IL cortex decreases during fear conditioning ( Gilmartin & Mcechron, 2005 ). 
 Though we did not perform tests of lateralization, our findings of right-sided effects in mOFC are consistent with work showing right-lateralized increases in HR reactivity with sodium amytal inactivation ( Ahern et al., 2001 ) and vmPFC damage ( Hilz et al., 2006 ). The current findings extend this literature by showing this reciprocal relationship between dorsal and ventral subregions of the mPFC in response to social threat, as well as showing that although there is a functional coupling between these two regions, their effects on HR reactivity are independent of each other. Our findings are also consistent with the idea that dorsal and ventral MPFC subregions may play preferential roles in sympathetic and parasympathetic regulation of the heart (and possibly other organs). This idea is discussed in more detail in the  Supplementary Discussion . 
 
 
 HR reactivity as an individual differences measure 
 Our results also have implications for understanding individual differences in threat and stress reactivity. In our study, the degree to which an individual expressed each of the links between SET, brain activity, and HR strongly predicted the degree of HR reactivity to the challenge. HR reactivity provides a robust way of characterizing individual differences in physiological responses to stressors, rather than relying solely on subjective reports as outcome measures, which can depend on self-presentation ( Weinberger, Schwartz, & Davidson, 1979 ) and generally have more complex determinants. HR reactivity as an individual difference measure has been associated with increased hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity ( al'Absi et al., 2000 ;  Cohen et al., 2000 ;  Sgoutas-Emch et al., 1994 ;  Uchino et al., 1995 ) and cellular immune reponses to acute psychological stressors (reviewed in ( Cacioppo, 1994 ))( Knapp et al., 1992 ;  Sgoutas-Emch et al., 1994 ;  Uchino et al., 1995 ). HR reactivity to acute laboratory stressors in particular has been associated with blastogenic responses to mitogen (a probe of immune cell proliferation in response to challenge), NK cell counts, and lymphocyte cell counts (t-cells, b-cells) ( Brosschot et al., 1992 ;  Cohen et al., 2000 ;  Knapp et al., 1992 ;  Landmann et al., 1984 ;  Sgoutas-Emch et al., 1994 ;  Uchino et al., 1995 ). HR reactivity is an outcome deserving of study in its own right, and is not likely to be highly related to reported subjective anxiety or other psychological reports. In the present study, for example, HR reactivity was uncorrelated with emotional resilience, optimism, and other measures. 
 
 Absence of amygdala increases in SET: Differentiation of SET from other negative emotional tasks 
 Though reciprocal dorsal and ventral MPFC activity has emerged as a common theme across manipulations of emotion, the present results also provide evidence that not all aversive emotional states and outcomes are the same. For example, the basolateral and central amygdala have been strongly implicated in the learning and expression of cue-threat associations, respectively ( LeDoux, 1996 ). Amygdala activity is a prominent correlate of anticipatory anxiety ( Nitschke et al., 2009 ), conditioned fear in anticipation of shock ( Phelps et al., 2004 ), and reported negative emotion in response to affective pictures ( Ochsner & Gross, 2008 ;  Ochsner et al., 2004 ;  Phan et al., 2005 ). Amygdala hyperactivity is a prominent feature of multiple anxiety disorders ( Etkin & Wager, 2007 ), and its neurons encode both positive and negative predicted value ( Paton, Belova, Morrison, & Salzman, 2006 ). 
 However, our speech preparation task evoked no detectable increases in the amygdala—rather, they showed evidence for decreases during SET that did not strongly predict HR. Flexible change-point models that could have detected activation that was uncoupled from the task demand and HR also showed no evidence for amygdala responses during the speech preparation period ( Lindquist et al., 2007 ). The lack of amygdala activation is consistent with other studies of performance stressors, some of which have produced reliable  decreases  in the amgydala and hippocampus in both PET and fMRI ( Dedovic et al., 2005 ;  Pruessner et al., 2008 ). Physical pain shows a similar pattern of amygdala unresponsiveness or decreases ( Derbyshire et al., 1997 ;  Petrovic, Carlsson, Petersson, Hansson, & Ingvar, 2004 ), though results vary across studies. This pattern contrasts with recent reports of increased amygdala responses in cardiovascular responders performing a stressful cognitive task ( Gianaros et al., 2008b ), perhaps due to differences in the nature of the stressor; future research should address this issue. The latter study notwithstanding, the brain data in this study support the notion that SET responses are qualitatively distinct from some other forms of affective processing. 
 
 
 
 Challenges with physiology-induced imaging artifacts 
 One potential problem with any study relating brain activity to HR, blood pressure, or emotional states that induce physiological changes is the possibility that the psychological demands might induce vascular changes and thus fluctuation in fMRI signal that are non-neuronal in origin. There are several lines of defense against interpreting the results of the present study as vascular artifacts. 
 First, the pattern of results across the brain is very specifically localized to regions known to be involved in autonomic control from converging lesion, electrophysiologal and neuroanatomical studies in animals and humans. Second, that argument notwithstanding, one way to assess whether this pattern is artifactual is to examine whether studies of mechanical changes in vascular responses produce similar results. The evidence to date suggests that they do not. For instance, hypercapnia (increased blood CO2 induced, for example, by breath-holding) results in increases in fMRI signal throughout the brain, rather than in specific regions ( Thomason, Burrows, Gabrieli, & Glover, 2005 ;  Vazquez et al., 2006 ). The pgACC and mOFC show relatively low changes in percent signal during a breath-hold challenge relative to other regions of the brain (see Thomasen et al.,  Figure 6 ). Third, many kinds of physiological artifacts, such as effects of pulsatile motion due to the heart-beat, occur at different temporal frequencies from neuronal-induced fMRI signal, and are not likely to be significant sources of the brain-HR covariance observed here (see Birn et al. this issue). Finally, in our second, companion study (Wager et al., this issue) we were able to identify and control for signal in major arteries, including the anterior cerebral artery at the genu of the corpus callosum, and the MPFC findings were replicated. 
 Other standard caveats concerning the use of path models to infer directionality (i.e., causality) of the results apply. The use of a directional path model that specifies brain activity as a predictor of HR does not provide strong evidence that brain activity causes HR changes, though in this case the location of findings in “visceromotor” regions of MPFC ( Price, 1999 ), and the findings that the neuronal activity underlying fMRI responses was likely to occur 5–6 sec before observable HR changes, favor a brain-to-heart causal directionality. 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 In conclusion, these findings contribute significantly to the investigation of brain-physiology relationships in the context of social threat. The relationship between social threat and associated physiological responses (HR) was mediated by reliable and sustained increases in pre-genual cingulate/MPFC and decreases in vmPFC/mOFC. Future investigations should more specifically examine whether the dorsal/ventral distinction within the MPFC maps onto distinctions within the peripheral nervous system (sympathetic and parasympathetic, respectively), their relationships to emotion reports (negative and positive, respectively), and their potential subcortical mediators. We address some of these issues in a companion paper ( Wager et al., submitted ). 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supp. methods, results, discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 We would like to thank Niall Bolger for helpful discussion on path analysis, and the authors of SPM software for making it freely available. This paper was made possible with the support of grant funding from NSF 0631637 (T.W.), NIH Grant MH076136 (T.W.), NIH Grant MH59615 (BLF), a pilot grant from the UM fMRI lab to S.T./C.W., positive psychology microgrant to C.W. and dissertation thesis grant to C.W. 
 
 
 
 Author contributions: Design: C.W., B.F. and S.F.T., Data collection: C.W. and D.N., Analysis: T.D.W., M.L., and C.W. Writing: T.D.W., C.W., M.L., S.F.T., and B.F. Matlab code implementing mediation analyses is freely available at  http://www.columbia.edu/cu/psychology/tor/ . 
 
 
 1 
 In the present results, for simplicity, we identify regions that show significant  a  and  b  paths, indicating a relationship with speech preparation and an independent relationship with HR, and then conduct mediation tests on the resulting regions. However, qualitatively identical results were found when voxel-by-voxel maps were made of the overlap of  a ,  b , and  a*b  effects. 
 
 
 2 
 The same relationships were found after regressing out all MRI-related covariates within each subject (p <= .0003 for all tests), except that the first and second baseline periods were no longer significantly different (0.07 BPM, t = 0.91, p > .10). 
 
 
 3 
 Heart period, 1/HR, was actually analyzed, which has a more nearly linear relationship with underlying sympathetic and parasympathetic effectors ( Cacioppo et al., 1994 ), but we discuss the results in terms of heart rate here for ease of interpretation. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 The Variability of Human, BOLD Hemodynamic Responses 
 Neuroimage 
 1998 
 8 
 4 
 360 
 369 
 9811554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ahern 
 GL 
 
 
 Sollers 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Labiner 
 DM 
 
 
 Herring 
 AM 
 
 
 Weinand 
 ME 
 
 
 
 Heart rate and heart rate variability changes in the intracarotid sodium amobarbital test 
 Epilepsia 
 2001 
 42 
 7 
 912 
 921 
 11488892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Al'Absi 
 M 
 
 
 Bongard 
 S 
 
 
 Buchanan 
 T 
 
 
 Pincomb 
 GA 
 
 
 Licinio 
 J 
 
 
 Lovallo 
 WR 
 
 
 Cardiovascular and neuroendocrine adjustment to public speaking and mental arithmetic stressors 
 Psychophysiology 
 1997 
 34 
 3 
 266 
 275 
 9175441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 al'Absi 
 M 
 
 
 Bongard 
 S 
 
 
 Lovallo 
 WR 
 
 
 Adrenocorticotropin responses to interpersonal stress: effects of overt anger expression style and defensiveness 
 Int J Psychophysiol 
 2000 
 37 
 3 
 257 
 265 
 10858571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amat 
 J 
 
 
 Baratta 
 MV 
 
 
 Paul 
 E 
 
 
 Bland 
 ST 
 
 
 Watkins 
 LR 
 
 
 Maier 
 SF 
 
 
 Medial prefrontal cortex determines how stressor controllability affects behavior and dorsal raphe nucleus 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2005 
 8 
 3 
 365 
 371 
 15696163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amat 
 J 
 
 
 Paul 
 E 
 
 
 Watkins 
 LR 
 
 
 Maier 
 SF 
 
 
 Activation of the ventral medial prefrontal cortex during an uncontrollable stressor reproduces both the immediate and long-term protective effects of behavioral control 
 Neuroscience 
 2008 
 154 
 4 
 1178 
 1186 
 18515010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amat 
 J 
 
 
 Paul 
 E 
 
 
 Zarza 
 C 
 
 
 Watkins 
 LR 
 
 
 Maier 
 SF 
 
 
 Previous experience with behavioral control over stress blocks the behavioral and dorsal raphe nucleus activating effects of later uncontrollable stress: role of the ventral medial prefrontal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 51 
 13264 
 13272 
 17182776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Kedo 
 O 
 
 
 Kindler 
 M 
 
 
 Pieperhoff 
 P 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Shah 
 NJ 
 
 
 
 Cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human amygdala, hippocampal region and entorhinal cortex: intersubject variability and probability maps 
 Anat Embryol (Berl) 
 2005 
 210 
 5–6 
 343 
 352 
 16208455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An 
 X 
 
 
 Bandler 
 R 
 
 
 Ongür 
 D 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortical projections to longitudinal columns in the midbrain periaqueductal gray in macaque monkeys 
 J. Comp. Neurol 
 1998 
 401 
 4 
 455 
 479 
 9826273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bandler 
 R 
 
 
 Keay 
 KA 
 
 
 Floyd 
 N 
 
 
 Price 
 J 
 
 
 Central circuits mediating patterned autonomic activity during active vs. passive emotional coping 
 Brain Res Bull 
 2000 
 53 
 1 
 95 
 104 
 11033213 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bandler 
 R 
 
 
 Shipley 
 MT 
 
 
 Columnar organization in the midbrain periaqueductal gray: modules for emotional expression? 
 Trends Neurosci 
 1994 
 17 
 9 
 379 
 389 
 7817403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barbas 
 H 
 
 
 Saha 
 S 
 
 
 Rempel-Clower 
 N 
 
 
 Ghashghaei 
 T 
 
 
 Serial pathways from primate prefrontal cortex to autonomic areas may influence emotional expression 
 BMC neuroscience 
 2003 
 4 
 25 
 14536022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baron 
 RM 
 
 
 Kenny 
 DA 
 
 
 The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 1986 
 51 
 6 
 1173 
 1182 
 3806354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berntson 
 GG 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Binkley 
 PF 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Quigley 
 KS 
 
 
 Fieldstone 
 A 
 
 
 Autonomic cardiac control. III. Psychological stress and cardiac response in autonomic space as revealed by pharmacological blockades 
 Psychophysiology 
 1994 
 31 
 6 
 599 
 608 
 7846220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Block 
 J 
 
 
 Kremen 
 AM 
 
 
 IQ and ego-resiliency: conceptual and empirical connections and separateness 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 1996 
 70 
 2 
 349 
 361 
 8636887 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bosma 
 H 
 
 
 Two alternative job stress models and the risk of coronary heart disease 
 Am Public Health Assoc 
 1998 
 Vol. 88 
 68 
 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brosschot 
 JF 
 
 
 Benschop 
 RJ 
 
 
 Godaert 
 GL 
 
 
 de Smet 
 MB 
 
 
 Olff 
 M 
 
 
 Heijnen 
 CJ 
 
 
 
 Effects of experimental psychological stress on distribution and function of peripheral blood cells 
 Psychosomatic medicine 
 1992 
 54 
 4 
 394 
 406 
 1502282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Social neuroscience: autonomic, neuroendocrine, and immune responses to stress 
 Psychophysiology 
 1994 
 31 
 2 
 113 
 128 
 8153248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Berntson 
 GG 
 
 
 Binkley 
 PF 
 
 
 Quigley 
 KS 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Fieldstone 
 A 
 
 
 Autonomic cardiac control. II. Noninvasive indices and basal response as revealed by autonomic blockades 
 Psychophysiology 
 1994 
 31 
 6 
 586 
 598 
 7846219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Malarkey 
 WB 
 
 
 Kiecolt-Glaser 
 JK 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Sgoutas-Emch 
 SA 
 
 
 Sheridan 
 JF 
 
 
 
 Heterogeneity in neuroendocrine and immune responses to brief psychological stressors as a function of autonomic cardiac activation 
 Psychosom Med 
 1995 
 57 
 2 
 154 
 164 
 7792374 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cannon 
 WB 
 
 
 The wisdom of the body 
 1932 
 New York 
 W. W. Norton 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carroll 
 D 
 
 
 Hewitt 
 JK 
 
 
 Last 
 KA 
 
 
 Turner 
 JR 
 
 
 Sims 
 J 
 
 
 A twin study of cardiac reactivity and its relationship to parental blood pressure 
 Physiol Behav 
 1985 
 34 
 1 
 103 
 106 
 4041047 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 S 
 
 
 Hamrick 
 N 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 MS 
 
 
 Feldman 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rabin 
 BS 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 The stability of and intercorrelations among cardiovascular, immune, endocrine, and psychological reactivity 
 Ann Behav Med 
 2000 
 22 
 3 
 171 
 179 
 11211850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 KA 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Activity in prelimbic cortex is necessary for the expression of learned, but not innate, fears 
 J Neurosci 
 2007a 
 27 
 4 
 840 
 844 
 17251424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 KA 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Recalling safety: cooperative functions of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus in extinction 
 CNS Spectr 
 2007b 
 12 
 3 
 200 
 206 
 17329980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craig 
 AD 
 
 
 A new view of pain as a homeostatic emotion 
 Trends Neurosci 
 2003 
 26 
 6 
 303 
 307 
 12798599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 H 
 
 
 Human cingulate cortex and autonomic control: converging neuroimaging and clinical evidence 
 Brain 
 2003 
 126 
 10 
 2139 
 2152 
 12821513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Corfield 
 DR 
 
 
 Chandler 
 MP 
 
 
 Mathias 
 CJ 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Cerebral correlates of autonomic cardiovascular arousal: a functional neuroimaging investigation in humans 
 J Physiol (Lond) 
 2000 
 523 
 Pt 1 
 259 
 270 
 10673560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Mathias 
 CJ 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Zanini 
 S 
 
 
 Dewar 
 BK 
 
 
 
 Human cingulate cortex and autonomic control: converging neuroimaging and clinical evidence 
 Brain 
 2003 
 126 
 Pt 10 
 2139 
 2152 
 12821513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Tang 
 J 
 
 
 Glaser 
 D 
 
 
 Butterworth 
 B 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Anterior cingulate activity during error and autonomic response 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 27 
 4 
 885 
 895 
 15996878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1992 
 15 
 353 
 375 
 1575447 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dedovic 
 K 
 
 
 Renwick 
 R 
 
 
 Mahani 
 NK 
 
 
 Engert 
 V 
 
 
 Lupien 
 SJ 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 JC 
 
 
 The Montreal Imaging Stress Task: using functional imaging to investigate the effects of perceiving and processing psychosocial stress in the human brain 
 J Psychiatry Neurosci 
 2005 
 30 
 5 
 319 
 325 
 16151536 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nearing 
 KI 
 
 
 Ledoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Neural circuitry underlying the regulation of conditioned fear and its relation to extinction 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 59 
 5 
 829 
 838 
 18786365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Derbyshire 
 SW 
 
 
 Jones 
 AK 
 
 
 Gyulai 
 F 
 
 
 Clark 
 S 
 
 
 Townsend 
 D 
 
 
 Firestone 
 LL 
 
 
 Pain processing during three levels of noxious stimulation produces differential patterns of central activity 
 Pain 
 1997 
 73 
 3 
 431 
 445 
 9469535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devinsky 
 O 
 
 
 Morrell 
 MJ 
 
 
 Vogt 
 BA 
 
 
 Contributions of anterior cingulate cortex to behaviour 
 Brain 
 1995 
 118 
 Pt 1 
 279 
 306 
 7895011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 S 
 
 
 Gruenewald 
 TL 
 
 
 Kemeny 
 M 
 
 
 When the social self is threatened: shame, physiology, and health 
 Journal of personality 
 2004 
 72 
 6 
 1191 
 1216 
 15509281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 S 
 
 
 Kemeny 
 M 
 
 
 Acute Stressors and Cortisol Responses: A Theoretical Integration and Synthesis of Laboratory Research 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 2004 
 130 
 3 
 355 
 391 
 15122924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 4 
 1325 
 1335 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SE 
 
 
 Gable 
 SL 
 
 
 Hilmert 
 CJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Neural pathways link social support to attenuated neuroendocrine stress responses 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 35 
 4 
 1601 
 1612 
 17395493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Functional Neuroimaging of Anxiety: A Meta-Analysis of Emotional Processing in PTSD, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Specific Phobia 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2007 
 164 
 10 
 1476 
 1488 
 17898336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feldman 
 P 
 
 
 Cohen 
 S 
 
 
 Hamrick 
 N 
 
 
 Lepore 
 S 
 
 
 Psychological stress, appraisal, emotion and Cardiovascular response in a public speaking task 
 Psychology and Health 
 2004 
 19 
 3 
 353 
 368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiske 
 ST 
 
 
 Cuddy 
 AJ 
 
 
 Glick 
 P 
 
 
 Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and competence 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2007 
 11 
 2 
 77 
 83 
 17188552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabbott 
 PL 
 
 
 Warner 
 TA 
 
 
 Jays 
 PR 
 
 
 Bacon 
 SJ 
 
 
 Areal and synaptic interconnectivity of prelimbic (area 32), infralimbic (area 25) and insular cortices in the rat 
 Brain Res 
 2003 
 993 
 1–2 
 59 
 71 
 14642831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabbott 
 PL 
 
 
 Warner 
 TA 
 
 
 Jays 
 PR 
 
 
 Salway 
 P 
 
 
 Busby 
 SJ 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to subcortical autonomic, motor, and limbic centers 
 J Comp Neurol 
 2005 
 492 
 2 
 145 
 177 
 16196030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 4 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 P 
 
 
 Van Der Veen 
 FM 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JR 
 
 
 Regional cerebral blood flow correlates with heart period and high-frequency heart period variability during working-memory tasks: Implications for the cortical and subcortical regulation of cardiac autonomic activity 
 Psychophysiology 
 2004 
 41 
 4 
 521 
 530 
 15189475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 PJ 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JR 
 
 
 Sheu 
 LK 
 
 
 Derbyshire 
 SW 
 
 
 Matthews 
 KA 
 
 
 Heightened functional neural activation to psychological stress covaries with exaggerated blood pressure reactivity 
 Hypertension 
 2007 
 49 
 1 
 134 
 140 
 17101844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 PJ 
 
 
 Sheu 
 LK 
 
 
 Matthews 
 KA 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JR 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Individual differences in stressor-evoked blood pressure reactivity vary with activation, volume, and functional connectivity of the amygdala 
 J Neurosci 
 2008a 
 28 
 4 
 990 
 999 
 18216206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 PJ 
 
 
 Sheu 
 LK 
 
 
 Matthews 
 KA 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JR 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Individual Differences in Stressor-Evoked Blood Pressure Reactivity Vary with Activation, Volume, and Functional Connectivity of the Amygdala 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2008b 
 28 
 4 
 990 
 18216206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 PJ 
 
 
 Van Der Veen 
 FM 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JR 
 
 
 Regional cerebral blood flow correlates with heart period and high-frequency heart period variability during working-memory tasks: Implications for the cortical and subcortical regulation of cardiac autonomic activity 
 Psychophysiology 
 2004 
 41 
 4 
 521 
 530 
 15189475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilmartin 
 M 
 
 
 Mcechron 
 M 
 
 
 Single Neurons in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex of the Rat Exhibit Tonic and Phasic Coding During Trace Fear Conditioning 
 Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2005 
 119 
 6 
 1496 
 1510 
 16420154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Law 
 CS 
 
 
 Spiral-in/out BOLD fMRI for increased SNR and reduced susceptibility artifacts 
 Magn Reson Med 
 2001 
 46 
 3 
 515 
 522 
 11550244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gramer 
 M 
 
 
 Saria 
 K 
 
 
 Effects of social anxiety and evaluative threat on cardiovascular responses to active performance situations 
 Biol Psychol 
 2007 
 74 
 1 
 67 
 74 
 16950557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hilz 
 M 
 
 
 Devinsky 
 O 
 
 
 Szczepanska 
 H 
 
 
 Borod 
 J 
 
 
 Marthol 
 H 
 
 
 Tutaj 
 M 
 
 
 Right ventromedial prefrontal lesions result in paradoxical cardiovascular activation with emotional stimuli 
 Brain 
 2006 
 129 
 12 
 3343 
 3355 
 17082198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoover 
 WB 
 
 
 Vertes 
 RP 
 
 
 Anatomical analysis of afferent projections to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2007 
 212 
 2 
 149 
 179 
 17717690 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hsu 
 DT 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Midline and intralaminar thalamic connections with the orbital and medial prefrontal networks in macaque monkeys 
 J Comp Neurol 
 2007 
 504 
 2 
 89 
 111 
 17626282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Izquierdo 
 A 
 
 
 Wellman 
 CL 
 
 
 Holmes 
 A 
 
 
 Brief uncontrollable stress causes dendritic retraction in infralimbic cortex and resistance to fear extinction in mice 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 21 
 5733 
 5738 
 16723530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jain 
 D 
 
 
 Joska 
 T 
 
 
 Lee 
 FA 
 
 
 Burg 
 M 
 
 
 Lampert 
 R 
 
 
 … stress-induced abnormal left ventricular function response in patients with coronary artery disease … 
 J Nucl Cardiol 
 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jain 
 D 
 
 
 Shaker 
 SM 
 
 
 Burg 
 M 
 
 
 Wackers 
 FJ 
 
 
 Soufer 
 R 
 
 
 Zaret 
 BL 
 
 
 Effects of mental stress on left ventricular and peripheral vascular performance in patients with coronary artery disease 
 J Am Coll Cardiol 
 1998 
 31 
 6 
 1314 
 1322 
 9581726 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 W 
 
 
 Babyak 
 M 
 
 
 Krantz 
 DS 
 
 
 Waugh 
 RA 
 
 
 Coleman 
 RE 
 
 
 Hanson 
 MM 
 
 
 
 Mental stress--induced myocardial ischemia and cardiac events 
 Jama 
 1996 
 275 
 21 
 1651 
 1656 
 8637138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kern 
 S 
 
 
 Oakes 
 TR 
 
 
 Stone 
 CK 
 
 
 McAuliff 
 EM 
 
 
 Kirschbaum 
 C 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Glucose metabolic changes in the prefrontal cortex are associated with HPA axis response to a psychosocial stressor 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 2008 
 33 
 4 
 517 
 529 
 18337016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiecolt-Glaser 
 JK 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Malarkey 
 WB 
 
 
 Glaser 
 R 
 
 
 Acute psychological stressors and short-term immune changes: what, why, for whom, and to what extent? 
 Psychosomatic medicine 
 1992 
 54 
 6 
 680 
 685 
 1454962 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiecolt-Glaser 
 JK 
 
 
 Glaser 
 R 
 
 
 Depression and immune function: central pathways to morbidity and mortality 
 J Psychosom Res 
 2002 
 53 
 4 
 873 
 876 
 12377296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiecolt-Glaser 
 JK 
 
 
 McGuire 
 L 
 
 
 Robles 
 TF 
 
 
 Glaser 
 R 
 
 
 Emotions, morbidity, and mortality: new perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 2002 
 53 
 83 
 107 
 11752480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirschbaum 
 C 
 
 
 Pirke 
 KM 
 
 
 Hellhammer 
 DH 
 
 
 The 'Trier Social Stress Test'--a tool for investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 1993 
 28 
 1–2 
 76 
 81 
 8255414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knapp 
 PH 
 
 
 Levy 
 EM 
 
 
 Giorgi 
 RG 
 
 
 Black 
 PH 
 
 
 Fox 
 BH 
 
 
 Heeren 
 TC 
 
 
 Short-term immunological effects of induced emotion 
 Psychosomatic medicine 
 1992 
 54 
 2 
 133 
 148 
 1565752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kondo 
 H 
 
 
 Saleem 
 KS 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Differential connections of the temporal pole with the orbital and medial prefrontal networks in macaque monkeys 
 J Comp Neurol 
 2003 
 465 
 4 
 499 
 523 
 12975812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kondo 
 H 
 
 
 Saleem 
 KS 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Differential connections of the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortex with the orbital and medial prefrontal networks in macaque monkeys 
 J Comp Neurol 
 2005 
 493 
 4 
 479 
 509 
 16304624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landmann 
 RM 
 
 
 Müller 
 FB 
 
 
 Perini 
 C 
 
 
 Wesp 
 M 
 
 
 Erne 
 P 
 
 
 Bühler 
 FR 
 
 
 Changes of immunoregulatory cells induced by psychological and physical stress: relationship to plasma catecholamines 
 Clin Exp Immunol 
 1984 
 58 
 1 
 127 
 135 
 6478647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Ahern 
 GL 
 
 
 Thayer 
 JF 
 
 
 Neural correlates of heart rate variability during emotion 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 44 
 1 
 213 
 222 
 18778779 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Ahern 
 GL 
 
 
 Thayer 
 JF 
 
 
 Activity in medial prefrontal cortex correlates with vagal component of heart rate variability during emotion 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2001 
 47 
 97 
 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 The emotional brain 
 1996 
 New York 
 Touchstone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Emotion circuits in the brain 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2000 
 23 
 155 
 184 
 10845062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Waugh 
 C 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Modeling state-related fMRI activity using change-point theory 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 35 
 3 
 1125 
 1141 
 17360198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lovallo 
 WR 
 
 
 Pincomb 
 GA 
 
 
 Brackett 
 DJ 
 
 
 Wilson 
 MF 
 
 
 Heart rate reactivity as a predictor of neuroendocrine responses to aversive and appetitive challenges 
 Psychosom Med 
 1990 
 52 
 1 
 17 
 26 
 2305020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacCorquodale 
 K 
 
 
 Meehl 
 PE 
 
 
 On a distinction between hypothetical constructs and intervening variables 
 Psychological Review 
 1948 
 55 
 2 
 307 
 321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McDonald 
 AJ 
 
 
 Mascagni 
 F 
 
 
 Guo 
 L 
 
 
 Projections of the medial and lateral prefrontal cortices to the amygdala: a Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin study in the rat 
 Neuroscience 
 1996 
 71 
 1 
 55 
 75 
 8834392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mcewen 
 B 
 
 
 Physiology and Neurobiology of Stress and Adaptation: Central Role of the Brain 
 Physiological Reviews 
 2007 
 87 
 3 
 873 
 904 
 17615391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McEwen 
 BS 
 
 
 Sapolsky 
 RM 
 
 
 Stress and cognitive function 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 1995 
 5 
 2 
 205 
 216 
 7620309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milad 
 MR 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction 
 Nature 
 2002 
 420 
 6911 
 70 
 74 
 12422216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milad 
 MR 
 
 
 Vidal-Gonzalez 
 I 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Electrical stimulation of medial prefrontal cortex reduces conditioned fear in a temporally specific manner 
 Behav Neurosci 
 2004 
 118 
 2 
 389 
 394 
 15113265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 JB 
 
 
 Sarinopoulos 
 I 
 
 
 Oathes 
 DJ 
 
 
 Johnstone 
 T 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 
 Anticipatory Activation in the Amygdala and Anterior Cingulate in Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Prediction of Treatment Response 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 Heinzel 
 A 
 
 
 Degreck 
 M 
 
 
 Bermpohl 
 F 
 
 
 Dobrowolny 
 H 
 
 
 Panksepp 
 J 
 
 
 Self-referential processing in our brain—A meta-analysis of imaging studies on the self 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 1 
 440 
 457 
 16466680 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Obrist 
 PA 
 
 
 Cardiovascular psychophysiology: a perspective 
 1981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Cognitive emotion regulation: Insights from social cognitive and affective neuroscience 
 Currents Directions in Psychological Science 
 2008 
 17 
 1 
 153 
 158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Chopra 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 
 For better or for worse: neural systems supporting the cognitive down-and up-regulation of negative emotion 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 2 
 483 
 499 
 15488398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 Vogt 
 BA 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Receptor architecture of human cingulate cortex: Evaluation of the four-region neurobiological model 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paton 
 JJ 
 
 
 Belova 
 MA 
 
 
 Morrison 
 SE 
 
 
 Salzman 
 CD 
 
 
 The primate amygdala represents the positive and negative value of visual stimuli during learning 
 Nature 
 2006 
 439 
 7078 
 865 
 870 
 16482160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrovic 
 P 
 
 
 Carlsson 
 K 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Hansson 
 P 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 Context-dependent deactivation of the amygdala during pain 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2004 
 16 
 7 
 1289 
 1301 
 15453980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrovic 
 P 
 
 
 Dietrich 
 T 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Carlsson 
 K 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 Placebo in emotional processing--induced expectations of anxiety relief activate a generalized modulatory network 
 Neuron 
 2005 
 46 
 6 
 957 
 969 
 15953423 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 GJ 
 
 
 Uhde 
 TW 
 
 
 Tancer 
 ME 
 
 
 Neural substrates for voluntary suppression of negative affect: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2005 
 57 
 3 
 210 
 219 
 15691521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nearing 
 KI 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Extinction learning in humans: role of the amygdala and vmPFC 
 Neuron 
 2004 
 43 
 6 
 897 
 905 
 15363399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Porges 
 SW 
 
 
 The Polyvagal Theory: phylogenetic contributions to social behavior 
 Physiol Behav 
 2003 
 79 
 3 
 503 
 513 
 12954445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Porro 
 C 
 
 
 Functional activity mapping of the mesial hemispheric wall during anticipation of pain 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 4 
 1738 
 1747 
 12948728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortical networks related to visceral function and mood 
 Annals Of the New York Academy Science 
 1999 
 877 
 383 
 396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 JC 
 
 
 Dedovic 
 K 
 
 
 Khalili-Mahani 
 N 
 
 
 Engert 
 V 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 M 
 
 
 Buss 
 C 
 
 
 
 Deactivation of the limbic system during acute psychosocial stress: evidence from positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging studies 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2008 
 63 
 2 
 234 
 240 
 17686466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Beer 
 JS 
 
 
 Prefrontal involvement in the regulation of emotion: convergence of rat and human studies 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2006 
 16 
 6 
 723 
 727 
 17084617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Russo 
 GK 
 
 
 Barron 
 JL 
 
 
 Lebron 
 K 
 
 
 The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in the recovery of extinguished fear 
 J Neurosci 
 2000 
 20 
 16 
 6225 
 6231 
 10934272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Radley 
 JJ 
 
 
 Arias 
 CM 
 
 
 Sawchenko 
 PE 
 
 
 Regional differentiation of the medial prefrontal cortex in regulating adaptive responses to acute emotional stress 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 50 
 12967 
 12976 
 17167086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rozanski 
 A 
 
 
 Bairey 
 CN 
 
 
 Krantz 
 DS 
 
 
 Friedman 
 J 
 
 
 Resser 
 KJ 
 
 
 Morell 
 M 
 
 
 
 Mental stress and the induction of silent myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease 
 N Engl J Med 
 1988 
 318 
 16 
 1005 
 1012 
 3352695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saleem 
 KS 
 
 
 Kondo 
 H 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Complementary circuits connecting the orbital and medial prefrontal networks with the temporal, insular, and opercular cortex in the macaque monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 2008 
 506 
 4 
 659 
 693 
 18067141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saper 
 CB 
 
 
 The central autonomic nervous system: conscious visceral perception and autonomic pattern generation 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2002 
 25 
 433 
 469 
 12052916 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schiller 
 D 
 
 
 Levy 
 I 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 From fear to safety and back: reversal of fear in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 45 
 11517 
 11525 
 18987188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selye 
 H 
 
 
 The stress of life 
 1956 
 New York 
 McGraw-Hill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sgoutas-Emch 
 SA 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Malarkey 
 W 
 
 
 Pearl 
 D 
 
 
 Kiecolt-Glaser 
 JK 
 
 
 
 The effects of an acute psychological stressor on cardiovascular, endocrine, and cellular immune response: a prospective study of individuals high and low in heart rate reactivity 
 Psychophysiology 
 1994 
 31 
 3 
 264 
 271 
 8008790 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheps 
 D 
 
 
 Mental Stress-Induced Ischemia and All-Cause Mortality in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: Results From the Psychophysiological Investigations of Myocardial Ischemia Study 
 Circulation 
 2002 
 105 
 15 
 1780 
 1784 
 11956119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sierra-Mercado 
 D 
 Jr 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 KA 
 
 
 Lebron-Milad 
 K 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Inactivation of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex reduces expression of conditioned fear and impairs subsequent recall of extinction 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 2006 
 24 
 6 
 1751 
 1758 
 17004939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Makino 
 S 
 
 
 Kvetnansky 
 R 
 
 
 Post 
 RM 
 
 
 Stress and glucocorticoids affect the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3 mRNAs in the hippocampus 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1995 
 15 
 3 
 1768 
 1777 
 7891134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stein-Behrens 
 B 
 
 
 Mattson 
 MP 
 
 
 Chang 
 I 
 
 
 Yeh 
 M 
 
 
 Sapolsky 
 R 
 
 
 Stress exacerbates neuron loss and cytoskeletal pathology in the hippocampus 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1994 
 14 
 9 
 5373 
 5380 
 8083742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thayer 
 JF 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 The role of vagal function in the risk for cardiovascular disease and mortality 
 Biol Psychol 
 2007 
 74 
 2 
 224 
 242 
 17182165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Burrows 
 BE 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Breath holding reveals differences in fMRI BOLD signal in children and adults 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 3 
 824 
 837 
 15808983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tugade 
 MM 
 
 
 Fredrickson 
 BL 
 
 
 Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce back from negative emotional experiences 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 2004 
 86 
 2 
 320 
 333 
 14769087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Malarkey 
 W 
 
 
 Glaser 
 R 
 
 
 Individual differences in cardiac sympathetic control predict endocrine and immune responses to acute psychological stress 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 1995 
 69 
 4 
 736 
 743 
 7473028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vazquez 
 AL 
 
 
 Cohen 
 ER 
 
 
 Gulani 
 V 
 
 
 Hernandez-Garcia 
 L 
 
 
 Zheng 
 Y 
 
 
 Lee 
 GR 
 
 
 
 Vascular dynamics and BOLD fMRI: CBF level effects and analysis considerations 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 32 
 4 
 1642 
 1655 
 16860574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vertes 
 RP 
 
 
 Differential projections of the infralimbic and prelimbic cortex in the rat 
 Synapse 
 2004 
 51 
 1 
 32 
 58 
 14579424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vertes 
 RP 
 
 
 Interactions among the medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and midline thalamus in emotional and cognitive processing in the rat 
 Neuroscience 
 2006 
 142 
 1 
 1 
 20 
 16887277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 Andrews 
 JR 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 
 Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2006 
 96 
 6 
 3517 
 3531 
 16899645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vogt 
 BA 
 
 
 Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2005 
 6 
 7 
 533 
 544 
 15995724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Barrett 
 L 
 
 
 Bliss-Moreau 
 E 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 K 
 
 
 Duncan 
 S 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 
 The neuroimaging of emotion 
 The handbook of emotion 
 2008 
 Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Hughes 
 B 
 
 
 Davidson 
 M 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 ML 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Prefrontal-subcortical pathways mediating successful emotion regulation 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 59 
 1037 
 1050 
 18817740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Scott 
 DJ 
 
 
 Zubieta 
 JK 
 
 
 Placebo effects on human mu-opioid activity during pain 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2007 
 104 
 11056 
 11061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 van Ast 
 V 
 
 
 Hughes 
 B 
 
 
 Davidson 
 ML 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses to social threat, Part II: Prefrontal-subcortical pathways and relationship with anxiety 
 Neuroimage 
 submitted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 Y 
 
 
 Gould 
 E 
 
 
 McEwen 
 BS 
 
 
 Stress induces atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA 3 pyramidal neurons 
 Brain research 
 1992 
 588 
 2 
 341 
 345 
 1393587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waugh 
 CE 
 
 
 Panage 
 S 
 
 
 Mendes 
 WB 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Cardiovascular recovery from anticipated negative experiences that never occur 
 Psychophysiology 
 2008 
 45 
 s1 
 S83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waugh 
 CE 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Fredrickson 
 BL 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 The neural correlates of trait resilience when anticipating and recovering from threat 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DA 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 GE 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Low-anxious, high-anxious, and repressive coping styles: psychometric patterns and behavioral and physiological responses to stress 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 1979 
 88 
 4 
 369 
 380 
 479459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Holmes 
 CJ 
 
 
 Cherry 
 SR 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Automated image registration: I. General methods and intrasubject, intramodality validation 
 J Comput Assist Tomogr 
 1998 
 22 
 1 
 139 
 152 
 9448779 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 A) Task design. The SET manipulation involved a 2-min resting baseline, a 15 sec visual presentation of the speech topic, a 2-min preparation period, a 15-sec no speech instruction, and a 2.5 min recovery period. B) Nuisance regressors for fMRI analysis. These varied across participants, but always included regressors for linear and higher-order head movement, potential outliers based on task- and physiology-blind global signal analysis, global activity values, and linear drift. C) Heart rate changes over time. Individuals are shown by the light gray lines, and the group average (with shaded standard error region) is shown by the heavy black line. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Path model (top) and results of the multi-level mediation effect parametric mapping search. Relationships between Speech Prep and brain activity (Path a) and between fMRI activity and heart rate (Path b, controlling for the Speech Prep regressor) were tested both within person and between persons, with heart rate (HR) reactivity as a predictor of individual differences in path amplitude. A) Path a results for the first-level model (time series). Saggital slice showing regions whose activity increased (yellow/orange) or decreased (blue) in response to the social evaluative threat (SET) challenge. Significant regions of 3 or more contiguous voxels at q < .05 False Discovery Rate corrected, and contiguous regions at p < .005, are shown. B) Path b results for the first-level model (time series). Sagittal slices showing significant positive (yellow/orange) or negative (blue) correlates of heart rate changes over time, controlling for Speech Prep regressor. C) Path a results for the second-level model, showing correlations between SET-brain connectivity and HR reactivity. Positive correlations are shown in yellow, and negative correlation in blue. D) Path b results for the second-level model, showing correlations between brain-HRconnectivity and HR reactivity. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Regions showing both Path a (SET responses) and Path b (prediction of HR) in the first-level (time series) model, and results from one amygdala region of interest (ROI). Positive results for both Path a and Path b are shown in red, and negative results for both are shown in blue. No regions showed positive a and negative b effects or vice versa. Results are shown at P < .001 for display, but all regions showed significant effects in both paths at q < .05 FDR (p < .0004). The time series plots at right show group-averaged time series data across the run estimated with the Hierarchical Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (HEWMA) model. They are similar to, but smoother, than the raw data averages. Instruction periods are shown as yellow horizontal bars, and the Speech Prep period is shown as a blue horizontal bar in each plot. The HEWMA model provides estimates of which time points are deviant from the pre-SET baseline using a 2-state mixture model; these periods are marked with a red line. Time points that were individually significantly different from the average pre-scan baseline (zero on the y-axis) are marked with green dots at y = 0. The right (R) putamen alone showed evidence for a trend towards de-activation even before the speech instruction onset, as evidenced by a change-point value that occurred before the instruction. The right amygdala ROI showed significant de-activation in response to SET, but this activity did not predict heart rate fluctuations. Other amygdala sub-regions showed similar results. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Visualization of brain-HR connectivity (related to Path b) for the pregenual cingulate. A) Superimposed plots of the group-average time series data (black, with standard error regions shaded) against the group-average HR data (red). Speech Prep-related variance was not removed for display purposes, so the response to the social threat challenge can be seen. In addition, nuisance covariates (see  Figure 1C ) were not removed for display purposes, so the original response in both brain and heart can be seen. Only standard preprocessing procedures were performed. Instruction periods are shown as yellow horizontal bars, and the Speech Prep period is shown as a blue horizontal bar. B) The same plot as in (A), but with nuisance covariates removed. C) Plots of brain (black) and superimposed HR (red) for individual subjects, each shown in a separate panel. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Path diagram and effect plots for the pregenual anterior cingulate (pgACC). A) Path a results for Level 1 (time series SET-brain relationship) and Level 2 (correlation between SET-brain relationship and HR reactivity). Cross-hairs indicate center-of-mass coordinates for the SET effect (Path  a , blue) and heart-rate prediction effect (Path  b , green). Mean path coefficients are shown, with standard errors in parentheses. ***, P < .001. The line plot (left panel) shows the first-level effects, the relationships between the SET predictor (which took on values of 0 for baseline and 1 during speech preparation; x-axis) and fMRI activity (y-axis). Relationships for Individual participants are shown as blue lines, one per participant. The group-average effect with its standard error is shown by the black line and gray shaded area. The right panel shows a scatterplot of the second-level relationship between individual differences in the slope of the Path  a  effect (x-axis) and the average HR response to the task (y-axis). The significant relationship (r = .68, p < .00037 [the FDR threshold]) indicates that those with high HR reactivity showed larger SET-brain (Path  a ) effects. B) The same relationships for the brain-HR relationship (Path  b ), controlling for the SET predictor. Significant first- and second-level effects demonstrate the reliable link between individual profiles of brain activity and individual profiles of HR changes across time. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Mediation path diagram for all three key mediators of social evaluative threat (SET) effects on heart rate. Solid black lines indicate significant relationships, and light gray lines indicate non-significant relationships. Connections hypothesized to be directional are shown as one-way arrows, whereas effects likely to be bi-directional (feedback loops) based on anatomy are shown as double-headed arrows. Causality could only be inferred for the SET-brain effects because SET was experimentally manipulated. First-level effects (SET-brain connectivity for Path a or brain-HR connectivity for Path b) are shown as line plots, and second-level effects (correlations between Path a or Path b and HR reactivity) are shown as scatterplots. Effect plots are shown for pregenual cingulate (pgACC) and medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC), but are omitted for putamen (Put) for space reasons. Full statistics are presented in Table 5. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brain responses to SET challenge (Path a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1st-level: within-subjects 
 
 
 >2nd-level: moderation by average HR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 Name 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Vol. (mm3) 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Vol. (mm3) 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Increases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial frontal 
 pgACC 
 0 
 31 
 3 
 7383 
 5.15 
 −3 
 28 
 0 
 6387 
 4.46 
 
 
 Temporal 
 vTC 
 25 
 −56 
 −18 
 29 
 3.64 
 28 
 −56 
 −18 
 234 
 3.55 
 
 
 
 STS 
 −66 
 −41 
 0 
 29 
 3.63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 OCC 
 3 
 −88 
 −3 
 25986 
 5.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L OCC 
 −25 
 −94 
 18 
 1963 
 3.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R OCC 
 22 
 −91 
 30 
 59 
 3.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Decreases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal 
 L mOFC 
 −19 
 38 
 −21 
 117 
 3.48 
 −19 
 56 
 −21 
 176 
 3.43 
 
 
 
 R mOFC 
 19 
 38 
 −15 
 1553 
 4.25 
 19 
 47 
 −18 
 1699 
 3.43 
 
 
 
 R aOFC 
 22 
 59 
 −18 
 146 
 3.73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basal ganglia 
 R Putamen 
 34 
 0 
 6 
 293 
 3.88 
 31 
 −3 
 3 
 234 
 3.41 
 
 
 Insula 
 R valNS 
 44 
 9 
 −9 
 88 
 3.56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 R TP 
 38 
 16 
 −39 
 410 
 4.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R ITG 
 66 
 −19 
 −21 
 59 
 3.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R STG 
 59 
 6 
 −3 
 117 
 3.88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L STG 
 −56 
 −3 
 0 
 29 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diencephalon 
 Thal 
 9 
 −25 
 9 
 29 
 3.46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 
 44 
 −66 
 36 
 117 
 3.86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior medial 
 PCC 
 0 
 −53 
 15 
 850 
 3.96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MidCing 
 3 
 −16 
 57 
 703 
 4.13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precun 
 −9 
 −59 
 69 
 29 
 3.44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precun 
 3 
 −50 
 72 
 88 
 3.45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sensorimotor 
 SMC 
 6 
 −28 
 72 
 88 
 3.74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMC 
 −6 
 −31 
 78 
 59 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Correlates of HR, controlling for SET (Path b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1st-level: within-subjects 
 2nd-level: moderation by average HR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 Name 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Vol. (mm3) 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Vol. (mm3) 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B level 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial frontal 
 pgACC 
 0 
 28 
 0 
 7793 
 4.17 
 0 
 31 
 6 
 42305 
 4.23 
 
 
 
 vmPFC 
 0 
 22 
 −24 
 29 
 3.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 vmPFC 
 −3 
 38 
 −21 
 29 
 3.47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 rdACC 
 3 
 16 
 18 
 146 
 3.48 
 9 
 22 
 33 
 352 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 rmPFC 
 −12 
 59 
 3 
 29 
 3.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 preSMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 −3 
 72 
 615 
 3.68 
 
 
 Lateral frontal 
 L DLPFC 
 −25 
 50 
 30 
 205 
 3.79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SFG 
 
 
 
 
 
 −25 
 50 
 27 
 820 
 3.57 
 
 
 
 R DLPFC 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 34 
 30 
 3340 
 3.68 
 
 
 Basal ganglia 
 R Cau 
 12 
 6 
 6 
 234 
 3.96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R Cau 
 19 
 −21 
 21 
 29 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L Cau 
 −16 
 16 
 21 
 59 
 3.38 
 −22 
 −19 
 21 
 1172 
 3.42 
 
 
 
 R Cau 
 19 
 −6 
 24 
 29 
 3.56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Negative association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal 
 R mOFC 
 19 
 34 
 −24 
 29 
 3.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R mOFC 
 16 
 41 
 −21 
 205 
 3.78 
 25 
 44 
 −15 
 9814 
 3.97 
 
 
 
 R IOFC 
 31 
 41 
 −18 
 59 
 3.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R aOFC 
 16 
 56 
 −15 
 176 
 3.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L IOFC 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 34 
 −12 
 6592 
 3.72 
 
 
 
 L aOFc 
 
 
 
 
 
 −22 
 53 
 −15 
 762 
 3.97 
 
 
 Medial frontal 
 VMPFC/mOFC 
 
 
 
 
 
 −3 
 50 
 −27 
 498 
 3.38 
 
 
 Posterior medial 
 MidCing 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 −16 
 57 
 1934 
 3.97 
 
 
 Lateral frontal 
 R IFG 
 44 
 31 
 −12 
 29 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R IFG 
 44 
 38 
 −3 
 176 
 3.78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 L TP 
 −28 
 3 
 −45 
 322 
 3.73 
 −34 
 6 
 −39 
 3721 
 3.95 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 −41 
 3 
 −42 
 29 
 3.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L STG 
 
 
 
 
 
 −50 
 −22 
 6 
 6240 
 3.74 
 
 
 
 R TC/OCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
 −56 
 9 
 4893 
 3.98 
 
 
 
 L PHCMP 
 −31 
 −34 
 −18 
 29 
 3.39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basal ganglia 
 R Putamen/vINS 
 38 
 −3 
 −9 
 820 
 3.95 
 34 
 3 
 −21 
 8789 
 4.03 
 
 
 Insula 
 R vaINS 
 44 
 6 
 −15 
 117 
 3.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Overlap of 1st-level SET and HR (a and b paths) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Vol. (mm3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive a and b paths 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial frontal 
 pgACC 
 0 
 31 
 3 
 5420 
 
 
 
 R Cau 
 12 
 16 
 9 
 29 
 
 
 
 
 Negative a and b paths 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal 
 R mOFC 
 16 
 41 
 −18 
 117 
 
 
 
 R aOFC 
 19 
 59 
 −18 
 59 
 
 
 Basal ganglia 
 R Putamen 
 34 
 0 
 0 
 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
