
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 NeuroImage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 19539034 
 2722694 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.021 
 NIHMS125112 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Resting-state BOLD networks versus task-associated functional MRI for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease risk groups 
 
 
 
 
 Fleisher 
 Adam S. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Sherzai 
 Ayesha 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 Curtis 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Langbaum 
 Jessica B.S. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 Kewei 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Buxton 
 Richard B. 
 
 3 
 
 
 1 Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, AZ 
 2 Department of Neuroscience University of California, San Diego 
 3 Department of Radiology University of California, San Diego 
 4 Loma Linda University Medical Center 
 
 Corresponding Author Address  Adam Fleisher Banner Alzheimer's Institute 901 East Willetta Street Phoenix, AZ 85006  Adam.Fleisher@Bannerhealth.com  602 239-6979 Fax 602 239-6499 
 
 
 19 
 6 
 2009 
 
 
 16 
 6 
 2009 
 
 
 1 
 10 
 2009 
 
 
 1 
 10 
 2010 
 
 47 
 4 
 1678 
 1690 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 To assess the ability of resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging to distinguish known risk factors for AD, we evaluated 17 cognitively normal individuals with a family history of AD and at least one copy of the apolipoprotein e4 allele compared to 12 individuals who were not carriers of the APOE4 gene and did not have a family history of AD. Blood oxygen level dependent fMRI was performed evaluating encoding-associated signal and resting state default mode network signal differences between the two risk groups. Neurocognitive testing revealed that the high risk group performed worse on category fluency testing, but the groups were equivalent on all other cognitive measures. During encoding of novel face-name pairs, there were no regions of encoding-associated BOLD activations that were different in the high risk group. Encoding-associated deactivations were greater in magnitude in the low risk group in the medial and right lateral parietal cortex, similar to findings in AD studies. The resting state DMN analysis demonstrated nine regions in the prefrontal, orbital frontal, temporal and parietal lobes that distinguished the two risk groups. Resting state DMN analysis could distinguish risk groups with an effect size of 3.35, compared to an effect size of 1.39 using encoding-associated fMRI techniques. Imaging of the resting state avoids performance related variability seen in activation fMRI, is less complicated to acquire and standardize, does not require radio-isotopes, and may be more effective at identifying functional pathology associated with AD risk compared to non-resting fMRI techniques. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 Alzheimer's disease 
 APOE4 
 default network 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Functional imaging has been demonstrated to be able to distinguish people at risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) prior to any clinical manifestations of neurodegeneration in young and middle aged individuals( Bookheimer et al., 2000 ;  Fleisher et al., 2005 ;  Fleisher et al., 2008 ;  Reiman et al., 1996 ;  Reiman et al., 2004 ). These studies and others provide evidence that there may be identifiable changes in brain physiology prior to potential clinical manifestations of dementia. Over the past two decades functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become a prominent tool for studying blood oxygenation levels associated with various cognitive activities. Most studies have focused on the use of cognitive tasks to explore fMRI blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal activity, to define functional brain maps relating to anatomical structures, and to define related networks of brain activity. Although this has proven useful for understanding functional brain pathways, it is not clear that these activation techniques will be practical for use as biomarkers to identify individuals predisposed to developing dementia or useful as outcome measures in preventative drug studies. fMRI activation studies unfortunately suffer from intra and inter-subject variability, scanner variability, are dependent on task performance, and often involve lengthy scan times with complex study designs that are hard to standardize, and are difficult to perform in cognitively impaired individuals. fMRI evaluation of the resting state of the brain may be a sufficient and relevant target for studies of pre-clinical dementia. 
 The amplitude of the hemodynamic response to an external stimulus is dependent on the basal state of the brain( Ances et al., 2008 ;  Brown et al., 2003 ;  Buxton et al., 2004 ;  Davis et al., 1998 ). Exposure to the same sensory stimulus will generate different fMRI responses depending on whether the basal state is high or low. For example, in individuals with a copy of the apolipoprotien E epsilon 4 allele (APOE4) and a family history of dementia, compared to individuals without these risk factors, differences reported in medial temporal lobe activations during encoding may simply reflect differences in the basal neuro-physiologic state( Fleisher et al., 2008 ). In fact, when alterations in the resting state are accounted for, the activation states may no longer reveal significant absolute differences. This implies that the resting state may often drive differences reported in activation state fMRI studies of AD and AD risk( Fleisher et al., 2008 ). One advantage to resting-state fMRI is that it is not dependent on differential task performance such as memory encoding, which is of particular concern when studying neurodegenerative processes and evaluating disease modifying therapies for prevention and treatment of dementia. Due to these issues, in part, there is an increasing interest in development of resting state fMRI as a potential biomarker for preventative drug development in AD. 
 Echo Planar Imaging of the default mode network (DMN) explores resting state neuronal network dysfunction in AD and has potential to be a sensitive marker for preclinical AD patho-physiology. The DMN represents a network of coordinated low frequency fluctuation (LFF) in specific functional neuronal networks. It is manifested as key brain regions that are elevated in states of relative rest, which are responsible for attention to environmental stimuli, reviewing of past knowledge, and planning of future behaviors( Binder et al., 1999 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). These regions predominantly consist of midline and lateral frontal regions, and medial and lateral parietal regions extending into posterior cingulate/retrosplenial (pC/rsp) cortex( Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ). These same regions that are activated at rest appear to be suppressed during various cognitive activities, including encoding of new memories( Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ;  Rombouts et al., 2005 ;  Sorg et al., 2007 ). For this reason, two methods have been developed utilizing the DMN to identify diseases of cognition and risk for dementia in the BOLD fMRI literature. One method explores task-related deactivations and the other focuses on differences in resting state BOLD networks. These default networks may be particularly effected by the neurodegenerative process of AD( Buckner et al., 2008 ). With this, several groups have reported both reduced resting state connectivity( Buckner et al., 2005 ) and alterations in fMRI task-induced deactivation responses in aging ( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ;  Lustig et al., 2003 ) mild cognitive impairment (MCI) ( Rombouts et al., 2005 ) and AD patients ( Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ;  Lustig et al., 2003 ;  Persson et al., 2008 ;  Rombouts et al., 2005 ;  Sorg et al., 2007 ;  Wang et al., 2007 ;  Wang et al., 2006 ) compared to healthy controls. 
 Abnormalities of the DMN seen with fMRI may signify underlying physiologic defects associated with AD. For instance, there is evidence of a relationship between medial temporal lobe memory networks, frontoparietal attentional networks and the DMN, which appears to be required for successful memory formation( Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ;  Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ). Also, decreased connectivity between the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and the posterior cingulate cortex in AD has been proposed to represent early changes in functional brain networks in AD( Greicius et al., 2004 ). Evidence that supports this includes findings that the cortical regions that make up the DMN are similar to areas of early brain atrophy, hypometabolism, decreased perfusion, and fibrillar amyloid deposition in early AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI)( Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Edison et al., 2007 ;  Forsberg et al., 2007 ;  Jack, Jr. et al., 2008 ;  Johnson et al., 1998 ;  Klunk et al., 2004 ;  Minoshima et al., 1997 ). In particular, the posterior cingulate and precuneus cortex are regions that have the most prominent deactivations during cognitive tasks and are increased during the resting state( Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Greicius et al., 2004 ). Very recently data was presented demonstrating that decrease in the DMN in cognitively normal APOE4 carries is associated with increase cortical fibrillar amyloid ( Buckner et al., 2009 ;  Hedden et al., 2009 ). And, differences in DMN signal has been noted in APOE4 carriers as young as 20-35 years old ( Filippini et al., 2009 ). In addition, suppression of encoding-associated fMRI deactivation in the posterior cortical default network is associated with increased amyloid plaque burden in the precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex measured by Pittsburg compound B positron emission tomography (PiB-PET) imaging( Sperling et al., 2008 ). Further, failure of deactivation of medial posterior DMN during encoding is associated with worse memory performance( Miller et al., 2008 ) Overall, these findings suggest that “suspending” the default network during working memory is necessary for successful encoding, is impaired in AD, and potentially is associated with underlying amyloid pathology, even prior to clinical dementia in association with the APOE4 allele. 
 In an effort to further develop tools for early identification of Alzheimer's disease pathology and risk, we studied individuals with high and low risk for developing AD using BOLD fMRI. We compared the ability to distinguish AD risk groups using activation and deactivation fMRI during an encoding task versus resting state BOLD DMN correlation analysis. Resting state data was extracted from the encoding scans which included periods of relative rest. The overall aim of this study was to comparatively evaluate the utility of DMN BOLD fMRI in distinguishing risk for Alzheimer's disease pathology, and as a potential biomarker forpreventative treatment trial. 
 
 
 METHODS 
 
 Study population 
 Twenty-nine healthy right-handed volunteers, fifty to sixty-five years of age, were evaluated. Seventeen had a significant family history of dementia in a first degree relative and at least one copy of the APOE4 gene. Twelve participants had neither a family history of dementia nor a copy of the APOE4 gene. Participants were drawn from normal control participants in the University of San Diego (UCSD) Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, from the UCSD student, staff, and faculty population, as well as the general San Diego community by means of advertisements. The study was conducted according to Good Clinical Practice, the Declaration of Helsinki and U.S. 21 CFR Part 50-Protection of Human Subjects, and Part 56-Institutional Review Boards. Written informed consent for the study was obtained from all of the participants before protocol-specific procedures were performed, including cognitive testing. 
 All potential participants were screened and excluded for a history of significant head trauma with residual cognitive deficits, other neurological or major psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, developmental learning disorders, and alcohol or substance abuse. The Geriatric Depression Scale (Yesavage, Brink et al. 1982) was administered to screen for the presence of affective disturbance. Persons with significant cerebrovascular disease (as indexed by modified Rosen ischemic scores greater than 4) were also excluded, as were individuals with unstable diabetes and respiratory disease. All participants underwent careful screening for contraindications for magnetic resonance imaging (i.e., metal in the body, pregnancy, claustrophobia), as well as complete physical and neurological examinations. All participants received APOE4 genotyping using a polymerase chain reaction based method (Saunders, Strittmatter et al. 1993). 
 
 
 Cognitive testing 
 All participants received the following neuropsychological test battery within one month prior to imaging: Boston Naming Test(Kaplan, Goodglass et al. 1983), WMS-R Logical Memory Test(Wechsler 1987), Verbal Fluency( Monsch, Bondi et al. 1992 ), WAIS-R digit span forward and backward(Wechsler 1981), WAIS-R Digit symbol test(Smith 1982), California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT)(Delis, Freeland et al. 1988), Clock Drawing(Mohs, Knopman et al. 1997), Trail Making Test (A and B)(Reitan 1958), and Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)(Folstein, Folstein et al. 1975). Participants were excluded if they did not fall within age adjusted normal ranges for all cognitive tests, as determined by a licensed neuropsychologist at our center. 
 
 
 Functional MRI Behavioral Task 
 An associative encoding task was utilized to evaluate interleaved blocks of memorizing pairs of faces and names, and periods of rest. The task was adapted with permission from Dr. Reisa Sperling( Sperling, Bates et al. 2001 ). This task was chosen due to its ability to activate the medial temporal lobes and deactivate the default mode networks with BOLD fMRI ( Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ;  Sperling et al., 2003a ;  Sperling et al., 2001 ). Participants viewed pairs of Novel and previously viewed (Repeated) faces and names in alternating blocks of 40 seconds each, separated by 25 seconds of viewing a central fixation crosshair. Participants were familiarized with the repeated face/name pairs, and tested for recall accuracy prior to active scanning. During the fixation task participants were instructed to lay with their eyes open, stare straight at the crosshair in the middle of the screen, and try to blank their minds of the faces and names previously presented. This task is described in detail in a previous publication( Fleisher et al., 2008 ) and in an online supplement. Four runs were obtained for each participant in rapid succession, each lasting a total of four minutes and thirty-five seconds. A total of 56 Novel face-name pairs and four Repeated face-name pairs were used over the course of the entire experiment, with 400 total seconds of resting during visual fixation. 
 
 
 Post-scan testing 
 Immediately following the imaging session, outside the scanner, subjects were tested for their recall of all 60 face-name pairs. The post-scan testing was a cued recall task in which subjects were shown 70 faces individually. They were presented with a choice of three names for each face and instructed to chose the name that was presented during the scanning session. There were ten distractor faces in the post-scan testing that were not presented during the experiment. Percent recall scores were calculated to verify attention to the scanning task and evaluate encoding capabilities in both risk groups. 
 
 
 MRI Acquisition 
 
 MRI technique 
 All scans were performed on a General Electric Signa EXCITE 3.0T short bore, twin speed scanner with a body transmit coil and an 8 channel receive array. High-resolution structural brain images were acquired with a magnetization prepared three-dimensional fast spoiled gradient sequence acquisition (FSPGR: 124 axial slices, 1 mm × 1 mm in-plane resolution, 1.3 mm slice thickness, Field of View = 256 × 256, TR = 7.8 ms, TE = 3.1 ms, flip angle 12°). BOLD data were acquired using echo planar imaging sequences (35 slices, perpendicular to the axis of the Hippocampus, 6mm in plane resolution, 0 spacing, FOV=22, TE=30 ms, TR=2500 ms). Voxel dimensions were 3.4 × 3.4 × 6.0mm. 
 
 
 Physiologic monitoring 
 During all BOLD scan acquisitions, pulse and respiratory wave forms were collected using a pulse oxymeter and respiratory effort transducer. Data from these instruments were collected at 40 samples per second using a multi-channel data acquisition board (National Instruments). Scanner TTL pulse data (10ms duration, 5 volt pulse per slice acquisition) were recorded at 1 kHz. The TTL pulse data were used to synchronize the physiologic data to the acquired images. Pulse, respiratory, and TTL data were used to calculate physiologic noise regressors to improve neuronal activity related signal identification (Glover, Li et al. 2000; Restom, Behzadi et al. 2006). 
 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 
 General Post-Scan Image Processing 
 For each voxel the MR signal associated with physiologic noise from both pulse rate and respiratory rate data were included in a general linear model analysis as regressors to model physiologic fluctuations of the BOLD signal. These physiologic noise component estimates were removed from the data to form corrected echo time series for further analysis of BOLD data. Images were then motion corrected across time points, among all four runs, to the most typical base image in the second run, using a three-dimensional iterated, linearized, weighted least-squares method with Fourier interpolation using the Application for Functional NeuroImaging software (AFNI)( Cox, 1996 ). Time series were also visually inspected for motion based on the output of a program designed to detect outliers (AFNI-3dToutcount). Time points with isolated head movements not corrected by the registration algorithm were ignored in the statistical analysis. A high (0.01 Hz) and low pass (0.1 Hz) filter was applied to remove signal in nonphysiologic ranges (3dFourier). In addition, all data were smoothed with a 6mm full width at half maximum Gaussian filter. Smoothing in space enhances the signal-to-noise ratio of data ( Turner et al., 1998 ), increasing the validity of statistical tests across groups and compensating for variance in normalization( Ashburner and Friston, 1999 ). Functional datasets were then resampled to 2mm isotropic voxels. 
 
 
 Task-Related Signal processing 
 A general linear model (GLM) approach was used for statistical analysis of the individual functional datasets. Data from all four functional runs were concatenated for use in the GLM analysis performed by AFNI's 3dDeconvolve program( Cox, 1996 ). Stimulus-related MR signal was included in the regression model by convolving the block design stimulus pattern with a gamma density function to create reference vectors using the AFNI Waver program( Cox, 1996 ). In addition, motion related translation and rotation parameters were used as covariates. Hence, the GLM model included a combination of the following independent variables with MR signal as the dependent variable: reference vectors representing the occurrence of different stimulus types (i.e., Novel face-name pairs, Repeated face-name pairs, or fixation), six motion parameters, a linear trend, and a constant. This procedure produced F statistics representing the strength of associations between stimulus presentation and mean peak signal change for each voxel, averaged across each stimulus block for all four functional acquisitions, for each individual participant. Based on the F statistic, mean peak signal changes that satisfied an alpha level of 0.05 for association with the stimulus were used as the primary outcome variables for activations and deactivations in second level between-group analyses. These mean peak values were converted to percent signal change by dividing mean baseline signal data by the mean peak task-associated values for each scan. The contrast between novel face/name pair encoding blocks and repeated face/name pair encoding blocks was used as the primary outcome measure to isolate BOLD signal associated with novel encoding( Sperling et al., 2001 ). 
 
 
 Resting state Default Mode Network analysis 
 An approximate of the resting state was assessed by removing task related signal fluctuations from encoding blocks and evaluating periods of visual fixation. Regression modeling was used to remove all task-associated BOLD activity and isolate fluctuations associated with the resting state throughout all functional datasets. To do this, regression coefficients associated with novel and repeated encoding generated by the GLM used to deconvolve task-associated signal were extracted using AFNI's 3dSynthesize and 3dcalc programs ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni ). The default network mode was then assessed by correlating each voxel in individual datasets with low frequency fluctuations within a 12mm spherical seed region placed within the largest area of task-related deactivation in the posterior cingulate/retrospenial region (pC/rsp) ( Figure 1C ; atlas coordinates: −1, 50, 36 (RAI)). This seed location has been reported in the literature to strongly identify the default mode network with correlation analysis of data extracted from resting portions of other functional tasks( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ). For each individual's scan, fluctuations in resting BOLD signal during fixation were determined for each voxel and correlated across time to signal fluctuations in the seed region. Whole brain statistical maps were then generated with each voxel containing its representative Pearson r-value. This was done using AFNI's 3dDeconvolve program. Movement parameters included as covariate in the task-associated GLM were also included in this correlation analysis. The resulting correlation maps were converted to z scores using Fisher's r-to-z transformation for further group analysis. This method of correlation analysis of the resting state has been demonstrated on various functional datasets to consistently identify the default mode network( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ;  Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). 
 
 
 Volumetric data processing 
 Measurements of total intracranial, whole brain, ventricular and hippocampal volumes were calculated using semi-automated segmentation and volumetric output measures from FreeSurfer's ASEG analysis(Fischl, Salat et al. 2002). Whole brain, ventricular, and hippocampal volumes were divided by the total intracranial volumes to adjust for variability due to head size. These normalized volumes were used for between group comparisons to evaluate for significant group differences. 
 
 
 
 Between group statistics 
 All demographics, neurocognitive measures and volumetric MRI measures were compared between AD risk groups by chi-square or two sample t-tests, as appropriate, with significance determined as p ≤ 0.05. 
 All functional and anatomical images were transformed into standard Talairach atlas space( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ) for co-registration and between group voxel-wise analyses. For all between group exploratory analyses a liberal p-threshold <0.05 was used. In addition, to account for type-I errors due to multiple comparisons a cluster thresholding criteria to determine a minimum cluster size necessary to avoid false positive associations was established by a Monte Carlo simulation program (AlphaSim) with an alpha criteria of 0.05( Cox, 1996 ). This simulation determines the number of adjacent voxels that must be activated so that there is less than a 5% risk of activation occurring by random chance based on the number of voxels being analyses within a predetermined volume. 
 Task-associated functional datasets were first submitted to two-tailed voxel-wise t-tests between the two different AD risk groups using AFNI's 3dttest program. To further distinguish regions of encoding-associated deactivations versus activations in both risk groups, these datasets were separated into BOLD signal that was decreased due to task presentation and signal that was increased during the task using one sample within group t-tests. Regions of significant within-group encoding-associated  deactivations  in the low risk group were identified that overlapped with regions of  deactivation  in the high risk group. These complementary between-group regions of overlapping deactivations were then assessed for between group signal intensity differences with voxel-wise two-tailed t-tests. This was done to assure that only regions with unidirectional significant signal changes were compared between groups. By doing this we avoided comparing regions of deactivation in one group to regions of activation in the other group, potentially making interpretation of default mode network signal changes difficult. In addition, volume of task-associated deactivations between each risk group was compared with two-tailed t-tests. Similarly, regions of overlapping between-group encoding-associated  activations  were assessed to isolate significant group differences resulting from signal increases in both groups. 
 Correlation z-score maps for the resting default mode network were compared between groups using voxel-wise two-tailed t-tests. Clusters of correlated DMN activity that differed between risk groups were determined with p-thresholding and cluster size thresholding with an alpha < 0.05 as described above. Mean z-scores from each functional cluster demonstrating significant between-group differences were extracted for each individual. 
 For both task-associated measures and resting DMN measures, mean voxel values for clusters demonstrating between group differences were subjected to traditional two sample t-tests to calculate specific p-values. Standard deviations and 95% confidence intervals were also calculated using these mean values. In addition, effect sizes for distinguishing differences between the two groups for each of these functional regions of interest (ROI) was calculated using Hedges g scores, accounting for sample sizes( Hedges, 1981 ). Finally, multivariate effect sizes were calculated using multivariate Hedges g scores to examine potential increased sensitivity when utilizing simultaneous information from all defined ROIs for each fMRI modality ( Kline, 2004 ). 
 Cognitively normal individuals have decreased memory scores associated with increased amyloid binding on amyloid imaging or attenuation of the DMN on fMRI( Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ;  Pike et al., 2007 ). For this reason we performed correlation analyses by group and for the total cohort comparing California verbal learning test scores to mean fMRI measures in regions demonstrating significant group differences. 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Demographics and cognitive testing 
 Participants in the high risk group (n=17) all had a significant family history of dementia in a first degree relative and at least one copy of the APOE4 gene (e3,e4 = 13; e4,e4 = 4). The low risk group (n=12) had no family history of dementia and no copies of the APOE4 gene (e3,e3 = 11; e2,e3 = 1). Ages ranged from 51 years to 65 years (high risk = 58.6 ± 4.1; low risk = 57.6 ± 4.5). These groups did not significantly differ by age, gender or education ( Table1 ). There were no differences in brain volume measurements of whole brain, ventricles, or hippocampi ( Table1 ). There were no group differences in measures of memory ( Table 1 ) or other neurocognitive test scores, except higher scores on category fluency retrieval in the low risk group (low risk = 63.6 ± 6.4 (range:54-74) , high risk = 53.2 ± 8.0 (range:41-68): p<0.001). Category fluency testing consisted of category retrieval of animals, fruits and vegetables in one minute for each category, with total scores calculated by adding the retrieval scores for all three categories. There were no group differences on the post scan recall task of face-name pairs ( Table1 ). 
 
 Encoding associated comparisons 
 Whole brain voxel-wise comparison of percent signal change associated with novel encoding demonstrated several regions with relatively higher encoding-associated BOLD signal in the high risk group compared to the low risk group ( Figure 1A ). This included ten significant clusters of signal that differed between groups in broad regions of the medial and superior frontal lobe, superior marginal gyrus of the parietal lobe, superior temporal gyrus, occipital cortex, and cingulated cortex. Notably, none of these areas represent regions with increased encoding-associated BOLD signal in both groups. In the low risk group, all regions showing between group differences involve areas of deactivation (negative signal change) in response to encoding. The statistical differences between groups is due to relative increased signal in the high risk group with either “less negative” or positive signal change in response to encoding. In other words, these were regions of attenuated deactivation in the high risk group, with no regions of encoding-associated  activations  (increased signal) in the low risk group. These regions represent deactivations or divergent signal response between groups, and did not include cortical areas typically associated with activation in response to the face-name encoding task such as the hippocampus, pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus, fusiform gyrus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices( Sperling et al., 2001 ). 
 Significant encoding-associated activations were distinguished from areas of deactivations for each risk group using within-group one-sample t-tests to differentiate signal change significantly greater than or less than zero.  Figure 1B  displays overlapping regions of activations during encoding, demonstrating that the task successfully, and prominently, activates bilateral hippocampus in each risk group, in addition to scattered regions in the frontal lobes, fusiform gyri, and thalami. Task-related deactivations were found in the entire group (n=29) to successfully represent regions consistent with the default mode network, with prominent posterior cingulated/retrospenial, lateral parietal, and medial prefrontal deactivation during encoding ( Figure 1C ). In addition, both risk groups had consistent independent overlapping areas of deactivation during encoding in these DMN-associated regions ( Figure 1D ). 
 Next, regions of activations and deactivations were assessed separately for between-group differences. No overlapping regions of encoding-associated activations ( Figure 1B, red regions ) were found to have significantly different BOLD signal change between groups. Three distinct regions of overlapping deactivations ( Figure 1D , purple regions) were able to distinguish risk groups for Alzheimer's disease. These included DMN regions in the bilateral medial posterior parietal lobes (cuneus/precuneus) and the right lateral parietal lobe (right superior marginal gyrus) ( Figure 2A ). In all three regions the low risk group had larger encoding-associated deactivations compared to the high risk group, i.e. the group with higher risk for AD had attenuated encoding-associated deactivation in DMN regions ( Figure 2B ). Mean cluster percent signal change, between-group p-values, and effect sizes for these clusters are presented in  Table 2 . By calculating an adjusted eta 2  we determine that the greatest variability accounted for by group membership for any individual ROI was 17.5%. All three clusters were combined to calculate a multivariate effect size of 1.39, accounting for 25.4% of variance due to risk group membership. Additionally, there were no significant differences in the total volumes of deactivated regions between risk groups. 
 
 
 Resting state correlation analysis 
 Correlation analysis of resting-state low frequency BOLD signal fluctuations in the full group (n=29) demonstrated regions of network connectivity with the pC/rsp seed consistent with previously reported DMN correlation analyses in cognitively normal elderly individuals ( Figure 3 )( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ). Increased nodal correlation/connectivity was found in the high risk group in the superior, anterior and ventral medial prefrontal cortex, right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, left postcentral gyrus, middle and superior temporal gyrus, and the right hippocampus, with decreased connectivity in the precuneus and gyrus rectus ( Figure 4 ). A total of nine distinct clusters were found with significant connectivity differences between the two risk groups ( Table 3 ). Mean cluster correlation z-scores, between-group p-values, and effect sizes for each cluster are presented in  Table 3 , showing that resting state correlation analysis of the DMN provided overall greater effect sizes to separate risk groups than differences in encoding-associated deactivations ( Table 2 ). Adjusted eta 2  demonstrate that the greatest variability accounted for by group membership, by any individual ROI, is 36.0% in the bilateral superior prefrontal cortex ROI. All nine connectivity clusters were combined to calculate a multivariate effect size of 3.35, accounting for 62.4% of variance due to risk group membership. 
 
 
 Planned corrections with cognitive test scores 
 Higher CVLT scores were associated with larger encoding-associated deactivation in the right lateral parietal lobe in the full cohort (n=29: Pearson r=−0.51, p=0.005), as well as in each risk group (high risk: r=−0.59, p=0.012; low risk: r=−0.58, p=0.048). In the high risk group only there was a trend association between increased CVLT scores and increased DMN connectivity z-scores in the precuneus (r=0.46, p=0.061). 
 
 
 
 Post-hoc Analysis 
 Recognizing the group difference in category fluency scores, we sought to evaluate the relationship between total category fluency scores and fMRI measures that differed between the two risk groups. Pearson r scores were calculated to measure the relationship between category fluency scores and encoding-associated BOLD deactivations (ROIs from  Figure 2 ) as well as DMN resting connectivity scores (ROIs from  Figure 4 ) in clusters that were different between groups. There were no significant correlations between category fluency and encoding-associated deactivations in any of the three reported ROIs. Category fluency had a negative correlation with resting connectivity scores in three of the reported ROIs: right middle/superior temporal gyrus (r=−0.44, p=0.017), right dorsolatertal prefrontal cortex (r=−0.39, p=0.036), and the right hippocampus (r=−0.4, p=0.031). Statistical trends were seen in the bilateral superior medial prefrontal cortex (r=−0.32, p=0.087), and the left anterior superior prefrontal cortex (r=−0.35, p=0.061). Positive correlations were seen with connectivity scores in the bilateral gyrus rectus (r=0.45, p=0.008) and the precuneus region (r=0.42, p=0.022) ( Figure 5 ). 
 To account for confounding effects of performance in category fluency between groups on differences seen in the DMN, we performed analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) on mean cluster values for each ROI that demonstrated a correlation between category fluency and DMN z-scores (ROIs noted above). For the seven functional ROIs assessed, when category fluency scores were controlled for, between-group z-scores remained significantly different with a p<0.05 for all ROIs except for the right hippocampus (p=0.11). 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 This study supports recent reports that that resting state BOLD fMRI can identify differences based on risk for AD In comparison with encoding-associated BOLD activations and deactivations, evaluation of network connectivity of low frequency fluctuations more readily detected variability associated with AD risk and provided superior effect sizes for distinguishing risk groups. Medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and temporal lobe structures showed increased DMN connectivity, with decreased connectivity in the precuneus and medial orbital frontal cortex, areas that have been consistently demonstrated to have reduced DMN activity in AD( Greicius et al., 2004 ;  Wang et al., 2006 ). Worse performance in the high risk group on category fluency testing was associated with increased temporal and prefrontal cortex resting connectivity, while associated with decreased connectivity in the precuneus and orbital frontal lobes. In addition, memory scores correlated with the degree of parietal deactivation during encoding. Overall our findings suggest that abnormalities in resting state networks may represent early functional impairment associated with risk for AD. Resting state BOLD fMRI is a viable candidate for a biomarker of preclinical dementia, and potentially a valuable tool in dementia prediction, prognosis, and preventative treatment development in AD. 
 It is difficult to ascribe specific pathophysiologic deficits associated with the APOE4 gene directly to differences in low frequency BOLD fluctuation correlations, such as those demonstrated here. And, some authors have cautioned against over interpretation of the resting state in terms of brain dysfunction( Morcom and Fletcher, 2007 ). Yet, there is strong evidence of a link to pre-clinical AD pathology and APOE4 carrier status. Apolipoprotein (APOE) e4 is a common susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and plays a key role in coordinating the mobilization and redistribution of cholesterol, phospholipids and fatty acids. In addition to AD, it has been associated with poorer outcomes in traumatic brain injury( Teasdale et al., 1997 ), age related cognitive impairment( Deary et al., 2002 ) and cardiovascular disease( Lenzen et al., 1986 ). It is implicated in mechanisms of neuronal development, brain plasticity and repair functions ( Mahley, 1988 ;  Mahley and Rall, Jr., 2000 ). There are also many studies that demonstrate a role of the APOE4 gene directly on amyloid processing and toxicity. There is evidence that it promotes formation of the beta-pleated sheet conformation of beta-amyloid (abeta) peptides into amyloid fibers, and inhibits the neurotoxic effect of abeta in an allele-specific manner (E2 > or = E3 > E4)( Jordan et al., 1998 ;  Ma et al., 1996 ;  Strittmatter et al., 1993 ). And, the APOE4 gene appears to modulate amyloid beta toxicity to vascular endothelium ( Folin et al., 2006 ). More recently, in vivo cortical amyloid imaging shows a strong relationship between fibrillar amyloid deposition and APOE4 carrier status( Reiman et al., 2009 ). This relationship has also been shown with APOE4 status and CSF Aβ 42  levels( Li et al., 2007 ). Relevant to our findings, it was recently demonstrated that there is a relationship between suppression of the DMN and increased cortical PET PiB amyloid binding uptake in cognitively normal individuals( Hedden et al., 2009 ;  Sperling et al., 2008 ). And, a recent study showed increased DMN BOLD signal and encoding associated hippocampal signal in young APOE4 carriers (ages 20-35), indicating that resting state fMRI may be a sensitive technique for identifying patterns associated with risk for AD many decades prior to development of AD pathology or clinical symptoms( Filippini et al., 2009 ). In combination with our finding of the strength of DMN for identifying AD risk, these studies demonstrate that resting state fMRI may represent a biomarker for identifying pre-clinical Alzhemer's disease. Yet to determine this, further pathological correlates and longitudinal studies must be performed to assess the true value of DMN imaging as a predictor and biomarker of dementia of the Alzheimer's type. 
 Encoding-associated differences in those at increased risk for AD have been well reported in the BOLD fMRI literature ( Bondi et al., 2005 ;  Bondi et al., 2004 ;  Bookheimer et al., 2000 ;  Fleisher et al., 2005 ;  Fleisher et al., 2008 ) The specific task used in our study has previously been reported to distinguish AD and MCI from normal controls ( Dickerson et al., 2005 ;  Sperling et al., 2003b ), as well as identify cognitively normal individuals at increased risk for AD( Fleisher et al., 2008 ). In association with the APOE4 genotype, the literature has been somewhat variable, with some studies showing increased BOLD signal in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) during encoding associated with AD risk( Bookheimer et al., 2000 ;  Fleisher et al., 2005 ), while others have seen decreased or mixed BOLD response to encoding ( Bondi et al., 2005 ;  Fleisher et al., 2008 ;  Johnson et al., 2006 ;  Trivedi et al., 2006 ), and some not finding encoding-associated MTL differences at all( Han et al., 2006 ). In the current study we first performed standard between-group voxel-wise t-tests evaluating all encoding-associated signal. We did not find differences in MTL structures, which reflects the inconsistency in the literature and perhaps a high level of variability and poor sensitivity of activation fMRI tasks in this population. The group differences we identified were all due to encoding-associated deactivations in the low risk group with relatively increased BOLD signal changes in the high risk group. No differences in activations were found in regions typically associated with this associative encoding task( Sperling et al., 2001 ). 
 Differences in encoding-associated deactivations were seen in DMN areas including the postero-medial and right lateral parietal lobes. In these regions the high risk group demonstrated attenuated deactivations compared to the low risk group, similar to differences seen in MCI and AD compared to elderly normal controls( Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ;  Rombouts et al., 2005 ). Adequate suppression of these posterior attentional networks appears to be important for successful encoding( Miller et al., 2008 ;  Pihlajamaki et al., 2008 ). Memory scores are associated with PiB amyloid burden in the parietal and prefrontal cortex of cognitively normal elderly( Pike et al., 2007 ). Similarly, we found correlations between degree of deactivations and memory scores in the lateral parietal lobe, with statistical trends in the precuneus of the high risk group, suggesting underlying early functional pathology associated with known AD risk factors. This is further supported by the observation that the posterior parietal lobe (including the precuneus region) is one area of early fibrillar amyloid deposition in AD, MCI and even asymptomatic elderly based on pathology and amyloid imaging studies ( Braak and Braak, 1991 ;  Braak and Braak, 1997 ;  Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Forsberg et al., 2007 ;  Fripp et al., 2008 ;  Klunk et al., 2004 ;  Mintun et al., 2006 ;  Pike et al., 2007 ;  Thal et al., 2002 ). 
 Comparison of resting-state DMN connectivity with the posterior cingulate/retrospenial region demonstrated larger and more widespread areas associated with risk for AD than encoding-associated deactivation analysis. In addition, effect sizes for distinguishing the two risk groups were substantially larger using this technique, with a combined ROI effect size more than twice as large, more than doubling the variance explained by AD risk group membership. Two of the nine regions demonstrating differences based on AD risk showed decreased DMN connectivity in the high risk group. These regions, the precuneus and the gyrus rectus in the medial orbitofrontal cortex, are areas of early amyloid pathology noted in AD( Braak and Braak, 1991 ;  Braak and Braak, 1997 ;  Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Klunk et al., 2004 ;  Thal et al., 2002 ), MCI ( Forsberg et al., 2007 ;  Pike et al., 2007 ), and elderly individuals with asymptomatic fibrillar amyloid deposition( Mintun et al., 2006 ;  Pike et al., 2007 ). They also represent regions associated with successful memory performance( Miller et al., 2008 ;  Stuss et al., 1982 ). Areas of increased connectivity were noted in regions of the medial prefrontal cortex (both superior and middle), right dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex, the right medial and lateral temporal lobe, including the hippocampus, and the left lateral parietal lobe. These are regions previously demonstrated to have decreased connectivity in resting DMN studies of AD, and may represent a disruption of temporal-frontal-parietal functional network connectivity( Greicius et al., 2004 ;  Sorg et al., 2007 ;  Wang et al., 2006 ). In addition to key roles in memory acquisition, retrieval and working memory( Nyberg et al., 1995 ;  Stuss and Benson, 1984 ;  Wilson et al., 1993 ), these cortical networks are important for sustained attention during relative periods of cognitive rest( Binder et al., 1999 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ;  Stuss et al., 1995 ). Reorganization of these functional networks may explain differences seen in DMN connectivity in high risk individuals. 
 Our finding of increased DMN connectivity with the posterior parietal seed region in various frontal and temporal cortex areas in high risk individuals is somewhat counterintuitive if we associate decreased DMN activity with impairment in AD. Why would risk for AD connote increased DMN connectivity in similar regions? One possibility is that prefrontal and temporal attentional and working memory networks are necessarily compensating for strained novel encoding abilities associated with risk for AD. For instance, increased fMRI activity in the prefrontal cortex is associated with degree of cognitive task difficulty( Braver et al., 1997 ;  Grady et al., 1996 ;  Grady et al., 2003 ;  Maril et al., 2001 ), giving evidence of prefrontal recruitment based on cognitive effort. Successful encoding appears to require coordination of neural networks involving the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and medial parietal regions; and low performing individuals demonstrate increased prefrontal activation to achieve successful encoding( Miller et al., 2008 ). Even in early AD, compared to controls, there is increased prefrontal and temporal BOLD activity during semantic and episodic memory tasks associated with successful performance( Grady et al., 2003 ). This compensatory recruitment of prefrontal cortex may be due to its role in mediating organizational and executive functions ( D'Esposito et al., 1995 ;  Fuster, 2000 ;  Stuss and Benson, 1984 ). This is also supported by the observation that prefrontal recruitment is related to task complexity across various cognitive tasks including working memory, semantic memory and perceptual tasks ( Braver et al., 1997 ;  Grady et al., 1996 ;  Maril et al., 2001 ). In addition, compensatory recruitment has been reported in frontal and temporal regions associated with the APOE4 gene in normal elderly, proposed to be mediated by increased frontal-executive function( Bondi et al., 2005 ;  Bookheimer et al., 2000 ;  Han et al., 2006 ;  Han and Bondi, 2008 ). 
 It is not clear, however, how compensatory brain functions during cognitive tasks are related to increased functional connectivity in the DMN during rest. Yet, it is conceivable that the same type of compensatory recruitment seen during challenging cognitive function mirrors redistributed network connectivity during the resting state. As the DMN is believed to function in baseline attention to environmental stimuli, reviewing of past knowledge, and planning of future behaviors( Binder et al., 1999 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ), impaired posterior parietal DMN function may result in recruitment of increased anterior connectivity to support these functions. Recall that our study also demonstrated decreased posterior parietal resting connectivity and attenuated encoding-associated deactivation in the setting of this increased prefrontal and temporal functional connectivity during the resting state. 
 The two risk cohorts in this study differed on scores assessing semantic memory recall processing based on category fluency testing. Increased resting DMN connectivity z-scores in the precuneus and medial orbital frontal cortex were associated with increased category fluency performance. There was also increased resting state connectivity in the ventral and superior prefrontal cortex, and medial and lateral right temporal cortex in association with lower scores in category fluency. These relationships did not account for risk group differences seen in resting DMN connectivity, except perhaps for the right hippocampus. Category fluency testing is impaired with damage to the prefrontal cortex or lateral temporal lobes ( Henry et al., 2004 ), structures important in key functions of semantic knowledge( Baldo and Shimamura, 1998 ;  Levy et al., 2004 ). In addition, category fluency testing shows early and prominent decline in AD( Henry et al., 2004 ;  Monsch et al., 1992 ;  Monsch et al., 1994 ), and preclinical AD within two years of diagnosis( Mickes et al., 2007 ). In APOE4 studies there are no clear reports of category fluency abnormalities distinguishing carriers from non carriers( Bondi et al., 1999 ). Note that all of our participant's category fluency scores were within normal range for their age and education. The association we found between increased temporal and frontal DMN connectivity and difficulty with semantic memory is consistent with the idea of functional reorganization of fronto-temporal networks in individuals predisposed to developing AD. And, fMRI studies of verbal fluency demonstrate involvement of medial temporal lobe, inferior frontal and retrosplenial cortex( Pihlajamaki et al., 2000 ). Coupled with our findings of attenuated deactivation in the parietal cortex associated with worse episodic memory performance, these findings suggest preclinical functional relevance of DMN connectivity differences in our population of cognitively normal individuals at high risk for AD. 
 There are several limitations to this study that should be noted. Most notably, the primary results in this study pertain to resting state low frequency fluctuation in the DMN; however, this was not a true resting state analysis. In order to do a direct comparison with activation state fMRI, all resting data was extracted from interleaved resting blocks and from baseline signal underlying an encoding paradigm. We cannot claim that the encoding paradigm did not influence our findings in this extrapolated resting state analysis. In addition, since there were some differences seen in encoding-related BOLD signal, it is not clear if extraction of this signal may have differentially affected the resting state baseline signal. Yet, task-related BOLD signal is a difference contrast between the baseline signal and the signal change associated with the task. Therefore, when removing the signal related to the task, the basal signal should be left intact. Yet this is difficult to verify. However, similar analyses have been reported that demonstrate that the DMN can be extracted from various cognitive paradigms in both block designs and event-related fMRI( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ;  Buckner et al., 2005 ;  Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ;  Fair et al., 2007 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ), suggesting minimal effects of the task on the resting state analysis. Another limitation to consider is, despite being a voxel-wise analysis, this study was not done entirely without  a priori  knowledge in that we used a predetermined retrosplenial seed region to perform a voxel-wise correlation analysis. Although this technique has been well validated( Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007 ), an approach without  a priori  hypotheses regarding expected brain changes, such as independent component analysis( Greicius et al., 2004 ), would validate our results, which we intend to perform. In addition to these limitations, this study was performed in a relatively small cohort, and replication of this work in larger cohorts with a true resting acquisition will be necessary for validation. 
 Use of resting state BOLD fMRI may be a more sensitive marker of preclinical functional reorganization in those at risk for AD, potentially representing underlying early AD pathology, as compared to activation and deactivation task-associated fMRI. It has distinct advantages in that the resting state does not suffer from variability related to task performance and may be easier to standardize across study sites. Yet, the resting state of the brain is not possible to standardize, as we cannot control a participant's mental state during during visual fixation or with eyes closed. It is also not dependent on radio-isotopes and may serve as a valuable marker for early AD pathology. However, we must emphasize that our data merely demonstrates an association with known risk factors for AD, and does not establish that those with altered network connectivity will progress to AD. Therefore, we do not imply that this data is useful for predicting subsequent AD, and we have not presented any data demonstrating a known relationship to AD pathology. Prospective longitudinal studies and association with AD pathology are required to address the potential use of these fMRI techniques as biomarkers for predicting future dementia. Cross-sectional studies such as this one are a first step in establishing true biomarkers for preclinical AD which are critical for development of preventative treatments and clinical screening tools and for prediction of impending dementia. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported by grant k23 AG24062 from the National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Reference List 
 
 
 
 
 Ances 
 BM 
 
 
 Leontiev 
 O 
 
 
 Perthen 
 JE 
 
 
 Liang 
 C 
 
 
 Lansing 
 AE 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 Regional differences in the coupling of cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism changes in response to activation: implications for BOLD-fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 39 
 1510 
 1521 
 18164629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Head 
 D 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Disruption of large-scale brain systems in advanced aging 
 Neuron 
 2007 
 56 
 924 
 935 
 18054866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Nonlinear spatial normalization using basis functions 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1999 
 7 
 254 
 266 
 10408769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baldo 
 JV 
 
 
 Shimamura 
 AP 
 
 
 Letter and category fluency in patients with frontal lobe lesions 
 Neuropsychology 
 1998 
 12 
 259 
 267 
 9556772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PS 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study 
 J.Cogn Neurosci 
 1999 
 11 
 80 
 95 
 9950716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Houston 
 WS 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 FMRI Evidence of Compensatory mechanisms in Older adults at Genetic Risk for Alzheimer's Disease 
 Neurology 
 2005 
 64 
 501 
 508 
 15699382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 Galasko 
 D 
 
 
 Thomas 
 RG 
 
 
 Thal 
 LJ 
 
 
 Neuropsychological function and apolipoprotein E genotype in the preclinical detection of Alzheimer's disease 
 Psychol Aging 
 1999 
 14 
 295 
 303 
 10403716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Houston 
 WS 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Differential BOLD Brain Response to Verbal Paired-Associate Learning by APOE Genotype in Nondemented Older Adults: A Functional MRI Study 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 2004 
 25 
 506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Strojwas 
 MH 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 Saunders 
 AM 
 
 
 Pericak-Vance 
 MA 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Small 
 GW 
 
 
 Patterns of brain activation in people at risk for Alzheimer's disease 
 N Engl J Med 
 2000 
 343 
 450 
 456 
 10944562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes 
 Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 
 1991 
 82 
 239 
 259 
 1759558 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 Frequency of stages of Alzheimer-related lesions in different age categories 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 1997 
 18 
 351 
 357 
 9330961 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 5 
 49 
 62 
 9038284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Eyler Zorrilla 
 LT 
 
 
 Georgy 
 B 
 
 
 Kindermann 
 SS 
 
 
 Wong 
 EC 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 BOLD and perfusion response to finger-thumb apposition after acetazolamide administration: differential relationship to global perfusion 
 J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 
 2003 
 23 
 829 
 837 
 12843786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 The Brain's Default Network: Anatomy, Function, and Relevance to Disease 
 Ann N y Acad Sci 
 2008 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Talukdar 
 T 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 ndrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease 
 J.Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 1860 
 1873 
 19211893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 LaRossa 
 G 
 
 
 Sachs 
 R 
 
 
 Fotenos 
 AF 
 
 
 Sheline 
 YI 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Molecular, structural, and functional characterization of Alzheimer's disease: evidence for a relationship between default activity, amyloid, and memory 
 J Neurosci 
 2005 
 25 
 7709 
 7717 
 16120771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Unrest at rest: default activity and spontaneous network correlations 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 1091 
 1096 
 17368915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 Uludag 
 K 
 
 
 Dubowitz 
 DJ 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 Modeling the hemodynamic response to brain activation 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 Suppl 1 
 S220 
 S233 
 15501093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat.Rev.Neurosci 
 2002 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Detre 
 JA 
 
 
 Alsop 
 DC 
 
 
 Shin 
 RK 
 
 
 Atlas 
 S 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory 
 Nature 
 1995 
 378 
 279 
 281 
 7477346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 TL 
 
 
 Kwong 
 KK 
 
 
 Weisskoff 
 RM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Calibrated functional MRI: mapping the dynamics of oxidative metabolism 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1998 
 95 
 1834 
 1839 
 9465103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deary 
 IJ 
 
 
 Whiteman 
 MC 
 
 
 Pattie 
 A 
 
 
 Starr 
 JM 
 
 
 Hayward 
 C 
 
 
 Wright 
 AF 
 
 
 Carothers 
 A 
 
 
 Whalley 
 LJ 
 
 
 Cognitive change and the APOE epsilon 4 allele 
 Nature 
 2002 
 418 
 932 
 12198535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Greve 
 DN 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Bertram 
 L 
 
 
 Mullin 
 K 
 
 
 Tanzi 
 RE 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Increased hippocampal activation in mild cognitive impairment compared to normal aging and AD 
 Neurology 
 2005 
 65 
 404 
 411 
 16087905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Edison 
 P 
 
 
 Archer 
 HA 
 
 
 Hinz 
 R 
 
 
 Hammers 
 A 
 
 
 Pavese 
 N 
 
 
 Tai 
 YF 
 
 
 Hotton 
 G 
 
 
 Cutler 
 D 
 
 
 Fox 
 N 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 A 
 
 
 Rossor 
 M 
 
 
 Brooks 
 DJ 
 
 
 Amyloid, hypometabolism, and cognition in Alzheimer disease: an [11C]PIB and [18F]FDG PET study 
 Neurology 
 2007 
 68 
 501 
 508 
 17065593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study “resting state” functional connectivity 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 35 
 396 
 405 
 17239622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Filippini 
 N 
 
 
 MacIntosh 
 BJ 
 
 
 Hough 
 MG 
 
 
 Goodwin 
 GM 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-{varepsilon}4 allele 
 Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 
 2009 
 106 
 7209 
 7214 
 19357304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fleisher 
 AS 
 
 
 Houston 
 WS 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Frye 
 S 
 
 
 Jenkins 
 C 
 
 
 Thal 
 LJ 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Identification of Alzheimer disease risk by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Arch Neurol 
 2005 
 62 
 1881 
 1888 
 16344346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fleisher 
 AS 
 
 
 Podraza 
 KM 
 
 
 Bangen 
 KJ 
 
 
 Taylor 
 C 
 
 
 Sherzai 
 A 
 
 
 Sidhar 
 K 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 Cerebral perfusion and oxygenation differences in Alzheimer's disease risk 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2008 
 4 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folin 
 M 
 
 
 Baiguera 
 S 
 
 
 Guidolin 
 D 
 
 
 Di Liddo 
 R 
 
 
 Grandi 
 C 
 
 
 De Carlo 
 E 
 
 
 Nussdorfer 
 GG 
 
 
 Parnigotto 
 PP 
 
 
 Apolipoprotein-E modulates the cytotoxic effect of beta-amyloid on rat brain endothelium in an isoform-dependent specific manner 
 Int J Mol Med 
 2006 
 17 
 821 
 826 
 16596266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forsberg 
 A 
 
 
 Engler 
 H 
 
 
 Almkvist 
 O 
 
 
 Blomquist 
 G 
 
 
 Hagman 
 G 
 
 
 Wall 
 A 
 
 
 Ringheim 
 A 
 
 
 Langstrom 
 B 
 
 
 Nordberg 
 A 
 
 
 PET imaging of amyloid deposition in patients with mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fripp 
 J 
 
 
 Bourgeat 
 P 
 
 
 Acosta 
 O 
 
 
 Raniga 
 P 
 
 
 Modat 
 M 
 
 
 Pike 
 KE 
 
 
 Jones 
 G 
 
 
 O'Keefe 
 G 
 
 
 Masters 
 CL 
 
 
 Ames 
 D 
 
 
 Ellis 
 KA 
 
 
 Maruff 
 P 
 
 
 Currie 
 J 
 
 
 Villemagne 
 VL 
 
 
 Rowe 
 CC 
 
 
 Salvado 
 O 
 
 
 Ourselin 
 S 
 
 
 Appearance modeling of (11)C PiB PET images: Characterizing amyloid deposition in Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment and healthy aging 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuster 
 JM 
 
 
 Executive frontal functions 
 Exp.Brain Res 
 2000 
 133 
 66 
 70 
 10933211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 Pietrini 
 P 
 
 
 Mentis 
 MJ 
 
 
 ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 SI 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Effect of task difficulty on cerebral blood flow during perceptual matching of faces 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1996 
 4 
 227 
 239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Beig 
 S 
 
 
 Keightley 
 ML 
 
 
 Burian 
 H 
 
 
 Black 
 SE 
 
 
 Evidence from functional neuroimaging of a compensatory prefrontal network in Alzheimer's disease 
 J Neurosci 
 2003 
 23 
 986 
 993 
 12574428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Srivastava 
 G 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2004 
 101 
 4637 
 4642 
 15070770 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Han 
 SD 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Revision of the apolipoprotein E compensatory mechanism recruitment hypothesis 
 Alzheimers.Dement 
 2008 
 4 
 251 
 254 
 18631975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Han 
 SD 
 
 
 Houston 
 WS 
 
 
 Jak 
 AJ 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Nagel 
 BJ 
 
 
 Fleisher 
 AS 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Corey-Bloom 
 J 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 Thal 
 LJ 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Verbal paired-associate learning by APOE genotype in non-demented older adults: fMRI evidence of a right hemispheric compensatory response 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 van Dijk 
 K 
 
 
 Becker 
 A 
 
 
 Mehta 
 A 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Johnson 
 K 
 
 
 Relationship of amyloid deposition to default netwrok functional connectivity in non-demented adults 
 Human Amyloid Imaging conference 
 2009 
 Seattle, WA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedges 
 LV 
 
 
 Distribution theory for Glass's estimator of effect size and related estimators 
 Journal of Educational Statistics 
 1981 
 6 
 107 
 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henry 
 JD 
 
 
 Crawford 
 JR 
 
 
 Phillips 
 LH 
 
 
 Verbal fluency performance in dementia of the Alzheimer's type: a meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2004 
 42 
 1212 
 1222 
 15178173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Lowe 
 VJ 
 
 
 Senjem 
 ML 
 
 
 Weigand 
 SD 
 
 
 Kemp 
 BJ 
 
 
 Shiung 
 MM 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Boeve 
 BF 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 11C PiB and structural MRI provide complementary information in imaging of Alzheimer's disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
 Brain 
 2008 
 131 
 665 
 680 
 18263627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Jones 
 K 
 
 
 Holman 
 BL 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Spiers 
 PA 
 
 
 Satlin 
 A 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 Preclinical prediction of Alzheimer's disease using SPECT 
 Neurology 
 1998 
 50 
 1563 
 1571 
 9633695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 TW 
 
 
 Trivedi 
 MA 
 
 
 Ries 
 ML 
 
 
 Torgerson 
 BM 
 
 
 Carlsson 
 CM 
 
 
 Asthana 
 S 
 
 
 Hermann 
 BP 
 
 
 Sager 
 MA 
 
 
 The influence of Alzheimer disease family history and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 on mesial temporal lobe activation 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 6069 
 6076 
 16738250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jordan 
 J 
 
 
 Galindo 
 MF 
 
 
 Miller 
 RJ 
 
 
 Reardon 
 CA 
 
 
 Getz 
 GS 
 
 
 LaDu 
 MJ 
 
 
 Isoform-specific effect of apolipoprotein E on cell survival and beta-amyloid-induced toxicity in rat hippocampal pyramidal neuronal cultures 
 J Neurosci 
 1998 
 18 
 195 
 204 
 9412500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kline 
 RB 
 
 
 Supplemental chapter on multivariate effect size estimation 
 2004 
 Retrieved October 29, 2008 from  http://www.apa.org/books/resoources/kline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Engler 
 H 
 
 
 Nordberg 
 A 
 
 
 Wang 
 Y 
 
 
 Blomqvist 
 G 
 
 
 Holt 
 DP 
 
 
 Bergstrom 
 M 
 
 
 Savitcheva 
 I 
 
 
 Huang 
 GF 
 
 
 Estrada 
 S 
 
 
 Ausen 
 B 
 
 
 Debnath 
 ML 
 
 
 Barletta 
 J 
 
 
 Price 
 JC 
 
 
 Sandell 
 J 
 
 
 Lopresti 
 BJ 
 
 
 Wall 
 A 
 
 
 Koivisto 
 P 
 
 
 Antoni 
 G 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Langstrom 
 B 
 
 
 Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer's disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B 
 Ann Neurol 
 2004 
 55 
 306 
 319 
 14991808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenzen 
 HJ 
 
 
 Assmann 
 G 
 
 
 Buchwalsky 
 R 
 
 
 Schulte 
 H 
 
 
 Association of apolipoprotein E polymorphism, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and coronary artery disease 
 Clin.Chem 
 1986 
 32 
 778 
 781 
 3698268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 DA 
 
 
 Bayley 
 PJ 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 The anatomy of semantic knowledge: medial vs. lateral temporal lobe 
 Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 
 2004 
 101 
 6710 
 6715 
 15090653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 G 
 
 
 Sokal 
 I 
 
 
 Quinn 
 JF 
 
 
 Leverenz 
 JB 
 
 
 Brodey 
 M 
 
 
 Schellenberg 
 GD 
 
 
 Kaye 
 JA 
 
 
 Raskind 
 MA 
 
 
 Zhang 
 J 
 
 
 Peskind 
 ER 
 
 
 Montine 
 TJ 
 
 
 CSF tau/Abeta42 ratio for increased risk of mild cognitive impairment: a follow-up study 
 Neurology 
 2007 
 69 
 631 
 639 
 17698783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Bhakta 
 M 
 
 
 O'Brien 
 KC 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 M 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional deactivations: change with age and dementia of the Alzheimer type 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2003 
 100 
 14504 
 14509 
 14608034 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ma 
 J 
 
 
 Brewer 
 HB 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Potter 
 H 
 
 
 Alzheimer A beta neurotoxicity: promotion by antichymotrypsin, ApoE4; inhibition by A beta-related peptides 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 1996 
 17 
 773 
 780 
 8892351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahley 
 RW 
 
 
 Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology 
 Science 
 1988 
 240 
 622 
 630 
 3283935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahley 
 RW 
 
 
 Rall 
 SC 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Apolipoprotein E: far more than a lipid transport protein 
 Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 
 2000 
 1 
 507 
 537 
 11701639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 On the tip of the tongue: an event-related fMRI study of semantic retrieval failure and cognitive conflict 
 Neuron 
 2001 
 31 
 653 
 660 
 11545723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mickes 
 L 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Fennema-Notestine 
 C 
 
 
 Galasko 
 D 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Thal 
 LJ 
 
 
 Progressive impairment on neuropsychological tasks in a longitudinal study of preclinical Alzheimer's disease 
 Neuropsychology 
 2007 
 21 
 696 
 705 
 17983283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Celone 
 K 
 
 
 DePeau 
 K 
 
 
 Diamond 
 E 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Rentz 
 D 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Age-related memory impairment associated with loss of parietal deactivation but preserved hippocampal activation 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2008 
 105 
 2181 
 2186 
 18238903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minoshima 
 S 
 
 
 Giordani 
 B 
 
 
 Berent 
 S 
 
 
 Frey 
 KA 
 
 
 Foster 
 NL 
 
 
 Kuhl 
 DE 
 
 
 Metabolic reduction in the posterior cingulate cortex in very early Alzheimer's disease 
 Ann.Neurol 
 1997 
 42 
 85 
 94 
 9225689 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Larossa 
 GN 
 
 
 Sheline 
 YI 
 
 
 Dence 
 CS 
 
 
 Lee 
 SY 
 
 
 Mach 
 RH 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 DeKosky 
 ST 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 [11C]PIB in a nondemented population: potential antecedent marker of Alzheimer disease 
 Neurology 
 2006 
 67 
 446 
 452 
 16894106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monsch 
 AU 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Butter 
 N 
 
 
 Paulsen 
 JS 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 Brugger 
 P 
 
 
 Swenson 
 MR 
 
 
 A comparison of category and letter fluency in alzheimer's disease and huntington's disease 
 Neuropsychology 
 1994 
 8 
 25 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monsch 
 AU 
 
 
 Bondi 
 MW 
 
 
 Butters 
 N 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 Katzman 
 R 
 
 
 Thal 
 LJ 
 
 
 Comparisons of verbal fluency tasks in the detection of dementia of the Alzheimer type 
 Arch Neurol 
 1992 
 49 
 1253 
 1258 
 1449404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morcom 
 AM 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Does the brain have a baseline? Why we should be resisting a rest 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 1073 
 1082 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Habib 
 R 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Kapur 
 S 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Functional brain maps of retrieval mode and recovery of episodic information 
 Neuroreport 
 1995 
 7 
 249 
 252 
 8742463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Lind 
 J 
 
 
 Larsson 
 A 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 Sleegers 
 K 
 
 
 Van 
 BC 
 
 
 Adolfsson 
 R 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Altered deactivation in individuals with genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 1679 
 1687 
 18346764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 DePeau 
 KM 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Impaired medial temporal repetition suppression is related to failure of parietal deactivation in Alzheimer disease 
 Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 
 2008 
 16 
 283 
 292 
 18378553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 Tanila 
 H 
 
 
 Hanninen 
 T 
 
 
 Kononen 
 M 
 
 
 Laakso 
 M 
 
 
 Partanen 
 K 
 
 
 Soininen 
 H 
 
 
 Aronen 
 HJ 
 
 
 Verbal fluency activates the left medial temporal lobe: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Ann.Neurol 
 2000 
 47 
 470 
 476 
 10762158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pike 
 KE 
 
 
 Savage 
 G 
 
 
 Villemagne 
 VL 
 
 
 Ng 
 S 
 
 
 Moss 
 SA 
 
 
 Maruff 
 P 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Masters 
 CL 
 
 
 Rowe 
 CC 
 
 
 Beta-amyloid imaging and memory in non-demented individuals: evidence for preclinical Alzheimer's disease 
 Brain 
 2007 
 130 
 2837 
 2844 
 17928318 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 
 2001 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Caselli 
 RJ 
 
 
 Yun 
 LS 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Bandy 
 D 
 
 
 Minoshima 
 S 
 
 
 Thibodeau 
 SN 
 
 
 Osborne 
 D 
 
 
 Preclinical evidence of Alzheimer's disease in persons homozygous for the epsilon 4 allele for apolipoprotein E 
 N Engl J Med 
 1996 
 334 
 752 
 758 
 8592548 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 Caselli 
 RJ 
 
 
 Bandy 
 D 
 
 
 Osborne 
 D 
 
 
 Saunders 
 AM 
 
 
 Hardy 
 J 
 
 
 Functional brain abnormalities in young adults at genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer's dementia 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2004 
 101 
 284 
 289 
 14688411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Bandy 
 D 
 
 
 Yu 
 M 
 
 
 Lee 
 W 
 
 
 Ayutyanont 
 N 
 
 
 Keppler 
 J 
 
 
 Reeder 
 SA 
 
 
 Langbaum 
 JB 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Price 
 JC 
 
 
 Aizenstein 
 HJ 
 
 
 DeKosky 
 ST 
 
 
 Caselli 
 RJ 
 
 
 Fibrillar amyloid-{beta} burden in cognitively normal people at 3 levels of genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease 
 Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Goekoop 
 R 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Altered resting state networks in mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease: an fMRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2005 
 26 
 231 
 239 
 15954139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sorg 
 C 
 
 
 Riedl 
 V 
 
 
 Muhlau 
 M 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Eichele 
 T 
 
 
 Laer 
 L 
 
 
 Drzezga 
 A 
 
 
 Forstl 
 H 
 
 
 Kurz 
 A 
 
 
 Zimmer 
 C 
 
 
 Wohlschlager 
 AM 
 
 
 Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2007 
 104 
 18760 
 18765 
 18003904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 R 
 
 
 Chua 
 E 
 
 
 Cocchiarella 
 A 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 R 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Putting names to faces: successful encoding of associative memories activates the anterior hippocampal formation 
 Neuroimage 
 2003a 
 20 
 1400 
 1410 
 14568509 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Bates 
 JF 
 
 
 Cocchiarella 
 AJ 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 Encoding novel face-name associations: a functional MRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2001 
 14 
 129 
 139 
 11559958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 B 
 
 
 Bates 
 JF 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Cocchiarella 
 AJ 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 fMRI studies of associative encoding in young and elderly controls and mild Alzheimer's disease 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 2003b 
 74 
 44 
 50 
 12486265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 O'Keefe 
 J 
 
 
 O'Brien 
 J 
 
 
 Deluca 
 A 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 Rentz 
 D 
 
 
 Marshall 
 GA 
 
 
 Eng 
 E 
 
 
 Rastegar 
 S 
 
 
 Carmasin 
 JS 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Cortical amyloid deposition assoiciated with impaired default network activity in non-demented older individuals 
 Human Amyloid Imagin Conference 
 2008 
 17 
 Chicago, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strittmatter 
 WJ 
 
 
 Saunders 
 AM 
 
 
 Schmechel 
 D 
 
 
 Pericak-Vance 
 M 
 
 
 Enghild 
 J 
 
 
 Salvesen 
 GS 
 
 
 Roses 
 AD 
 
 
 Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1993 
 90 
 1977 
 1981 
 8446617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Benson 
 DF 
 
 
 Neuropsychological studies of the frontal lobes 
 Psychol.Bull 
 1984 
 95 
 3 
 28 
 6544432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 EF 
 
 
 Benson 
 DF 
 
 
 Weir 
 WS 
 
 
 Chiulli 
 S 
 
 
 Sarazin 
 FF 
 
 
 Evidence for the involvement of orbitofrontal cortex in memory functions: an interference effect 
 J Comp Physiol Psychol 
 1982 
 96 
 913 
 925 
 7153388 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Alexander 
 MP 
 
 
 Picton 
 TW 
 
 
 A multidisciplinary approach to anterior attentional functions 
 Ann.N.Y.Acad.Sci 
 1995 
 769 
 191 
 211 
 8595026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-Planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 Thieme Medical 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Teasdale 
 GM 
 
 
 Nicoll 
 JA 
 
 
 Murray 
 G 
 
 
 Fiddes 
 M 
 
 
 Association of apolipoprotein E polymorphism with outcome after head injury 
 Lancet 
 1997 
 350 
 1069 
 1071 
 10213549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thal 
 DR 
 
 
 Rub 
 U 
 
 
 Orantes 
 M 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD 
 Neurology 
 2002 
 58 
 1791 
 1800 
 12084879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trivedi 
 MA 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 TW 
 
 
 Ries 
 ML 
 
 
 Torgerson 
 BM 
 
 
 Sager 
 MA 
 
 
 Hermann 
 BP 
 
 
 Asthana 
 S 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 Reduced hippocampal activation during episodic encoding in middle-aged individuals at genetic risk of Alzheimer's disease: a cross-sectional study 
 BMC Med 
 2006 
 4 
 1 
 16412236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Howseman 
 A 
 
 
 Rees 
 GE 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of the human brain: data acquisition and analysis 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 1998 
 123 
 5 
 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 K 
 
 
 Liang 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Tian 
 L 
 
 
 Zhang 
 X 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Altered functional connectivity in early Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state fMRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2007 
 28 
 967 
 978 
 17133390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Liang 
 M 
 
 
 Zhang 
 X 
 
 
 Tian 
 L 
 
 
 Wu 
 T 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Changes in hippocampal connectivity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from resting state fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 496 
 504 
 16473024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 FA 
 
 
 Scalaidhe 
 SP 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Dissociation of object and spatial processing domains in primate prefrontal cortex 
 Science 
 1993 
 260 
 1955 
 1958 
 8316836 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Encoding-associated BOLD signal change. Anatomical image is an average of all 29 subjects. A) Between group differences in encoding-associated percent BOLD signal change from voxel-wise t-tests, showing multiple areas of increased signal in the high risk group compared to the low risk group. B) Regions of encoding-associated increased BOLD signal for each risk group based on within-group t-tests, overlapped on to a single map: yellow = high risk (n=17), pink = low risk (n=12), red = areas of overlapping activations for the low and high risk groups. C) Significant encoding-associated deactivations in the entire cohort (n=29) representing the default mode network. The yellow sphere represents the pC/rsp seed placement for the subsequent resting DMN correlation analysis ( Figure 3 ). D) Regions of encoding-associated decreased BOLD signal for each risk group based on within-group t-tests, overlapped on to a single map: light blue = high risk, dark blue = low risk, purple = areas of overlapping deactivations for the low and high risk groups. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Group differences in overlapping regions of encoding-associated deactivations. A) Voxel-wise t-test maps showing greater deactivations in the low risk group compared to the high risk group. B) Percent signal change during encoding for each risk group in regions showing significant group differences. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Z-score maps of the entire cohort (n=29) showing BOLD fluctuations during rest correlated with the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial seed region ( Figure 1C ), demonstrating the default mode network. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Resting DMN connectivity with the pC/rsp seed in nine different regions between high risk and low risk individuals. A) Mean z-scores for pC/rsp connectivity for both risk groups in regions showing significant group differences. B) Voxel-wise between-group comparison maps of z-score correlations (−1 to +1) showing increased (hot colors) and decreased (cool colors) connectivity in the high risk group compared to the low risk group for each region. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Scatterplots showing the relationship between resting state connectivity z-scores and category fluency scores. Z-scores increase with decreasing category fluency scores in the right temporal and dorso-lateral pre-prefrontal cortex, with trends in medial superior frontal lobes. Connectivity with the pC/rsp decrease with decreasing category fluency scores in the precuneus and rectus gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographics, Memory Scores, Volumetrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 High Risk 
 Low Risk 
 P value 
 
 
 
 
 Number of Subjects 
 17 
 12 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 58.6 ± 4.1 
 57.6 ± 4.5 
 0.53 
 
 
 Sex (%female) 
 4M, 13F (76.5%) 
 5M, 7F (58.3%) 
 0.45 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 16.0 ± 2.0 
 16.0 ± 2.4 
 1 
 
 
 MMSE 
 29.6 ± 0.71 
 29.8 ± 0.39 
 0.39 
 
 
 CVLT 
 49.4 ± 10.0 
 50.3 ± 11.1 
 0.82 
 
 
 Logical memory delayed recall a 
 11.7± 4.8 
 12.4 ± 3.9 
 0.67 
 
 
 Category Fluency 
 53.2 ± 8.0 
 63.6 ± 6.4 
 <0.001 
 
 
 Post MRI Task Recall Score (%) 
 65.60 ± 16.2 
 70.0 ± 14.2 
 0.47 
 
 
 Whole brain volumes (% of TIV) 
 60.1 ± 2.0 
 60.9 ± 3.4 
 0.43 
 
 
 Ventricular volume (% of TIV) 
 1.4 ± 0.52 
 1.5 ± 0.61 
 0.80 
 
 
 Hippocampal volume (% of TIV) 
 0.51 ± 0.031 
 0.52 ± 0.043 
 0.54 
 
 
 
 
 MMSE = Folstein Mini Mental State Exam (Folstein, Folstein et al. 1975). 
 CVLT = California Verbal Learning Test (Delis, Freeland et al. 1988), 
 
 a 
 Delayed recall of the WMS-R Logical Memory Test(Wechsler 1987) 
 
 TIV = total intracranial volume 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Encoding-Associated Deactivation Differences by AD Risk Group 
 
 
 
 
 Cluster Region 
 Coordinates  (RAI) 
 Mean % signal change  ± SD 
 Group  difference  (%) 
 Effect size  (95% CI) 
 p-  values 
 
 
 Low Risk 
 High Risk 
 
 
 
 
 Right  cuneus/precuneus 
 −7 71 34 
 −0.30 ± 0.16 
 −0.13 ± 0.15 
 223.6 
 1.08  (0.26-1.84) 
 0.008 
 
 
 Left  cuneus/precuneus 
 10 73 32 
 −0.26 ± 0.21 
 −0.11 ± 0.14 
 42.2 
 0.89  (0.1-1.64) 
 0.025 
 
 
 Right  supramarginal  gyrus 
 −52 45 30 
 −0.20 ± 0.17 
 −0.07 ± 0.075 
 289.2 
 1.08 (0.26-1.83) 
 0.008 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Resting Default Mode Network Connectivity Differences by AD Risk Group 
 
 
 
 
 Cluster Region 
 Coordinates  (RAI) 
 Mean Correlation z-score  ± SD 
 Z-score  group  difference  (%) 
 Effect size  (95% CI) 
 p-values 
 
 
 Low Risk 
 High Risk 
 
 
 
 
 Bilateral Superior  Medial Prefrontal  Cortex 
 −5 −21 55 
 0.16 ± 0.18 
 0.46 ± 0.19 
 34.7 
 1.62  (0.73-2.41) 
 < 0.001 
 
 
 Bilateral  VentroMedial  Prefrontal cortex 
 2 −56 8 
 0.19 ± 0.27 
 0.44 ± 0.16 
 43.6 
 1.18  0.35-1.94 
 0.004 
 
 
 Right  Middle/Superior  Temporal 
 −48 7 −10 
 0.20 ± 0.19 
 0.44 ± 0.16 
 45.0 
 1.4  (0.55-2.19) 
 < 0.001 
 
 
 Right Dorsolateral  Prefrontal Cortex 
 −57 6 29 
 0.091 ± 0.19 
 0.32 ± 0.21 
 28.1 
 1.17  (0.34-1.93) 
 0.005 
 
 
 Left AnteroMedial  Prefrontal Cortex 
 17 −50 33 
 0.12 ± 0.23 
 0.38 ± 0.17 
 31.1 
 1.31  (0.46-2.08) 
 0.002 
 
 
 Left Post-Central  Parietal 
 35 41 60 
 0.13 ± 0.18 
 0.47 ± 0.37 
 26.8 
 1.12  (0.30-1.88) 
 0.006 
 
 
 Right  Hippocampus 
 −27 13 −13 
 0.31± 0.27 
 0.60 ± 0.30 
 51.3 
 1.03  (0.22-1.78) 
 0.011 
 
 
 Bilateral  Precuneus 
 3 74 46 
 0.75 ± 0.17 
 0.46 ± 0.20 
 −61.8 
 1.51  (0.64-2.30) 
 < 0.001 
 
 
 Bilat Gyrus Rectus 
 −3 −33 −21 
 0.25 ± 0.13 
 0.076  ± 0.091 
 −30.8 
 1.55  (0.67-2.34) 
 < 0.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
