
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9419065 
 21028 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 Human brain mapping 
 1065-9471 
 1097-0193 
 
 
 19569071 
 2789992 
 10.1002/hbm.20837 
 NIHMS142184 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Mapping the pathways of information processing from sensation to action in four distinct sensorimotor tasks 
 
 
 
 
 Ivanoff 
 Jason 
 
 
 
 
 Branning 
 Philip 
 
 
 
 
 Marois 
 René 
 
 
 Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt Vision Research Center, Center for Integrative and Cognitive Neurosciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, T 
 
 
 Correspondence should be addressed to: Jason Ivanoff or René Marois Jason Ivanoff Department of Psychology Saint Mary's University, 923 Robie St., Halifax, Nova Scotia Canada, B3H 3C3. Telephone: 902-420-5846  Jason.Ivanoff@smu.ca  René Marois Dept. of Psychology, 530 Wilson Hall Vanderbilt University 111 21 st  Ave S., Nashville, Tennessee USA, 37240 Telephone: 615-322-1779  rene.marois@vanderbilt.edu 
 
 
 28 
 8 
 2009 
 
 
 12 
 2009 
 
 
 1 
 12 
 2010 
 
 30 
 12 
 4167 
 4186 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Two sensorimotor tasks that share neither sensory nor motor modality can interfere with one another when they are performed simultaneously. A possible cause for this interference is the recruitment of common brain regions by these two tasks, thereby creating a bottleneck of information processing. This hypothesis predicts that such ‘bottleneck’ regions would be activated by each task even when they are performed separately. To test this prediction, we sought to identify, with fMRI, brain regions commonly activated by sensorimotor tasks that share neither sensory input nor motor output. One group of subjects was scanned while they performed in separate runs an auditory-vocal (AVo) task and a visuo-manual (ViM) task, while a second group of subjects performed the reversed sensorimotor mapping tasks (AM and ViVo). The results revealed strong activation preferences in specific sensory and motor cortical areas for each sensory and motor modality. By contrast, the posterior portion of the lateral prefrontal cortex (pLPFC), anterior insula, and, less consistently, the anterior cingulate, pre-supplementary and supplementary motor areas, and subcortical areas were commonly activated across all four sensorimotor tasks. These results were observed in both blocked and event-related fMRI designs, in both 3D-group averaged and 2D-individual subject analyses, and were replicated within individuals across scanning sessions. These findings not only suggest that these brain regions may serve a common amodal function in sensorimotor tasks, they also point to these regions – particularly the pLPFC and anterior insula – as candidate neural substrates underlying a central hub of information processing in the human brain. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Effective interaction with one's environment requires the ability to select appropriate responses to particular stimulus situations. While some stimulus-response (S-R) ensembles are more compatible than others [e.g.,  Fitts and Seeger, 1953 ] humans are endowed with the remarkable ability of making arbitrary responses to stimuli purely based on a given set of rules and instructions. This ability to quickly and efficiently pair any motor response to any stimulus affords us with an immensely adaptive way to respond to environmental changes. 
 While we can efficiently execute a proper response to any arbitrary stimuli, performance deteriorates greatly under conditions of multi-tasking. This is well illustrated by the psychological refractory period (PRP) paradigm, which requires making two distinct motor responses to two successively presented stimuli [ Pashler, 1994a ]. The response to the second stimulus is greatly slowed as the stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) between the two stimuli decreases. This dual-task slowing is thought to result from the inability to select two responses simultaneously. Specifically, the PRP effect has been attributed to the existence of a response selection bottleneck, in which only one response selection process can be executed at a time, leading to the serial postponement of response selection associated with the second task [see  Pashler & Johnston, 1998 , for a review]. According to this central-bottleneck account, information arising from distinct sensorimotor pathways ultimately converge onto a common structural hub, thereby creating a bottleneck of information processing [see  Klingberg, 1998 , and  Marois & Ivanoff, 2005 , for a discussion of alternative accounts of neural correlates of multi-tasking limitations]. Despite the fact that dual-tasking has been the subject of numerous functional neuroimaging studies [e.g.,  D'Esposito et al., 1995 ;  Adcock et al., 2000 ;  Bunge, Klingberg, Jacobsen, & Gabrieli, 2000 ;  Collette et al., 2005 ;  Dreher and Grafman, 2003 ;  Erickson et al., 2005 ;  Jaeggi et al., 2003 ;  Just, Carpenter, Keller, Emery, Zajac, & Thulborn, 2001 ; Klingberg and Roland, 1997; Erickson et al., 2007;  Sigman & Dehaene, 2008 ;  Stelzel, Kraft, Brandt, & Schubert, 2008 ], there is little consensus regarding the neural mechanism responsible for dual-task limitations. This is the case even when only considering studies that have investigated one classic form of dual-task interference, the PRP. Some PRP studies have compared dual-task and single-task conditions [ Herath, Klingberg, Young, Amunts, & Roland, 2001 ;  Szameitat, Schubert, Müller, & von Cramon, 2002 ;  Schubert & Szameitat, 2003 ;  Stelzel, Schumacher, Schubert, & D'Esposito, 2006 ]. These studies have identified middle frontal, inferior frontal and intra-parietal cortical regions as being involved in the coordination of dual-tasking. However, this methodological approach to dual-task interference may not necessarily yield activations specific to the executive control needed to co-ordinate dual-task performance, as they could also be related to executive processes (e.g. task-switching) that are not directly responsible to the dual-task slowing observed in the PRP. In addition, other studies have failed to show any evidence of dual-task specific activations [ Adcock et al., 2000 ;  Erickson et al., 2005 ;  Dux, Ivanoff, Asplund, & Marois, 2006 ]. 
 Another neuroimaging approach to dual-task interference consists in taking the same experimental principle used to demonstrate the PRP effect in behavioral studies, which is to compare brain activity levels at short versus long SOAs. Such efforts have isolated the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) as a potential neural candidate of the PRP bottleneck [e.g.,  Herath et al., 2001 ; Jiang, Saxe, Kanwisher, 2003]. However, the strength of the activation within this region was negatively correlated with the magnitude of the PRP effect [ Jiang, Saxe, & Kanwisher, 2004 ; but see  Herath et al., 2001 , who observed a positive correlation], suggesting that this region was related to efforts to reduce the PRP effect. Furthermore, while some studies [ Herath et al., 2001 ;  Jiang, 2004 ;  Jiang et al., 2004 ] have found the right IFG with a short SOA - long SOA subtraction, one study [ Marois, Larson, Chun, & Shima, 2006 ] observed no significant differences with this comparison. If the PRP is the result of a queuing of response selection for Task 2 as suggested by the central bottleneck model [ Pashler, 1994a ], then one would actually not expect to find any region whose magnitude of activation differs between short and long SOAs [ Jiang et al., 2004 ;  Marois and Ivanoff, 2005 ]. Rather, the SOA manipulation would be expected to affect the duration of neural activity in the brain regions subserving this central bottleneck, and recent time-resolved fMRI studies of the PRP provide support for this hypothesis [ Dux et al., 2006 ;  Sigman & Dehaene, 2008 ]. 
 Given that behavioral studies have pointed to the stage of response selection as the source of the bottleneck underlying the PRP [ Pashler, 1994a ], a fruitful approach to isolating that neural subtrates of the central bottleneck is to identify brain regions associated with response selection. Using such approach,  Jiang and Kanwisher [2003a]  noted that a fronto-parietal network (including the intra-parietal sulcus (IPS), precuneus, frontal eye fields (FEF), and lateral frontal areas in inferior and middle frontal gyrus [IFG and MFG, respectively]) was commonly activated in S-R compatibility tasks that did not share a common sensory or motor modality. In their task, spatial stimulus-response mapping was natural (i.e., stimuli were spatially aligned in the same order as response output) or unnatural (i.e., stimuli and responses were not arranged similarly).  Jiang and Kanwisher [2003a]  concluded that response selection is implemented by a common neural network irrespective of task details. In a similar vein, but with different conclusions,  Schumacher, Elston, and D'Esposito [2003]  used a parametric manipulation of response selection (by increasing the number of alternative responses and the spatial compatibility of the S-R pairing) to isolate response selection processes.  Schumacher et al. [2003]  observed a frontal-parietal network (including dorsal premotor, middle frontal, and superior parietal areas) whose activation pattern depended upon the task (spatial compatibility versus non-spatial numerosity), and therefore concluded that response selection is representation-specific. The discrepancy between these studies may have been the result of different kinds of response selection operations involved in S-R compatibility and S-R numerosity [ Schumacher and Jiang, 2003 ], suggesting that response selection is not a simple unitary process. 
 The conflicting results of the latter studies may be resolved by avoiding compatibility manipulations all together as a means of isolating brain regions involved in simple sensorimotor response selection tasks. To that effect, the goal of the current study was to localize brain regions that are commonly activated when performing two tasks that share neither sensory nor motor modalities. Our goal is conceptually similar to that of  Jiang and Kanwisher [2003a]  in that we sought regions that are commonly activated irrespective of the particular sensory input or motor output. However,  Jiang and Kanwisher [2003a] , and  Schumacher et al. [2003] , relied on a particular behavioral manipulation (S-R compatibility or S-R numerosity [ Hick, 1952 ; see also  Woo & Lee, 2007 ], respectively) to uncover brain regions specifically involved in response selection. By contrast, we adopted a simpler and more inclusive approach to identifying brain regions commonly activated across four sets of sensorimotor mappings. Specifically, to isolate most (if not all) brain regions that may be activated across sensorimotor tasks, we compared activation of each sensorimotor task to a simple baseline condition, and then searched for regions of overlapping activation between these tasks. According to the response selection bottleneck model [ Pashler, 1994a ], any brain regions taking part in the structural bottleneck revealed by the PRP should be activated even when each task is carried out in isolation. Thus, in the present study, we scanned two groups of subjects who each performed two distinct sensorimotor tasks under single-task situations: one group of participants performed an auditory-manual (AM) task and a visual-vocal (ViVo) task. The other group of participants performed the opposite pairing (AVo and ViM). Any brain regions supporting a central, capacity-limited stage of information processing should be commonly activated by all four pairings. While this approach does not allow us to unambiguously claim that the ‘convergence’ areas are involved in response selection  per se , it has the advantage of revealing brain areas that are commonly involved in the performance of simple sensorimotor tasks irrespective of the sensory or motor modalities. Given that response selection is not the only process that taps into this central bottleneck of information processing [e.g.  Carrier and Pashler, 1995 ;  Ruthruff, Miller, & Lachmann, 1995 ; see  Marois & Ivanoff, 2005  for review], our approach therefore has the potential to reveal all the brain regions that support common, amodal stages of information processing. 
 Two recent studies have used a similar experimental approach to isolate brain regions commonly activated across sensorimotor tasks. For one of these studies, this approach was used to identify candidate central processing regions that could then be probed under other experimental manipulations [ Dux et al., 2006 ]. However, that study only examined one sensorimotor pair of tasks (i.e., AM and ViVo). The other study included the reciprocal combination of sensorimotor pairs (i.e. AM-ViVo and AVo-ViM) but used those pairs to specifically isolate putative brain regions involved in dual-task condition relative to single-task conditions [ Stelzel et al., 2006 ]. As mentioned above, a dual- vs. single-task comparison is not expected to specifically isolate brain regions that may underly a central bottleneck of information processing at the stage of response selection. Moreover, the current study differs from these previous studies in several technical respects. First, we used both blocked and event-related (ER) designs to isolate such brain regions to provide a replication of results with two experimentally distinct paradigms, thereby making it unlikely that the results are paradigm-specific. In addition, we examined all brain regions that showed convergence of activation not only at the group-average level, but also at the individual level. The latter approach allows one to assess whether commonly activated brain regions are simply an artifact of the lower resolution afforded by group averages. Finally, this single-subject analysis included rescanning a subset of our participants to determine whether the task-specific activation was replicable across fMRI sessions. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Subjects 
 Twenty-eight adult volunteers, aged 18 to 39 and recruited from the Vanderbilt community, participated in the study for financial compensation. All participants filled out informed consent forms. This study was approved by Vanderbilt's Internal Review Board. 
 
 
 General Design 
 All subjects performed two separate sensorimotor tasks under single-task condition, with each of the two tasks consisting of a three alternative-discrimination. Half of the subjects were randomly assigned to the “AVo/ViM” condition in which they were to make vocal utterances in response to auditory stimuli (auditory-vocal; AVo) and manual key-presses in response to visual stimuli (visual-manual; ViM). The remaining 14 subjects were assigned to the “AM/ViVo” group: manual key-press responses were made to auditory stimuli (AM) and vocal responses to the visual stimuli (ViVo). Different subjects were used for each pairings (AVo/ViM and AM/ViVo) in order to avoid prepotency interference (e.g. interference during ViVo task from previous association of a visual stimulus with a manual response in ViM task). 
 The scanning session included four blocked and four event-related (ER) runs. The blocked and fast-event runs were counterbalanced between subjects. In the blocked runs each of the two tasks were presented in separate blocks of trials (see below) and task order was counterbalanced between runs, whereas in the ER runs each of the two tasks were presented in separate runs. 
 
 Behavioral Paradigm 
 
 Task Design 
 The three visual stimuli were colored checkered shapes (circle, square, and triangle, all 3.7° wide) presented on a light gray background. To improve visual cortex activity, the visual shapes were filled with red and green alternating (10Hz) checkers (~.37° per checker). The auditory stimuli were complex frequency-modulated sounds created by re-sampling segments of bird songs such that they were unrecognizable as bird sounds. Stimuli (visual and auditory) were presented for 200ms for the first 8 participants, and for 500ms for the last 20 participants (to further amplify activity in sensory cortex). This stimulus duration change was offset by changing the inter-stimulus interval (ISI) so that the length of a trial remained constant (see below). The ISI was the same for both auditory and visual stimuli (see below). Manual Key-press responses were recorded with the index, middle, and ring finger of the right hand. Vocal responses were monosyllabic utterances “ba”, “bo”, and “be” recorded with an MRI compatible microphone (Resonance Technology, Inc., Northridge, CA). To minimize motion and vocal artifacts within the scanner, participants were practiced making the vocal responses with minimal jaw movement. The pairings between specific sensory and motor responses were counterbalanced between subjects. Participants were instructed to respond as soon as they felt confident of their responses (i.e., both accuracy and speed was emphasized). 
 
 
 
 Trial Design 
 
 Block runs 
 These runs included distinct blocks of trials for each of the two sensorimotor tasks. Each 24.75s block contained the presentation of a cue followed by 10 trials of a given task. Each trial started with the presentation of the stimulus (auditory or visual), and followed by a white fixation cross (0.5°). The stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) was 2.25s for both stimuli durations (200ms and 500ms). At the beginning of each block, subjects were cued to the modality of the task by means of a visual cue (i.e., the fixation cross turning green) or an auditory cue (i.e., a pure tone of 880 Hz) for 1000ms for the visual and auditory tasks, respectively. The cues were followed by a 1.25s fixation period before onset of the first trial. These two block types alternated trice in each fMRI run, and were separated from each other by 24.75s long periods of fixation, during which subjects were only required to fixate the cross. Thus, there were 6 fixation, 3 visual, and 3 auditory blocks per 4.5mins-long fMRI run, and four of such runs per fMRI session. 
 
 
 Event-related runs 
 Each 4.5min ER run included 42 trials of the same stimulus type (auditory or visual). The presentation of the stimulus (for 200ms or 500ms) preceded the presentation of a fixation cross. For both stimulus durations, the SOAs were 2.25s, 4.5s, 6.75s, or 8.5s). There were two runs of each of the two sensorimotor tasks, with the order of these runs alternating within subjects and counterbalanced between subjects. The task identity was introduced to the participant over the scanner intercom system by the experimenter prior to each fMRI run. 
 
 
 Practice 
 Participants were trained and practiced on the tasks within the scanner and prior to the fMRI runs. The single practice block of trials was similar to the experimental blocks runs with the exception that the correct responses were presented visually (centrally, approximately within 1°) during the ISI. Subjects were instructed to use this information to learn the appropriate S-R mappings and they made responses during the presentation of the visual presentation of the correct answer. For the vocal responses, the responses ‘BO’, ‘BE’, or ‘BA’, and for the key-press responses, the number corresponding to the key (1, 2 or 3) were displayed at fixation. Subjects were instructed to use the answers to learn the appropriate responses to the stimuli. Responses were monitored online by the experimenter to assure they had made the appropriate response. Performance measures (RT, accuracy) were not saved. 
 
 
 
 fMRI parameters 
 Imaging data was acquired on a GE LX 3T (Madison, WI) scanner. The 2D anatomical T1-weighted images were acquired using conventional parameters. The T2*-weighted transverse echoplanar images (EPI) slices (64 x 64 matrix) were interleaved and acquired axially (aligned to the AC-PC plane; 17 slices; 3.75 mm 2  in-plane; 6 mm thick, 0mm gap) for the first four (2 AVo-ViM, 2 AM-ViVo) participants and sagittally (22 slices; 3.75 mm 2  in-plane; 7 mm thick; 0mm gap) for the remaining 24 participants (12 AVo-ViM and 12 AM-ViVo). After the first four participants were scanned, we suspected that medial frontal regions may play a key role in response selection [e.g.,  Dux et al., 2006 ;  Marois et al., 2006 ]. Thus, sagittal sectioning was adopted because it afforded the optimal orientation for high-resolution 2D analysis of these areas. Adding the participants with axial slice acquisition did not change the pattern of results, thus they were included in the analysis. The T2* parameters for the axial prescription were the following: TR=1.75s, TE=25ms, and FA=70°. For the sagittal prescription, it was the following: TR=2.25s; TE=25ms; and FA=70. Finally, 124 high-resolution 3D-SPGR images were taken in the axial plane (along the AC-PC plane) at the end of each scanning session. 
 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 
 Behavioral Data 
 Due to technical problems, incomplete vocal and/or manual reaction times (RTs) were acquired from seven participants. The group behavioral data was therefore calculated from 21 participants. Responses faster than 200ms (anticipations) and slower than 1500ms were excluded from the behavioral analyses. Performances in the sensory tasks were analyzed by combining the auditory tasks (AVo & AM) and contrasting them with the visual tasks (ViVo & ViM). Likewise, performances in the motor tasks were analyzed by combining the manual tasks (AM & ViM) and contrasting them with the vocal tasks (AVo & ViVo). Lastly, performances in the four sensorimotor tasks were compared to each other with four unpaired t-tests (AVo versus AM, AVo versus ViVo, ViM versus ViVo, and ViM versus AM), and two paired t-tests (AVo versus ViM and ViVo versus AM) owing to the non-orthogonality of the contrasts and therefore preventing the usual 2×2 ANOVA. 
 
 
 fMRI Data 
 Brainvoyager software (versions 2000 and QX, BV Innovation, Maastricht The Netherlands) was used for pre-processing and data analysis. All images were transformed into interpolated 1mm 3  Talairach space [Talairach and Tournoux, 1988] for each participant. Pre-processing included motion correction, slice scan time correction (relative to the first volume of the first run) and linear trend removal for both the ER and block runs. Participants were explicitly instructed to restrict their movement while being scanned, and the degree of movement was acceptable (i.e. < 5mm translation [x,y,z] or rotation [pitch, yaw, roll]). Temporal smoothing (1.75s FWHM for the axial data and 2.25s FWHM for the sagittal data) was used for the block runs only. Event-related analyses were corrected for serial correlations. Within each run, the first seven volumes were discarded for the MR signal to reach its steady state. In order to combine data for timecourse analyses from both the axial and sagittal group of subjects, the axial data sets were down-sampled using MATLAB's (The Mathworks, Natick, MA) signal processing toolbox to the sampling rate (TR=2.25s) acquired with the sagittal images. All subsequent analyses were performed on the re-sampled data for these participants. 
 Three main analyses were performed on the fMRI data set. The first analysis served to identify brain regions associated with each sensorimotor task from sensation to response. The second analysis aimed at distinguishing the sensory and motor neural components of each sensorimotor task. The third analysis isolated regions that were commonly activated across all sensorimotor tasks. 
 
 (1) Activated regions for each sensorimotor task 
 The first analysis aimed at isolating, for each sensorimotor task, the brain regions associated with the entire flow of information processing, from sensation to motor response. Only the block runs were used for this analysis because only the block runs had appropriate baseline contrast (i.e., the fixation blocks). Voxels whose activity correlated with each task were isolated using a voxel-based multiple regression analysis by convolving a canonical hemodynamic response [ Boynton, Engel, Glover, & Heeger, 1996 ]. Activity in each sensorimotor task (AM, AVo, ViVo, and ViM) was contrasted with activity during the fixation blocks. The resulting maps were overlaid to create composite activation maps. The overall model fit was assessed with a  t -statistic using a random effects model, and the thresholded  p -values were set using the false discovery rate method [ Genovese, Lazar, Nichols, 2002 ]. Unless otherwise indicated, all SPMs were thresholded with a minimal value of q(FDR)=0.05, c(V)=1. The activation maps were projected onto an inflated brain of a representative subject's anatomy ( Figure 1 ). 
 
 
 (2) Sensory and motor regions 
 The second analysis aimed at highlighting brain regions specifically or preferentially activated to each sensory and motor modality. Sensory areas were identified using the following contrast:  ( A V o - V i M ) - ( V i V o - A M )  The areas associated with auditory processing are isolated as “positive” activations and those with the visual processing are “negative”. Likewise, the motor areas were identified with the following contrast:  ( A V o - V i M ) - ( A M - V i V o )  Here, brain regions preferentially associated with vocal responses are identified with “positive” activations, whereas the “negative” activity reflects brain regions preferentially responsive to the manual response. 
 Separate SPMs for the block and ER runs were computed using the standard random effects GLM. The SPMs for the block runs were computed as described in (1) but using the contrasts mentioned above. The SPMs for the ER runs were constructed as in the block runs with the exception that only the peak volume (i.e., 4 th  volume) was used for the contrasts. This contrast analysis offered results that were very similar to the result from an analysis that used the entire timecourse. Only voxels that were significantly [q(FDR)=0.05] activated in both maps were considered truly activated and are illustrated in  Figure 2 . This “replication” ensured that isolated voxels are most likely those that show reliable differences in activation between the two sensory modalities and between the two motor modalities. 
 Timecourse estimates for each sensory and motor conditions in the isolated ROIs were then obtained with deconvolution analysis of the ER data. Thus, for each sensory (or motor) areas, the estimated timecourses for the visual and auditory stimuli (or manual and vocal) were plotted by averaging the response to tasks that share the same modality (e.g. the timecourse of visual stimulation in visual cortex represent the average of the timecourses of the ViM and ViVo conditions in that ROI). Finally, two t-tests were carried out on the timecourses at peak amplitude (i.e., the 4 th  volume). The first t-test determined whether the hemodynamic responses in the opposite-modality trials (e.g. ViVo/ViM trial in auditory cortex) were smaller than those in the proper-modality trial (e.g. AM/AVo trial in auditory cortex), confirming the SPM analysis regarding modality preference. The second t-test assessed whether the peak responses in the opposite-modality trial were greater than baseline, thereby establishing whether the ROI specifically responds to one modality and not the other. 
 
 
 (3) Identification of commonly activated regions across sensorimotor tasks 
 To identify regions commonly activated by all sensorimotor tasks we adopted several, multi-step criteria. A flow chart of our analysis approach is illustrated in  Figure 1 . An initial conjunction analysis isolated potential convergence brain regions at the group-averaged level. We ran the analysis on both blocked and ER data to ensure that the activation results were consistent across these two methodological approaches. Thus, only regions that were identified in both designs were considered for further analyses. It is possible, however, that some of the putative “conjunctive” regions demonstrate co-activation only because of the spatial blurring of activation foci during inter-subject averaging. Because true conjunctive activity ought to be seen within the data of individual participants, the ROIs isolated in group-averaged SPMs were also probed for overlap in activation across sensorimotor tasks in the unsmoothed, original 2D slices of individual participants. If a region passed these analysis steps, we further explored the reliability of activation in a second scanning session performed in a subset of participants. 
 
 (i) Group-level conjunction analysis 
 A region was identified as a convergence area if it was significantly activated in all of the four sensorimotor tasks (i.e., using a logical AND;  Nichols et al., 2005 ) in both the block and ER data sets. Thus, any particular voxel had to be significantly activated [q(FDR)<.05, random-effects model] in all eight SPMs to be considered a candidate convergence area in group composites. Subsequent, confirmatory, paired sample t-tests on peak activations from the ER timecourses assessed whether there were any sensory or motor preferences in the conjunction areas. 
 
 
 (ii) Individual subject 2D analysis 
 This analysis was carried out on the 2D slice data of each individual participant who underwent a sagittal scan ( n =24). This analysis was performed on unfiltered, non-smoothed original 2D data in order to minimize blurring of activation across voxels. 
 For each ROI isolated in the group average, the corresponding area in each hemisphere was first isolated in individual subjects’ 3D anatomical (i.e. SPGR) data. The corresponding area in the 2D slices of the same subject was then determined, using anatomical landmarks (gyri and sulci) to delineate the boundaries of the ROI. The large medial wall ROI isolated in the group analysis was broken down into supplementary motor area (SMA), pre-SMA and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) sub-ROIs, for the left and right hemispheres, for the 2D analysis. Similarly, the large cerebellar ROI was subdivided into left and right hemispheres, and into the anterior lobule and superior-posterior lobule ROI. The 2D SPMs for each of the two sensorimotor tasks (since each subject performed only two of the four sensorimotor tasks) were then thresholded [q(FDR)<0.05] using a fixed-effects GLM applied to the ER data of each individual subject, and activation overlap between the two tasks in each of the ROI voxels was assessed for conjunction of activation. The time courses from the voxels with activation overlap were then examined to verify that they exhibited gamma function-like hemodynamic responses to each of the two sensorimotor tasks. The number of such voxels was then recorded for every participant in each ROI. 
 To be considered a strong candidate for convergence of activations across all tasks, an ROI should (1) have a significant number of participants showing voxel-based activation overlap and (2) a non-significant number of participants with task-specific activation. Thus, the convergence ROIs were also probed for voxels exhibiting task-specific activation (i.e., activated by one task, but not by the other). Any participant was considered to have conjunction activation and/or task-specific activation if there was at least one voxel within the ROI exhibiting significant activation in both tasks (AVo and ViM, or AM and ViVo) and/or only in one task, respectively. The ROI was first identified in standardized 3D space and then anatomically localized in original 2D space (i.e., before standardizing the dataset into Talaraich space). Although a 1-voxel criterion may appear liberal, it should be stressed that these voxels had to pass several statistical criteria (described above and below) to be considered significantly activated, and that the number of voxels per ROI in individual subjects’ Talairach space was small (range: 2-16 voxels). 
 We used the Clopper-Pearson “exact” confidence intervals (CI) [ Agresti, 2002 ;  Clopper and Pearson, 1934 ] to determine whether the proportion of subjects demonstrating “activation” for a particular category (task-specific or conjunction) was significantly above zero. Our confidence limits were Bonferroni corrected to account for multiple comparisons (i.e., nine ROIs and two hemispheres = 18 samples per group; 0.05 Bonferroni corrected CI: lower bound=0.14%, upper-bound=99.86%). For each ROI and sensorimotor tasks, there are 12 participants. A brain region could be confidently (99.72% probability) claimed to contain at least one participant with either conjunction or task-specific activation if the lower bound of the confidence interval was greater than 1/12. To obtain a lower bound corresponding to a 0.14% Clopper-Pearson CI greater than 1/12, at least 6 out of 12 participants needed to show activated voxels. 
 
 
 (iii) Replication of individual subject results in the 2D analysis 
 In a final analysis, we sought to assess the reliability of the conjunction and task-specific activity observed in the individual subject 2D analysis described above. Four of the participants demonstrating conjunction and task-specific activity were rescanned in an ER experiment that was identical to the ER runs of the first scanning session. In order to match voxels across scans, care was taken with slice prescription of the second scan to ensure that it matched closely the prescription of the first scan. To determine whether voxels in the regions of interest showed either conjunction or task-specific activation in  both  fMRI sessions, the FDR threshold, q, for each session was set to 0.22 as the combined FDR satisfies  E(V 2 /R 2 ) ≤ q 1 q 2  [ Reiner, Yekutieli, and Benjamini, 2003 ], giving rise to an omnibus q level of 0.05. The timecourses in the surviving voxels were then examined for the presence of gamma function-like hemodynamic response. Regions that survive this three-stage analysis (group random effects analysis for both Block and ER data, individual 2D analysis, and the 2D replication analysis) were deemed to be strong candidates for neural areas exhibiting amodal response selection processing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 As seen in  Table 1 , there were no differences in accuracy between all sensorimotor tasks. With RTs, there was no overall difference between manual (AMViM) and vocal (AVoViVo) responses,  F (1,19)=0.90. However, responses to auditory (AM and AVo; 849ms) stimuli were overall slower than responses to visual (ViM and ViVo; 675ms) stimuli,  F (1,19)=16.06,  p <0.001. AM responses were marginally slower than ViVo responses [t(11)=2.19, p=0.051], and AVo responses were slower than responses in the three other tasks (see  Table 1 ). 
 The slower responses to auditory tasks might be due to the presence of background noise from the scanner and/or the discriminative difficulty of the auditory stimuli. Whatever the cause for the slower RTs in auditory tasks, it should have little bearing on isolating brain regions co-activated by all tasks. 
 We also considered whether overall performance differed between the AVo/ViM and AM/ViVo groups. The RT difference was significant [ F (1,19)=4.64,  p <0.05] owing to faster average responses for the AM/ViVo group (716ms) than the AVo/ViM group (824ms). However, this difference may have been the result of a speed-accuracy tradeoff as the slower AVo/ViM group (98%) responded marginally [t(19)=2.05, p=0.055] more accurately than the ViVo/AM group (96%). 
 
 
 FMRI Results 
 
 Activated regions for each sensorimotor task 
 SPMs for the AVo-fixation, AM-fixation, ViVo-fixation and ViM-fixation contrasts from the blocked fMRI runs are illustrated in  Figure 2 . Extensive activation foci were not only observed in primary sensory and motor cortices, but also in association areas of all cortical lobes. Although all but the ViVo tasks recruited large expanses of cortex, auditory cortex activation was more prominent in the auditory tasks while visual cortex activation was more readily observed in the visual tasks. Similarly, manual responses recruited more dorsal and slightly more posterior regions of the frontal lobe than vocal responses. In addition, subcortical (thalamus and superior colliculus) activations (not shown) were also common across tasks. 
 Although this analysis reveals that each sensorimotor task recruits a relatively large extent of cortical and subcortical tissue, it does not identify brain regions that are either commonly activated across all four tasks or that are specific to each sensory and motor modalities. The following analyses serve these purposes. 
 
 
 Identification of Sensory and Motor Areas 
 We sought to identify brain regions that were more activated for a particular sensory (e.g., auditory) or motor (e.g., manual) modality than for the other (i.e., visual and vocal, respectively). Regions that exhibited modality-preferred activation in both Blocked and ER runs are illustrated in  Figure 3 . 
 Not surprisingly, visual stimulation preferentially recruited Brodmann areas (BAs) 18 and 19 of the occipital lobe, whereas auditory stimuli preferentially recruited the superior temporal cortex and adjacent areas. In addition, the vocal responses preferentially recruited lateral regions of the precentral gyrus, whereas manual responses engaged more dorsal regions of the pre- and post-central gyrus. Examination of the time courses from the ER runs in these areas confirm that they demonstrate preferential, but not specific responses to a given sensory or motor modality ( Figure 3 ). That is to say, foci showed significant activation (all  p s<0.01) for the non-preferred modality (e.g. auditory activation in visual cortex, or manual response activation in vocal ROI). However, these non-preferred activations were much weaker than the preferred modality activations ( Fig. 3 ,  Table 2 ). Because these group-defined ROIs were relatively large, it is not possible to ascertain whether the present results were obtained because these sensory or motor ROIs do not exhibit strict modality specificity or because they are composed of a mixture of multimodal and modality-specific areas. 
 
 
 Identification of brain regions commonly activated across sensorimotor tasks 
 
 (i) Group-level Conjunction Analysis 
 We first sought to identify candidate convergence zones for all sensorimotor tasks in group-averaged SPMs. To achieve this, we identified, for the block and fast-event-related runs, voxels that were conjointly activated by all four tasks (AVo, ViM, ViVo, AM) in a random-effects analysis. Thus, only regions that were significantly activated for all four tasks and in both designs (block and fast ER) were accepted. This analysis revealed the following regions as commonly activated across the four tasks ( Fig. 4 ;  Table 3 ): a region of the medial wall comprising the bilateral SMA, pre-SMA and ACC; the right anterior insula; the posterior lateral frontal/prefrontal cortex [pLPFC] in Brodmann areas (BA) 6 and 9 intersecting the inferior precentral sulcus and inferior frontal sulcus [ Brass, Derfuss Frostmann, and von Cramon, 2005 ]; a more dorsal bilateral premotor (PM) cortex region in BA6; left thalamus; and a segment of the brainstem near the superior colliculus. All of these brain regions showed significant peak volume activity relative to baseline in all four sensorimotor tasks (AVo, ViM, ViVo, and AM). Except for the left pLPFC, right PM, and brainstem, which responded more to the vocal than the manual tasks, these brain regions did not demonstrate sensory or motor preference (ANOVAs on the percent signal change at peak amplitude) ( Table 3 ). Thus, these brain regions are distinct from the sensory and motor regions in that they generally respond strongly and similarly to all sensory and motor modalities tested. 
 While these results are consistent with the notion that these regions may constitute neural convergence zones for all sensorimotor tasks, they may also result from the blurring of adjacent foci displaying sensory- and/or motor-specific activation in this standardized group-averaged data. To address this issue, we carried out an analysis on individual subject's non-standardized data. 
 
 
 (ii) Individual 2D analysis 
 Within each convergence ROI, using in-plane 2D images, we assessed whether the majority of subjects exhibited at least one voxel of conjunction and/or task-specific activity (see Methods and  Table 4 ). Given that this brain region is thought to be functionally heterogeneous ( Picard & Strick, 2001 ), the frontal medial wall ROI was divided into a ventral ACC ROI and a dorsal pre-SMA/SMA ROI. It was also divided according to left and right hemisphere. Regions that demonstrated conjunction-related activation for all conditions in most subjects consisted of the right anterior insula, bilateral pLPFC, bilateral pre-SMA/SMA, bilateral ACC, and the left thalamus. The PM cortex demonstrated conjunction-related activation in only the AVo/ViM tasks, while the brainstem did not exhibit robust conjunction activity. In addition, the pLPFC and the preSMA/SMA showed task-specific activation in at least one of the four sensorimotor tasks (AVo,ViM,AM,ViVo). 
 Thus, several of the conjunction ROIs defined at the group level also demonstrated robust conjunction activity in 2D analysis of single subjects. However, some of these ROIs, namely the pLPFC and preSMA/SMA, also showed task-specific activation. The latter finding can be interpreted in at least two ways. First, the conjunction activity observed both at the group and individual levels could be an artifact of the hemodynamic blurring of distinct single-task activation foci. Alternatively, the conjunction ROIs may include distinct sub-regions demonstrating true task-specific and conjunction-related activity. Importantly, although the pLPFC showed both conjunction activity and task-specific activity, the latter was limited to a vocal task (AVo; see  Table 4 ). These vocal-specific voxels were not only posterior to the conjunction voxels in the individual subject 2D analysis, they were also immediately anterior to the vocal motor ROI (cf.  Figs. 3  and  4 ), suggesting that they belong to the vocal motor/premotor cortex. Thus, the posterior extent of the pLPFC ROI may have been tainted by vocal-specific activity from the adjacent vocal motor cortex. This finding, together with the fact that no significant manual-specific activation was observed in pLPFC, suggests that this brain region contains genuine conjunction-related activity. By contrast, the preSMA/SMA showed significant task-specific activity in both vocal and manual tasks, casting doubt as to whether this brain region truly contains conjunction foci. 
 
 
 (iii) Replication of individual subject analysis 
 For three of the ROIs that exhibited conjunction activity at the group level, the individual-level analysis revealed a more complex pattern of activation. Specifically, examination of individual subjects’ activity profile in pLPFC and pre-SMA/SMA showed both conjunction-related and task-specific activations, while the PM ROI showed conjunction-related activity in the AVo/ViM, but not in the AM/ViVo, pairing. To determine whether the complex activation patterns in these brain regions are robust, we rescanned four of the participants who showed conjunction and task-specific activations in these three ROIs in a fast ER experiment that was identical to the first scanning session. The conjunction and task-specific voxels were separately identified in each session of each subject and assessed for overlap of activation across sessions using a conjunction analysis that required voxels to be significantly activated in each of the two sessions (see Methods). 
 The analysis revealed that both conjunction and task-specific activations replicated in three or all of the subjects for the pre-SMA/SMA and pLPFC, whereas the replication for task-specific activation held for about half the subjects in PM cortex ( Table 5 ).  Figure 5  illustrates the replication of activation across sessions for single-task activity in the pre-SMA/SMA and for conjunction-related activity in the pLPFC. Thus, the replication analysis provides additional support for the presence of genuine conjunction-related activity in pLPFC, and of task-specific activity in pre-SMA/SMA. By contrast, the pattern of activation in PM proved to be less consistent. 
 
 
 
 Summary 
 The results of the group-average and individual-level analyses specifically highlight the anterior insula, pLPFC, ACC, and thalamus as candidate neural substrates sub-serving response selection irrespective of the sensory and motor modalities. The preSMA/SMA is another candidate brain region, but the presence of task-related activity neighboring the conjunction activity does not allow us to rule out the possibility that the conjunction activation is a result of overlap of the hemodynamic spread of task-specific activity. A similar issue limits the interpretability of the PM activation, especially considering that the conjunction activation for one set of tasks (i.e., AM/ViVo) failed to demonstrate a sufficient number of participants with conjunctive activation. 
 
 
 Comparison of sensorimotor pairings 
 In a final analysis, we considered whether the AVo/ViM and ViVo/AM pairings differentially affected brain activations. It has been argued that some sensorimotor mappings are more naturally compatible than others [ Hazeltine and Ruthruff, 2006 ;  McCleod and Posner, 1984 ;  Stelzel et al., 2006 ;  Wickens, 1984 ], and that this compatibility effect may differentially recruit the (left) prefrontal cortex [ Stelzel et al., 2006 ]. Specifically, the AVo/ViM mapping may be less demanding on limited resources than the ViVo/AM pairing given that in the former pairing the input and outputs may be preferentially linked: we tend to respond verbally to auditory input, and often make manual movements towards visual objects. However, our behavioral results are inconsistent with this hypothesis, as subjects were generally faster in the AM/ViVo pairing than in the AVo/ViM pairing [t(19)=2.15, p<0.05]. Furthermore, a between-group comparison of these two sensorimotor mappings ([ViVo+AM] - [AVo+ViM]) revealed no activation differences at q(FDR)<0.05 or even with an uncorrected threshold of p<0.001. Thus, even if sensorimotor pairings differ in their compatibilities, it does not appear that these compatibility differences are expressed by differential activation of brain tissue. These results apply, at least, under conditions in which the sensorimotor tasks are performed separately. However, it is possible that different results could be obtained under dual-task situations [ Stelzel et al., 2006 ]. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The goal of this study was to identify brain regions that are commonly activated across sensorimotor tasks that share neither sensory nor motor modalities. Our results highlight a number of frontal/prefrontal and subcortical areas that are co-activated across sensorimotor tasks and that are distinct from brain regions showing clear preferences for distinct sensory or motor modalities. These findings were replicated across experimental paradigms, fMRI sessions, and were obtained under both group-level and individual-level analyses. In the following, we first discuss those regions that showed sensitivity to the sensory or motor modalities and then turn to the brain regions that demonstrated an amodal pattern of activation. 
 
 Brain regions sensitive to sensory or motor modalities 
 We identified sensory and motor areas preferentially associated with perceiving auditory or visual stimuli and executing vocal or manual responses. The areas activated by visual stimuli correspond primarily to extra-striate cortex (BAs 18 and 19) while the broad area activated by auditory stimuli includes primary (BA 41) and secondary (BAs 22 and 42) auditory cortex [ Binder et al., 1994 ;  Galaburda and Sanides, 1980 ]. The motoric foci identified in the manual task consist of the pre- and post-central gyrus and a small dorsal portion of the middle frontal gyrus (BAs 4 and 6). This activated region includes the primary cortex, but may also contain somatosensory cortex [cf.  Indovina and Sanes, 2001 ]. The motor region activated by the vocal task corresponds to BAs 4p and 4a/6, areas that are strongly activated during speech production [ Wilson, Saygin, Sereno, Iacoboni, 2004 ], and may also include more inferior vocal region (BA 43) associated with tongue movements [ Corfield et al., 1999 ]. The fact that these sensory and motoric activation foci match very well those previously described validates our methodological approach to isolating sensory and motor areas. 
 While these sensory and motor ROIs showed strong modality preferences, in that they were significantly more activated by one modality than by another, none showed strict modality specificity. For instance the visual ROIs responded slightly to auditory stimulus presentations. It is possible that the cross-modal activation reflects genuine interactions between the different modalities and their neural substrates [ Calvert et al., 1997 ;  Shimojo and Shams, 2001 ;  Falchier et al., 2002 ;  Wallace et al., 2004 ]. However, such interactions are rather limited in the absence of sensory integration [ Shimojo and Shams, 2001 ;  Wallace et al., 2004 ], and sensory specificity has been observed in other neuroimaging studies under unimodal presentations [ Johnson and Zatorre, 2005 ]. Alternatively, the cross-modal activation could have resulted from the inclusion of both truly unimodal areas and higher-level polymodal areas in each of the large sensory and motor ROIs. Indeed, when we restricted the spatial extent of these sensory or motor areas by defining them in individual subjects, greater evidence for modality specificity was evident (data not shown). It is important to emphasize, however, that the central aim of the present study was not to isolate sensory- or motor-specific areas, but to identify regions that demonstrated little or no sensitivity preferences in sensory or motor modality. The sensory and motor regions described here, by virtue of their strong modality preference, do not meet this criterion. 
 
 
 Brain regions commonly activated across sensorimotor mapping tasks 
 Our methodology has isolated several frontal, prefrontal and subcortical regions that were co-activated by all four tasks. This convergence of activations was found across experimental paradigms (blocked and event-related designs), levels of analysis (3D group-average and 2D individual-level), and fMRI sessions (replication of activations across two scan sessions). As such, our study provides a highly rigorous test of the hypothesis that specific brain regions serve as neural nodes of information convergence across sensorimotor tasks. Nonetheless, two caveats are worth discussing here. First, while the ROIs we identified may be candidate regions for a central bottleneck of information processing, we cannot claim that these brain regions are specifically involved in the capacity-limited stage of response selection. Co-activation may have resulted from any amodal process that is shared across tasks, such as post-trial performance evaluation, response readiness, or attentional processes, to name a few. These co-activations may also be limited to the type of sensorimotor mapping tasks (i.e., choice-RT) we have used. Thus, additional research is necessary to help identify the precise roles that each region plays in dual-task performance [e.g.,  Dux et al., 2006 ]. Nevertheless, the present results are highly helpful in narrowing down the number of brain areas that may act as structural bottlenecks of information processing. Second, before discussing the ROIs activated across all sensorimotor tasks, it should be kept in mind that while we observed conjunction of activations at the single-voxel level in un-smoothened, unfiltered 2D data of individual subjects, these findings are ultimately limited by the spatial resolution of our voxel size. Thus, it remains possible that different neuronal ensembles within the same voxel encode distinct sensorimotor pairings. This caveat likely applies to brain regions (e.g. thalamus) that contain tightly compact and functionally distinct subnuclei. However, it may be less pertinent for such cortical regions as the lateral prefrontal cortex, especially considering that LPFC cells can flexibly encode task-relevant information that is neither strictly sensory nor motor in a distributed manner across large extents of this brain region [ Duncan 2001 ;  Duncan and Owen, 2001 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ;  Passingham and Sakai, 2004 ]. 
 
 Subcortical regions 
 The thalamus demonstrated robust activity across all four tasks. Given that the thalamus is a relatively small brain structure that contains densely packed sub-nuclei involved in processing distinct types of sensory information, it is difficult to ascertain that the convergence of activation is not a result of the limited spatial resolution of fMRI. Furthermore,  Jiang and Kanwisher [2003b]  have specifically argued that this brain region is not the source of central processing limitations, because it was not commonly activated across a set of visual and auditory tasks, casting further doubt on its central involvement in response selection. However, other studies have observed thalamic activation in response selection [ Schumacher et al., 2003 ] and dual-tasking [e.g.,  Herath et al., 2001 ;  Szameitat et al., 2002 ;  Szameitat et al., 2006 ], and some thalamic nuclei, such as the pulvinar, are thought to subserve more general attention functions [cf.  Michael and Buron, 2005 ] that may be called upon by all sensorimotor tasks. Clearly, further work is necessary to establish whether certain thalamic nuclei act as a central hub of sensorimotor information processing. 
 
 
 Medial frontal cortex 
 In the group analysis, a large medial frontal ROI demonstrated co-activation across all tasks. In subsequent analysis (i.e., 2D, individual subjects, fixed-effects analyses), we broke this large ROI down into the ACC and preSMA/SMA complex. In the following sections we discuss these two components of the medial wall. 
 
 preSMA/SMA 
 The group-level analysis identified the SMA/pre-SMA as a potential region where sensorimotor information converges. These brain regions are considered higher motor areas involved in motor preparation and the selection of response sets [ Rushworth, Walton, Kennerley, and Bannerman, 2004 ]. Correspondingly, they are activated in advance of overt motor response [ Lee, Chang and Roh, 1999 ;  van Eimeren et al., 2006 ] and before primary motor cortex (M1) activity [ Cunnington, Windischberger, Deeke, and Moser, 2002 ]. The preSMA and SMA could not be functionally distinguished in our study. However, despite their close proximity and frequent co-activations, the SMA and preSMA have been proposed to exert different roles. Specifically, the pre-SMA is thought to play a more general role in response preparation and/or selection [ Rushworth et al., 2004 ;  Lau, Rogers, Ramnani, and Passingham, 2004 ;  Sakai, Hikosaka, Takino, Miyauchi, Nielsen, & Tamada, 2000 ], while the SMA may be more involved in sequencing motor responses than in selecting responses  per se  [ Deiber, Honda, Ibañez, Sadato, and Hallett, 1999 ]. 
 The observation that the SMA/preSMA was activated across all sensorimotor tasks is consistent with this brain region playing an important role in response selection [ Lau et al., 2004 ;  Lau, Rogers, & Passingham, 2006 ;  Marois et al., 2006 ], dual-task interference [ Dux et al., 2006 ;  Herath et al., 2001 ;  Klingberg, 1998 ;  Marois et al., 2006 ;  Schubert and Szameitat, 2003 ;  Szameitat et al., 2002 ], and task set implementation [ Dosenbach et al. 2006 ]. However, there is neurophysiological and neuroimaging evidence that distinct regions of the SMA/preSMA may control the movement of different motor effectors [ Dum and Strick, 2002 ; Picard and Strick, 1996]. Moreover, we observed robust task selective activation in the SMA/preSMA. These results cast doubts on the notions that the SMA/preSMA serve a non-selective role in response selection and form a central bottleneck of information processing. 
 
 
 Anterior cingulate cortex 
 The ACC was reliably activated by all four sensorimotor tasks, suggesting that this brain region is not sensitive to the sensory or motor modality of a response selection task. Although this finding is consistent with an fMRI study failing to find any response specificity in the ACC [ Barch et al., 2001 ], it does not provide compelling evidence against the view, based on neurophysiological [Picard and Strick, 1996], neuroimaging [ Paus et al., 1998 ;  Paus, 2001 ] and neuropsychological evidence [ Turken and Swick, 1999 ], that different regions of the ACC control motoric behavior of different effectors. Thus, the evidence suggesting an amodal role for the ACC in simple sensorimotor tasks is, at present, conflicting. Resolution of this issue will have to await further studies that will specifically investigate the functional neuroanatomy of this brain region with novel techniques, such as multi-variate pattern analysis [e.g.,  Kamitani and Tong, 2005 ] that can overcome the relatively poor spatial resolution of fMRI 
 It should be added that not all studies of response selection have reported ACC activation [cf.  Jiang and Kanwisher, 2003 ; Schumacher and D'Esposito, 2003]. By contrast, the ACC has been frequently observed in dual-task studies [ Herath et al., 2001 ;  Klingberg, 1998 ;  Schubert and Szameitat, 2003 ; Szmeitat, 2002;  Marois et al., 2006 ]. Several lines of evidence suggest that this brain region may be involved in cognitive control [ Posner et al., 1988 ;  Weissman et al., 2005 ], error or conflict monitoring [ Botvinick et al., 2004 ;  Carter et al., 1998 ;  Dreher and Grafman, 2003 ; see also  Rushworth et al., 2007 ] or, more broadly speaking, in relating actions to their outcome [ Rushworth et al., 2004 ;  Rushworth et al., 2007 ]. These functions may be particularly important for efficient dual-tasking [ Dreher and Grafman, 2003 ], as performing two tasks at once is likely to generate conflict. In the context of the present single sensorimotor mapping tasks, although demands for conflict resolution and cognitive control were not strong, the ACC activity may have reflected an evaluative process of the response choice or performance. If the function of the ACC is primarily related to post-response processing, then it is unlikely to constitute the bottleneck of information processing revealed by the PRP. Clearly, elucidation of the role of the ACC in response selection and dual-tasking would benefit from employing a methodological approach with a higher temporal resolution in order to precisely pinpoint the temporal stage of its involvement under single- and dual-task conditions. 
 
 
 
 Lateral frontal and prefrontal cortex 
 
 Anterior insula 
 The anterior insula was not only activated across all sensorimotor tasks, it also showed little evidence of task-specific activity. This is consistent with the proposed role of the insula in crossmodal processing [e.g., Bushara, Hanakawa, Immisch, Toma, Kansaku, & Hallett, 2003;  Calvert, 2001 ] and general task set implementation [Dosenbach et al., 2007]. This brain region has also been implicated in decision-making [ Sanfrey et al., 2003 ] and response-related processes, including response inhibition [ Bunge et al., 2002a ;  Wager et al., 2005 ] and response switching [ Paulus, Feinstein, Leland, and Simmons, 2005 ]. Other work has shown that anterior insula activity significantly correlates with response time performance [ Binder et al., 2004 ; but see  van Eimeren et al., 2006 ], again supporting a response-related function for this area. On the other hand, anterior insula activity has been inconsistently observed in response selection experiments [e.g.  van Eimeren et al., 2006 ;  Marois et al., 2006 ;  Jiang and Kanwisher 2003 ;  Schumacher et al., 2003 ]. 
 While some dual-tasking studies do not report insular activation in their investigations of dual-tasking [e.g.,  Bunge et al., 2000 ;  Klingberg, 1998 ], a few others [ Jiang, 2004 ;  Schubert & Szameitat, 2003 ; Szameitat et al., 2003] have found modest evidence of the insula's role in dual-tasking. That the anterior insula is involved in response inhibition and switching relates connects well with a purported role in dual-tasking. Inhibiting a response to the second target while processing the first may be necessary to efficiently execute both responses independently. However, cross-task inhibition does not easily account for the insula activation seen under our single-task conditions [but see  Burle, Vidal, Tandonnet, and Hasbrouq, 2004 , for potential evidence of inhibition in single tasks]. 
 In sum, while the involvement of the anterior insula in response selection and dual-tasking has been inconsistently observed in previous studies, the present results clearly point to this brain region as a potential neural node of information convergence across distinct sensorimotor tasks. What function(s) the anterior insula may ultimately fulfill in our tasks will, however, require further investigation. 
 
 
 Premotor cortex 
 The premotor cortex was another brain region that showed some evidence of activation across sensory and motor modalities in our response selection tasks. The premotor cortex, located within BA 6, is divided into two regions, dorsal PM and ventral PM, which are separated by the superior demarcation of the frontal eye fields (z=51) [ Rizzolatti et al., 2002 ]. According to this boundary, our PM activation falls within the dorsal part of PMv, just shy of the z=51 boundary. In addition to this dorso-ventral division, the PM cortex may be anatomically distinguished into a caudal and rostral section [ Boussaoud, 2001 ;  Picard and Stick, 2001 ;  Schubotz and von Cramon, 2003 ]. This caudal/rostral division may relate to an intention/attention [ Boussaoud, 2001 ], motor preparation/attention [Simon et al., 2001], or motor/cognitive [ Matsumoto et al., 2003 ] functional dissociation. Our activation foci lie closer to the caudal region involved in motor- and intention-related functions. 
 The premotor cortex has been linked to several response-related processes. Specifically, it has been implicated in motor preparation and the sensory guidance of movement [ Schubotz and von Crammon, 2003 ;  Rizzolatti et al., 2002 ;  Simon et al., 2002 ;  Wise, 1985 ], in stimulus-response compatibility [ Dassonville, Lewis, Zhu, Ugurbil, Kim, and Ashe, 2001 ; von Eimeren et al., 2005], temporal adjustments of responding [ Sakai, Hikosaka, Taakino, Miyauchi, Nielsen, and Tamada, 2000 ], and response selection  per se  [e.g.  Jiang and Kanwisher, 2003 ; Marois et al., 2005]. Moreover, this brain region has been directly implicated in dual-task interference [ Marois et al., 2006 ;  Szameitat et al., 2006 ;  Stelzel et al., 2006 ]. 
 Although there is substantial evidence that the premotor cortex is involved in response selection and dual-tasking, it is much less evident that this involvement is amodal. Indeed, the premotor cortex demonstrates motor and effector specificity [ Fink et al., 1997 ;  Schubotz and von Crammon, 2001 ], and somatotopy in the observation of actions [ Buccino et al., 2001 ]. Furthermore, the present study garnered only equivocal evidence that the premotor cortex is commonly activated across all sensorimotor tasks. Specifically, the group-defined ROI analysis revealed an activation preference for vocal tasks in the right PM cortex, while the 2D individual-level analysis failed to reveal significant conjunction-related activation in left and right PM for the AM and ViVo tasks. Taken together with studies demonstrating response specificity in premotor cortex, these findings do not support the view that this brain region represents a central, amodal bottleneck of information processing, although it certainly could represent a bottleneck at later, response-related stages of information processing [ Marois and Ivanoff, 2005 ]. However, given that the activation from particular tasks was also found not to be reliable in this brain region, the above conclusions should be regarded as tentative until further work reveals the specific contribution of the premotor cortex to dual-tasking limitations. 
 
 
 Posterior lateral prefrontal cortex (pLPFC) 
 The final region activated across all four sensorimotor tasks was the pLPFC. This region, which straddled the frontal and prefrontal cortex, included the anterior portion of lateral BA6 and posterior sections of BA9. The prefrontal cortex has been frequently implicated in response selection ( Bunge, 2004 ;  Bunge et al., 2002b ;  Jiang & Kanwisher, 2003a ;  Schumacher et al., 2003 ;  van Eimeren et al., 2006 ; Hester et al., 2007). This pLPFC ROI overlaps with the inferior frontal junction (IFJ) area believed to be involved in response conflict, task switching, dual-tasking, and cognitive control [ Brass et al., 2005 ;  Derfuss, Brass, Neumann, and von Cramon, 2005 ;  Dux et al., 2006 ; Hester et al., 2007]. The anterior portion of this ROI also overlaps with posterior regions of the prefrontal cortex implicated in stimulus-response compatibility [ Schumacher and D'Esposito, 2002 ;  Stelzel et al., 2006 ], dual-task coordination [ Szameitat et al., 2006 ], and executive control [ Duncan and Owen 2001 ;  Duncan, 2001 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ]. It has been suggested that the posterior prefrontal cortex does not sub-serve a single function, but that it uses an adaptive coding mechanism to encode any task-relevant information and operations for the purpose of meeting current behavioral goals [ Duncan and Owen 2001 ;  Duncan, 2001 ]. Moreover, a recent time-resolved fMRI study has provided direct evidence that this brain region plays a role in dual-tasking limitations [ Dux et al., 2006 ]. It may even be recruited under both perceptual and response-related forms of dual-task limitations [ Marois and Ivanoff, 2005 ]. Thus, both the present findings, and previous studies, are consistent with the view that the pLPFC may have central, amodal functions in response selection and dual-task studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summary 
 When considering both this study and prior neuroimaging, neurophysological and neuropsychological work, the pLPFC, together with the anterior insula are the most likely candidates for neural foci of a central, amodal bottleneck of information processing. Both regions have been observed in response selection tasks and in dual-task studies, and both are relatively insensitive to the sensory or motor modality of the task. Interestingly, despite the fact that our experiment was designed to isolate any brain regions activated across sensorimotor tasks from stimulus perception to response execution, the regions that showed conjunction of activity generally corresponded to regions previously associated with response selection [c.f.  Jiang and Kanwisher, 2003a ;  Schumacher et al., 2003 ;  Marois et al., 2006 ;  van Eimeren et al., 2006 ; Hester et al., 2007]. It is worth noting that no region of the parietal cortex was conjointly activated across all sensorimotor tasks, a finding that seems inconsistent with studies that have implicated this brain region in response selection [e.g.,  Jiang & Kanwisher, 2003a ;  Schumacher et al., 2003 ]. There are at least three reasons that we did not identify any parietal regions as a potential hub of response selection. First, those studies that have identified parietal regions as neural loci of response selection used compatibility manipulations, often within a restricted set of sensorimotor modalities. Here, we have used a broader approach of isolating any brain regions involved in sensorimotor processing irrespective of the sensory or motor modality. Secondly, given that response selection may not be a singular cognitive process [ Schumacher & Jiang, 2003 ; Hester et al., 2007], it is possible that parietal involvement is only necessary for some, but not all, forms of sensorimotor response selection. Lastly, the parietal cortex may not have been considered to include conjunction-related activation because of the stringent exclusionary criteria that we employed in the present study relative to previous studies [ Jiang & Kanwisher, 2003a ;  Schumacher et al., 2003 ]. 
 
 Implications for Models of dual-task interference 
 Although several neural models have been proposed to account for dual-task limitations [ Klingberg, 1998 ;  Marois and Ivanoff, 2005 ], the central bottleneck model of dual-tasking has received extensive support from the behavioral literature [ Pashler, 1994 ]. Here we attempted to rigorously assess a key neural assumption of this model, which is that all sensorimotor tasks rely on a common set of brain regions to process information at a central, amodal stage of response selection. Our results provide neuroanatomical evidence that is consistent with this structural bottleneck account, as specific frontal, prefrontal and possibly subcortical areas were found to be commonly activated by all sensorimotor tasks irrespective of the sensory or motor modality of these tasks. These regions may therefore serve as amodal, convergence zones of neural information processing that limit our ability to carry out more than one task at a time. As such, the present study sets the stage for future functional neuroimaging studies aimed at testing the involvement of these different brain regions in dual-task limitations. 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This research was supported by NIMH grant R01 MH70776 to R.M. and a fellowship from NSERC Canada to J.I. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Adcock 
 RA 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Golman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of executive processes involved in dual-task performance. 
 Preceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2000 
 97 
 3567 
 3572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Agresti 
 A 
 
 
 Categorical data analysis 
 2002 
 Wiley 
 Hoboken, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 T 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 J 
 
 
 Snyder 
 A 
 
 
 Anterior cingulate cortex and response conflict: Effects of response modality and processing domain. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 837 
 848 
 11532889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Ward 
 BD 
 
 
 Neural correlates of sensory and decision processes in auditory object identification. 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2004 
 7 
 295 
 301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Yetkin 
 FZ 
 
 
 Jesmanowicz 
 A 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Wong 
 EC 
 
 
 Estkowski 
 LD 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 MD 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human auditory cortex. 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1994 
 35 
 662 
 672 
 8210222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 Attention versus intention in the primate premotor cortex. 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 14 
 S40 
 S45 
 11373131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Conflict monitoring and anterior angulate cortex: an update. 
 Trends in Cognitive Science 
 2004 
 8 
 539 
 546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boynton 
 GM 
 
 
 Engel 
 SA 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging in human V1. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1996 
 16 
 4207 
 4221 
 8753882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 Derfuss 
 J 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 B 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 The role of the inferior frontal junction area in cognitive control. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 314 
 316 
 15927520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 The role of the frontal cortex in task preparation. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2002 
 12 
 908 
 914 
 12183390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 Fogassi 
 L 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 Seitz 
 RJ 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Freund 
 H-J 
 
 
 Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatopic manner: an fMRI study. 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2001 
 13 
 400 
 404 
 11168545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 How we use rules to select actions: A review of evidence from cognitive neuroscience 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2004 
 4 
 564 
 579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Dudukovic 
 NM 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Immature frontal lobe contributions to cognitive control in children: Evidence from fMRI. 
 Neuron 
 2002a 
 33 
 301 
 311 
 11804576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Halzetine 
 E 
 
 
 Scanlon 
 MD 
 
 
 Rosen 
 AC 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Dissociable contributions of prefrontal and parietal cortices to response selection. 
 NeuroImage 
 2002b 
 17 
 1562 
 1571 
 12414294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 Jacobsen 
 RB 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 A resource model of the neural basis of executive working memory. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2000 
 97 
 3573 
 3578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burle 
 B 
 
 
 Vidal 
 F 
 
 
 Tandonnet 
 C 
 
 
 Hasbrouq 
 T 
 
 
 Physiological evidence for response inhibition in choice reaction time tasks. 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2004 
 56 
 153 
 164 
 15518932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bushara 
 KO 
 
 
 Hanakawa 
 T 
 
 
 Immisch 
 I 
 
 
 Kansaku 
 K 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 Neural correlates of cross-modal binding. 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2003 
 6 
 190 
 195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calvert 
 GA 
 
 
 Crossmodal processing in the human brain: Insights from functional neuroimaging studies. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 1110 
 1123 
 11709482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calvert 
 GA 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Campbell 
 R 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 Woodruff 
 OW 
 
 
 Iversen 
 SD 
 
 
 David 
 AS 
 
 
 Activation of auditory cortex during silent lipreading. 
 Science 
 1997 
 276 
 593 
 596 
 9110978 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carrier 
 LM 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Attentional limits in memory retrieval. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 1995 
 21 
 1339 
 1348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Noll 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Anterior cingulated cortex, error detection, and the online monitoring of performance. 
 Science 
 1998 
 280 
 5364 
 747 
 9 
 9563953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clopper 
 CJ 
 
 
 Pearson 
 ES 
 
 
 The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case of the binomial. 
 Biometrika 
 1934 
 26 
 404 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Collette 
 F 
 
 
 Olivier 
 L 
 
 
 Van der Linden 
 M 
 
 
 Laureys 
 S 
 
 
 Delfiore 
 G 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Salmon 
 E 
 
 
 Involvement of both prefrontal and inferior parietal cortex in dual-task performance. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2005 
 24 
 237 
 231 
 15993762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corfield 
 DR 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Guz 
 A 
 
 
 Adams 
 L 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Cortical and subcortical control of tongue movement in humans: a functional neuroimaging study using fMRI. 
 Journal of Applied Physiology 
 1999 
 86 
 1468 
 1477 
 10233106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cunnington 
 R 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 Deecke 
 L 
 
 
 Moser 
 E 
 
 
 The preparation and execution of self-initiated and externally triggered movement : A study of event-related fMRI. 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 373 
 385 
 11798272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dassonville 
 P 
 
 
 Lewis 
 SM 
 
 
 Zhu 
 X-H 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Kim 
 S-G 
 
 
 Ashe 
 J 
 
 
 The effect of stimulus-response compatibility on cortical motor activation. 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 13 
 1 
 14 
 11133304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deiber 
 M-P 
 
 
 Honda 
 M 
 
 
 Ibañez 
 V 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 Mesial motor areas in self-initiated versus externally triggered movements examined with fMRI: Effect of movement type and rate. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 1999 
 81 
 3065 
 3077 
 10368421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Derfuss 
 J 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Involvement of the inferior frontal junction in cognitive control: Meta-analyses of switching and Stroop studies. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 25 
 22 
 34 
 15846824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Detre 
 JA 
 
 
 Alsop 
 DC 
 
 
 Shin 
 RK 
 
 
 Atlas 
 S 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory. 
 Nature 
 1995 
 378 
 279 
 281 
 7477346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Dissociation of frontal and cerebellar activity in a cognitive task: Evidence for a distinction between selection and search. 
 Neuroimage 
 1998 
 7 
 368 
 376 
 9626676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doesnbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Palmer 
 ED 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 Burgund 
 ED 
 
 
 Grimes 
 AL 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 A core system for the implementation of task sets. 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 50 
 799 
 812 
 16731517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dreher 
 J-C 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Dissociating the roles of the rostral anterior cingulated and the lateral prefrontal cortices in performing two tasks simultaneously or successively. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2003 
 13 
 329 
 339 
 12631562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dum 
 RP 
 
 
 Stick 
 PL 
 
 
 Motor areas in the frontal lobe of the primate. 
 Physiology and Behavior 
 2002 
 77 
 677 
 682 
 12527018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 An adaptive coding model of neural function in prefrontal cortex. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2001 
 2 
 820 
 829 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive demands. 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 2001 
 23 
 475 
 483 
 11006464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dux 
 PE 
 
 
 Ivanoff 
 J 
 
 
 Asplund 
 CL 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Isolation of a central bottleneck of information processing with time-resolved fMRI. 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 52 
 1109 
 1120 
 17178412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erdler 
 M 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 Lanzenberger 
 R 
 
 
 Vinod 
 E 
 
 
 Gartus 
 A 
 
 
 Deeckke 
 L 
 
 
 Beisteiner 
 R 
 
 
 Dissociation of supplementary motor area and primary motor cortex in human subjects when comparing index and little finger movements with functional magnetic resonance imaging. 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 2001 
 313 
 5 
 8 
 11684326 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erickson 
 KI 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 SJ 
 
 
 Wadhwa 
 R 
 
 
 Bherer 
 L 
 
 
 Peterson 
 MS 
 
 
 Scalf 
 PE 
 
 
 Kim 
 JS 
 
 
 Alvardo 
 M 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Training induced functional changes in dual-task processing: an fMRI study. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2006 
 17 
 192 
 204 
 16467562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erickson 
 KI 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 SJ 
 
 
 Wadhwa 
 R 
 
 
 Bherer 
 L 
 
 
 Peterson 
 MS 
 
 
 Scalf 
 PE 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Neural correlates of dual-task performance after minimizing task-preparation. 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 28 
 967 
 979 
 16109493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Falchier 
 A 
 
 
 Clavagnier 
 S 
 
 
 Barone 
 P 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 H 
 
 
 Anatomical evidence of multimodal integration in primate striate cortex 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2002 
 22 
 5749 
 5759 
 12097528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Pietrzyk 
 U 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Multiple nonprimary motor areas in the human cortex. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 1997 
 77 
 2164 
 2174 
 9114263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fitts 
 PM 
 
 
 Seeger 
 CM 
 
 
 SR compatibility: Spatial characteristics of stimulus and response codes. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1953 
 46 
 199 
 210 
 13084867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galaburda 
 A 
 
 
 Sanides 
 F 
 
 
 Cytoarchitectonic organization of the human auditory cortex. 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1980 
 190 
 597 
 610 
 6771305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate. 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hazeltine 
 E 
 
 
 Ruthruff 
 E 
 
 
 Modality pairing effects and the response selection bottleneck. 
 Psychological Research 
 2006 
 70 
 504 
 513 
 16151721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herath 
 P 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 Young 
 J 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Roland 
 P 
 
 
 Neural correlates of dual task interference can be dissociated from those of divided attention: an fMRI study. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 796 
 805 
 11532885 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms for response selection: Comparing selection of responses and items from working memory. 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 34 
 446 
 454 
 17071112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hick 
 WE 
 
 
 On the rate of gain of information. 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1952 
 4 
 11 
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indovina 
 I 
 
 
 Sanes 
 JN 
 
 
 On somatotopic representation centers for finger movements in human primary motor cortex and supplementary motor areas. 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 13 
 1027 
 1034 
 11352608 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ivry 
 RB 
 
 
 Franz 
 EA 
 
 
 Kingstone 
 A 
 
 
 Johnston 
 JC 
 
 
 The psychological refractory period effect following callosotomy: Uncoupling of lateralized response codes. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 1998 
 24 
 463 
 480 
 9554094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jaeggi 
 SM 
 
 
 Seewer 
 R 
 
 
 Nirkko 
 AC 
 
 
 Eckstein 
 D 
 
 
 Schroth 
 G 
 
 
 Groner 
 R 
 
 
 Gutbrod 
 K 
 
 
 Does excessive memory load attenuate activation in the prefrontal cortex? Load-dependent processing in single and dual tasks: functional magnetic resonance imaging study. 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 210 
 225 
 12814572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 K 
 
 
 Common neural substrates for response selection across modalities and mapping paradigms. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003a 
 15 
 1080 
 1094 
 14709228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 K 
 
 
 Common neural mechanisms for response selection and perceptual processing. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neurooscience 
 2003b 
 15 
 1095 
 1110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging provides new constraints on theories of the psychological refractory period. 
 Psychological Science 
 2004 
 15 
 390 
 396 
 15147492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Resolving dual-task interference: an fMRI study. 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 748 
 754 
 15193603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JA 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 RJ 
 
 
 Attention to simultaneous unrelated auditory and visual events: Behavioral and neural correlates. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 1609 
 1620 
 15716469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Emery 
 L 
 
 
 Zajac 
 H 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Independence of nonoverlapping cortical systems in dual cognitive tasks. 
 NeuroImage 
 2001 
 14 
 417 
 426 
 11467915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kamitani 
 Y 
 
 
 Tong 
 F 
 
 
 Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2005 
 8 
 679 
 685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 Concurrent performance of two working memory tasks: Potential mechanisms of interference. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1998 
 8 
 593 
 601 
 9823480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuypers 
 HGJM 
 
 
 Anatomy of descending pathways. 
 Handbook of Physiology. The Nervous System. Motor Control. Sect. I, Vol II 
 1981 
 597 
 666 
 American Physiological Society 
 Bethesda, MD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lau 
 HC 
 
 
 Rogers 
 RD 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Willed action and attention to the selection of action. 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 21 
 1407 
 1415 
 15050566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lau 
 H 
 
 
 Rogers 
 RD 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Dissociating response selection and conflict in the medial frontal surface. 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 29 
 446 
 451 
 16150611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 K-M 
 
 
 Chang 
 K-H 
 
 
 Roh 
 J-K 
 
 
 Subregions within the supplementary motor area activated at different stages of movement preparation and execution. 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 9 
 117 
 123 
 9918733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis 
 JW 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 DeYope 
 EA 
 
 
 A comparison of visual and auditory motion processing in human cerebral cortex. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 10 
 873 
 888 
 20000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 Schulkind 
 MD 
 
 
 Parallel memory retrieval in dual-task situations: I. Semantic memory.n 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 2000 
 26 
 1072 
 1090 
 10884010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Ivanoff 
 J 
 
 
 Capacity limits of information processing in the brain. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 296 
 305 
 15925809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Larson 
 JM 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 Shima 
 D 
 
 
 Response-specific sources of dual-task interference in human pre-motor cortex. 
 Psychological Research 
 2006 
 70 
 436 
 447 
 16283409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 R 
 
 
 Ikeda 
 A 
 
 
 Ohara 
 S 
 
 
 Matsuhashi 
 M 
 
 
 Baba 
 K 
 
 
 Yamane 
 F 
 
 
 Hori 
 T 
 
 
 Mihara 
 T 
 
 
 Nagamine 
 T 
 
 
 Shibasaki 
 H 
 
 
 Motor-related function subdivisions of human lateral premotor cortex: Epicortical recording in conditional visuomotor task. 
 Clinical Neurophysiology 
 2003 
 114 
 1102 
 1115 
 12804679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McLeod 
 P 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 
 
 Bouma 
 H 
 
 
 Bouwhuis 
 DG 
 
 
 Privileged loops from percept to act. 
 Attention and Performance X: Control of language processes 
 1984 
 55 
 66 
 Erlbaum 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Michael 
 GA 
 
 
 Buron 
 L 
 
 
 The human pulvinar and stimulus-driven attentional control. 
 Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2005 
 119 
 1353 
 1367 
 16300441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2001 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 J-P 
 
 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic. 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Dual-task interference in simple tasks: Data and Theory. 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 1994a 
 116 
 220 
 244 
 7972591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Graded capacity-sharing in dual-task interference? 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 1994b 
 20 
 330 
 342 
 8189196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Johnston 
 JC 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Attentional limitations in dualtask performance. 
 Attention 
 1998 
 155 
 189 
 Psychology Press 
 Hove, England 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Luck 
 SJ 
 
 
 Hillyard 
 SA 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 O'Brien 
 S 
 
 
 Gazzaniga 
 MS 
 
 
 Sequential operation of disconnected cerebral hemispheres in split-brain patients. 
 NeuroReport 
 1994 
 5 
 2381 
 2384 
 7881063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passingham 
 D 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 The prefrontal cortex and working memory: physiology and brain imaging. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2004 
 14 
 163 
 168 
 15082320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 Feinstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Leland 
 D 
 
 
 Simmons 
 AN 
 
 
 Superior temporal gyrus and insula provide response and outcome-dependent information during assessment and action selection in a decision-making situation. 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 607 
 615 
 15784440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Primate anterior cingulate cortex: Where motor control, drive, and cognition interface. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2001 
 2 
 417 
 424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Koski 
 L 
 
 
 Caramanos 
 Z 
 
 
 Westbury 
 C 
 
 
 Regional differences in the effects of task difficulty and motor output on blood flow response in the human anterior cingulated cortex: A review of 107 PET activation studies. 
 NeuroReport 
 1998 
 9 
 R37 
 R47 
 9674567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Meyer 
 E 
 
 
 Role of the human anterior cingulated cortex in the control of oculomotor, manual, and speech responses: A positron emission tomography study. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 1993 
 70 
 453 
 469 
 8410148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 P 
 
 
 Imaging the premotor areas. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2001 
 11 
 663 
 672 
 11741015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Imaging brain plasticity: Conceptual and methodological issues – A theoretical review. 
 NeuroImage 
 2000 
 12 
 1 
 13 
 10875897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 S 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Localization of cognitive operations in the human brain. 
 Science 
 1988 
 240 
 1627 
 1631 
 3289116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiner 
 A 
 
 
 Yekutieli 
 D 
 
 
 Benjammini 
 Y 
 
 
 Identifying differentially expressed genes using false discovery rate controlling procedures. 
 Bioinformatics 
 2003 
 19 
 368 
 375 
 12584122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Fogassi 
 L 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 Motor and cognitive functions of the ventral premotor cortex. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2002 
 12 
 149 
 154 
 12015230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Bannerman 
 DM 
 
 
 Fucntion organization of the medial frontal cortex. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2007 
 17 
 220 
 227 
 17350820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Bannerman 
 DM 
 
 
 Action sets and decisions in the medial frontal cortex. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2004 
 8 
 410 
 417 
 15350242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruthruff 
 E 
 
 
 Miller 
 J 
 
 
 Lachmann 
 T 
 
 
 Does mental rotation require central mechanisms? 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance 
 1995 
 21 
 552 
 570 
 7790833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 Takino 
 R 
 
 
 Miyauchi 
 S 
 
 
 Nielsen 
 M 
 
 
 Tamada 
 T 
 
 
 What and when: Parallel and convergent processing in motor control. 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2000 
 20 
 2691 
 2700 
 10729350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanfrey 
 AG 
 
 
 Rilling 
 JK 
 
 
 Aronson 
 JA 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 The neural basis of economic decision-making in the ultimatum game. 
 Science 
 2003 
 300 
 1755 
 1758 
 12805551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 Szameitat 
 AJ 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of interference in overlapping dual tasks: an fMRI study. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2003 
 17 
 733 
 746 
 14561459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Functional organization of the lateral premotor cortex: fMRI reveals different regions activated by anticipation of object properties, location and speed. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2001 
 11 
 97 
 112 
 11240114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Functional-anatomical concepts of human premotor cortex: Evidence from fMRI and PET studies. 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 20 
 S210 
 S131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 EH 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Neural implementation of response selection in humans as revealed by localized effects of stimulus-response compatibility on brain activation. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2002 
 17 
 193 
 201 
 12391572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 EH 
 
 
 Elston 
 PA 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Neural evidence for representation-specific response selection. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 1111 
 1121 
 14709230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 EH 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms for response selection: Representation specific or modality independent? 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 1077 
 1079 
 14709227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sherman 
 SM 
 
 
 Guillery 
 RW 
 
 
 Functional organization of thalamocortical relays. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 1996 
 76 
 1367 
 1395 
 8890259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shimojo 
 S 
 
 
 Shams 
 L 
 
 
 Sensory modalities are not separate modalities: plasticity and interactions. 
 Current Opion in Neurobiology 
 2001 
 11 
 505 
 509 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sigman 
 M 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Brain mechanisms of serial and parallel processing during dual-task performance. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 7585 
 7598 
 18650336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 SR 
 
 
 Meunier 
 M 
 
 
 Piettre 
 L 
 
 
 Berardi 
 AM 
 
 
 Segebarth 
 CM 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 Spatial attention and memory versus motor preparation: Premotor cortex involement as revealed by fMRI. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2002 
 88 
 2047 
 2057 
 12364527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelzel 
 C 
 
 
 Kraft 
 A 
 
 
 Brandt 
 SA 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 Dissociable neural effects of task order control and task set maintenance during dual-task processing. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 613 
 628 
 18052784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelzel 
 C 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 EH 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 The neural effect of stimulus-response modality compatibility on dual-task performance: an fMRI study. 
 Psychological Research 
 2006 
 70 
 514 
 25 
 16175414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szameitat 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lepsien 
 J 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Sterr 
 A 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 Task-order coordination in dual-task performance and the lateral prefrontal cortex. 
 Psychological Research 
 2006 
 70 
 541 
 552 
 16142491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szameitat 
 AJ 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 Müller 
 K 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Localization of executive functions in dual-task performance with fMRI. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 1184 
 1199 
 12495525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thach 
 WT 
 
 
 What is the role of the cerebellum in motor learning and cognition? 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 1998 
 2 
 331 
 337 
 21227229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turken 
 AU 
 
 
 Swick 
 D 
 
 
 Response selection in the human anterior cingulate cortex. 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 1999 
 2 
 920 
 924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullsberger 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Subprocesses of performance monitoring: A dissociation of error processing and response competition revealed by event-related fMRI and ERPs. 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 14 
 1387 
 1401 
 11707094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Eimeren 
 T 
 
 
 Wolbers 
 T 
 
 
 Münchau 
 A 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 Sieber 
 HR 
 
 
 Implementation of visuospatial cues in response selection. 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 29 
 286 
 294 
 (2006) 
 16087350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 C-Y 
 
 
 C. 
 
 
 Lacey 
 SC 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Franklin 
 M 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Common and unique components of response inhibition revealed by fMRI. 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 27 
 323 
 340 
 16019232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wallace 
 MT 
 
 
 Ramachandran 
 R 
 
 
 Stein 
 BE 
 
 
 A revised view of sensory cortical parcellation. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U S A., 17 
 2004 
 101 
 7 
 2167 
 2172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wickens 
 CD 
 
 
 
 
 Parasuraman 
 R 
 
 
 Davies 
 DR 
 
 
 Processing resources in attention. 
 Varieties of Attention 
 1984 
 63 
 102 
 Academic Press 
 Orlando 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Gopalakrishnan 
 A 
 
 
 Hazlett 
 CJ 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Dorsal anterior cingulated cortex resolves conflict from distracting stimuli by boosting attention toward relevant events. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 229 
 237 
 15238434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Listening to speech activates motor areas involved in speech production. 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2004 
 7 
 701 
 702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 The primate premotor cortex: Past, present, and preparatory. 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 1985 
 8 
 1 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woo 
 S-H 
 
 
 Lee 
 K-M 
 
 
 Effect of the number of response alternatives on brain activity in response selection. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2007 
 28 
 950 
 958 
 17094117 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Flow diagram highlighting the analysis stream for identifying convergence regions. See main text for details. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Brain regions activated for each sensorimotor task in the blocked design fMRI runs (AVo=auditory-vocal; AM=auditory-manual; ViVo=visual-vocal; ViM=visuo-manual). The activation maps are projected onto an inflated brain of a representative subject. All maps thresholded at q(FDR)<0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Brain regions, in the left hemisphere, exhibiting sensory (auditory or visual) or motor (vocal or manual) activation preferences. These regions were activated in both the block and fast-event runs [q(FDR)<0.05]. The time courses from the event-related runs contrasting sensory or motor modalities are also illustrated. The activation foci and time courses in the right hemisphere were similar to those in the left. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Brain regions exhibiting co-activation across all four sensorimotor tasks (AVo,AM, ViVo, and ViM) in both the block and fast-event runs [q(FDR)<0.05]. The timecourses are from the fast-event related runs.  a)  Medial regions.  b)  Lateral ROIs.  c)  Time courses in subcortical structures (cerebellum, brainstem, and thalamus). Not shown is an ROI in right precentral gyrus (see  Table 3 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Replication of activation patterns across fMRI sessions in a representative subject. Left, 2D SPMs and right, time courses.  a)  Replication of task-specific (AVo/ViM) activation across sessions in pre-SMA/SMA.  b)  Replication of conjunction activation across fMRI sessions in pLPFC. White voxels were those that demonstrated replicable co-activation for the AVo/ViM tasks across sessions. Maps were thresholded at q(FDR)<0.22 for an omnibus q(FDR)<0.05 across sessions. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral performance. Reaction time (and percentage accuracy) for sensorimotor tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vocal Response 
 Manual Response 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visual Stimulus 
 647msec (96.3%) 
 712msec (98.2%) 
 ns (ns) 
 
 
 Auditory Stimulus 
 935msec (97.9%) 
 785msec (96.0%) 
 * (ns) 
 
 
 
 * (ns) 
 ns (ns) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: The diagonal comparison, using paired t-tests, between ViVo and AM revealed no significant differences in reaction time and accuracy measures. Although the accuracy difference between ViM and AVo was not significant, responses were significantly (p<0.05) faster in the ViM condition than they were in the AVo condition. A * denotes a significant difference, using unpaired t-tests (p<0.05). 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Average Talaraich coordinates and size of regions showing sensory- (auditory vs visual) or motor- (manual vs vocal) preferred activation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Side 
 Brodmann Areas 
 x,y,z 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Sensory/Motor Preference t-value 
 
 
 
 
 Visual (ViM- AVo) - (AM - ViVo) 
 Left 
 18,19 
 −29,−81, 3 
 1706 
 3.71** 
 
 
 Right 
 18,19 
 29,−82,4 
 1472 
 3.32** 
 
 
 Auditory (AVo-ViM) - (ViVo-AM) 
 Left 
 13, 22, 40, 41, 42 
 −45,−21,12 
 11667 
 5.67** 
 
 
 Right 
 13, 22, 40, 41, 42 
 52,−20,10 
 17943 
 4.73** 
 
 
 Manual (ViM -AVo) - (ViVo - AM) 
 Left 
 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 40 
 −31,−23,55 
 5531 
 6.31** 
 
 
 Right 
 4 
 41,−25,43 
 4 
 2.90* 
 
 
 Vocal (AVo-ViM) - (AM-ViVo) 
 Left 
 4, 6 
 −40, −9, 35 
 2202 
 6.91** 
 
 
 Right 
 4, 6 
 46, −9, 38 
 2607 
 5.63** 
 
 
 Right 
 6, 43 
 57, −7, 13 
 89 
 3.62** 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: The equations below the modality names describe the contrasts used to isolate the modality-preferred activations. A * denotes a significant t-value uncorrected (p<0.05) and a ** denotes a significant t-value using the Bonferroni adjustments for multiple comparisons (p<0.006). 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Average Talaraich coordinates and size of brain regions showing conjunction of task activation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 x,y,z 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Sensory Preference t-value 
 Motor Preference t-value 
 
 
 
 
 Left pLPFC (BAs 6,9) 
 −40,0, 36 
 824 
 1.64 
 4.54** 
 
 
 Right pLPFC (BAs 6,9) 
 48,2,23 
 172 
 1.20 
 1.61 
 
 
 Left PM (BA 6) 
 −31,−5, 48 
 45 
 1.46 
 0.24 
 
 
 Right PM (BA 6) 
 41,−3,45 
 75 
 0.67 
 2.94* 
 
 
 Right Anterior Insula 
 37,8,8 
 105 
 1.15 
 1.50 
 
 
 Medial Wall (BAs 6, 24, 32) 
 −2,4,51 
 1257 
 1.64 
 1.33 
 
 
 Brainstem 
 −2,−29,0 
 365 
 1.11 
 2.57* 
 
 
 Left Thalamus 
 −14,−14,10 
 830 
 1.88 
 1.33 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: Group-defined ROIs with random effects analysis. A * denotes a significant t-value (p < 0.05), and ** denotes a significant t-value using a Bonferroni adjustment for 12 comparisons (p<0.004). The medial wall ROI consists of preSMA, SMA and anterior cingulate. A right precentral gyrus ROI (BAs 3,4) was removed from further analysis due to its close proximity between auditory and vocal ROIs. pLPFC= posterior Lateral Prefrontal Cortex; PM=Premotor. 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Number of participants demonstrating conjunction and/or task-specific activation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 AM/ViVo 
 AVo/ViM 
 
 
 Side 
 ROI 
 Conjunction 
 AM 
 ViVo 
 Conjunction 
 AVo 
 ViM 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Thalamus 
 6* 
 4 
 2 
 10* 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 
 Brainstem 
 2 
 0 
 1 
 5 
 1 
 0 
 
 
 
 pLPFC 
 7* 
 4 
 3 
 8* 
 6* 
 3 
 
 
 
 PM 
 5 
 3 
 5 
 7* 
 3 
 2 
 
 
 
 preSMA/SMA 
 9* 
 4 
 7* 
 9* 
 7* 
 3 
 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate 
 8* 
 5 
 3 
 11* 
 3 
 5 
 
 
 Right 
 Brainstem 
 3 
 0 
 1 
 3 
 2 
 0 
 
 
 
 Anterior Insula 
 6* 
 4 
 3 
 7* 
 2 
 2 
 
 
 
 pLPFC 
 6* 
 2 
 4 
 7* 
 7* 
 3 
 
 
 
 PM 
 5 
 3 
 4 
 8* 
 5 
 5 
 
 
 
 preSMA/SMA 
 10* 
 6* 
 5 
 10* 
 3 
 3 
 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate 
 7* 
 5 
 5 
 9* 
 0 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: The total number of participants per cell is 12 (i.e., only subjects with sagittal prescriptions were analyzed in 2D). Cells with asterisks (*) have 6 or more participants, indicating that there is 99.72% confidence, using the Bonferroni corrected Clopper-Pearson test (see Methods), that there is at least one participant with conjunction or task-specific activation. SP=Superior-Posterior; pLPFC= posterior Lateral Prefrontal Cortex; PM=Premotor; SMA=Supplementary Motor Area. 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Number of participants exhibiting replicable conjunction and task-specific activation. 
 
 
 
 
 Side 
 ROI 
 Conjunction Replications 
 Single-Task Replications 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 pLPFC 
 4/4 
 4/4 
 
 
 Right 
 pLPFC 
 4/4 
 3/4 
 
 
 Left 
 PM 
 3/3 
 1/3 
 
 
 Right 
 PM 
 3/4 
 2/4 
 
 
 Left 
 preSMA/SMA 
 4/4 
 3/4 
 
 
 Right 
 preSMA/SMA 
 4/4 
 3/3 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: Three participants performed the AVo/ViM tasks and the other participant performed the AM/ViVo tasks. The numerator indicates the number of subjects who demonstrated inter-session replicability of activation (i.e., significant conjunction or task-specific activation in Sessions 1 and 2), whereas the denominator indicates the number of subjects who showed conjunction or task-specific activation in Session 1 (as activation in session 1 is a prerequisite for assessing reliability). Note that one participant did not demonstrate any activity in left PM in Session 1, and another did not demonstrate single-task activity in right preSMA/SMA in Session 1, so the denominator in those cases is 3, rather than 4. pLPFC= posterior Lateral Prefrontal Cortex; PM=Premotor; SMA=Supplementary Motor Area. 
 
 
 
 
