
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8218014 
 1577 
 Brain Cogn 
 Brain and cognition 
 0278-2626 
 1090-2147 
 
 
 19586700 
 2783884 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2009.06.001 
 NIHMS130591 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural Correlates of Metaphor Processing: The Roles of Figurativeness, Familiarity and Difficulty 
 
 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 Gwenda L. 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 Carol A. 
 
 
 Department of Psychology Colorado State University Fort Collins, Colorado 
 
 
 
 Author's Note : Gwenda Schmidt is now with the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania. 
 
 Address for correspondence: Gwenda L. Schmidt University of Pennsylvania Department of Neurology 3400 Spruce St. 3W Gates Building/Chatterjee Philadelphia, PA 19104  schmidtg@hope.edu 
 
 
 15 
 8 
 2009 
 
 
 7 
 7 
 2009 
 
 
 12 
 2009 
 
 
 1 
 12 
 2010 
 
 71 
 3 
 375 
 386 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 There is currently much interest in investigating the neural substrates of metaphor processing. In particular, it has been suggested that the right hemisphere plays a special role in the comprehension of figurative (non-literal) language, and in particular metaphors. However, some studies find no evidence of right hemisphere involvement in metaphor comprehension (e.g.  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ). We suggest that lateralization differences between literal and metaphorical language may be due to factors such as differences in familiarity ( Schmidt et al., 2007 ), or difficulty ( Bookheimer, 2002 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ) in addition to figurativeness. The purpose of this study was to separate the effects of figurativeness, familiarity, and difficulty on the recruitment of neural systems involved in language, in particular right hemisphere mechanisms. This was achieved by comparing neural activation using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) between four conditions: literal sentences, familiar and easy to understand metaphors, unfamiliar and easy to understand metaphors, and unfamiliar and difficult to understand metaphors. Metaphors recruited the right insula, left temporal pole and right inferior frontal gyrus in comparison with literal sentences. Familiar metaphors recruited the right middle frontal gyrus when contrasted with unfamiliar metaphors. Easy metaphors showed higher activation in the left middle frontal gyrus as compared to difficult metaphors, while difficult metaphors showed selective activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus as compared to easy metaphors. We conclude that the right hemisphere is involved in metaphor processing and that the factors of figurativeness, familiarity and difficulty are important in determining neural recruitment of semantic processing. 
 
 
 right hemisphere 
 figurative language 
 metaphors 
 semantic processing 
 insula 
 
 
 
 The nature of semantic processing of non-literal (i.e. figurative) language has been debated over the years. Traditional views hold that metaphors and other non-literal language (e.g. irony, inferences, indirect requests) require qualitatively different processing strategies for comprehension, and therefore figurative language is inherently different than literal language ( Grice, 1975 ). One crucial aspect of the debate over whether figurative language is qualitatively different from literal language focuses on the role of the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension. Initially it was hypothesized that the right hemisphere has a unique role in metaphor comprehension: the right hemisphere theory of metaphor. This was due to the difficulties that patients with right hemisphere brain damage have specifically with comprehension of non-literal language. An early imaging study ( Bottini et al., 1994 ) and an early divided visual field study ( Anaki, Faust, & Kravetz, 1998 ), both with neurologically unimpaired subjects, each found a right hemisphere advantage for metaphor processing. However, more recent work (for a review, see  Kacinik & Chiarello, 2007 ) has called into question the right hemisphere theory. Some neuroimaging research has failed to find right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor comprehension ( Rapp, Leube, Erb, Grodd, & Kircher, 2004 ,  Rapp, Leube, Erb, Grodd, & Kircher, 2007 ). Other researchers find right hemisphere recruitment for metaphor comprehension, but suggest that the right hemisphere involvement is not due to the figurative nature of metaphors. Some researchers attribute right hemisphere involvement to factors such as differences in familiarity (e.g.  Schmidt, DeBuse, & Seger, 2007 ;  Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ), or complexity ( Bookheimer, 2002 ).  Giora (1997 ,  1999 ,  2003 ) suggests that it is meaning salience (determined by frequency, conventionality, xx and xx) rather than figurativeness which determines the laterality of semantic processing. Beeman's coarse semantic coding theory ( Beeman et al., 1994 ,  Beeman, 1998 ;  Jung-Beeman, 2005 ) proposes that the left hemisphere specializes in processing only fine (close) semantic relationships while the right hemisphere is adept at both fine (close) and coarse (distant) semantic relationships. While all of these proposals are to some degree overlapping, it is Beeman's theory that we use as the basis for insight into two of the factors examined in this study: figurativeness and familiarity. In addition, we suggest that right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor processing may be affected by a third factor, difficulty. 
 
 
 
 Figurativeness 
 Since the role of figurativeness in right hemisphere language is still controversial we chose to include it in our study to investigate its role in the neural basis of metaphor as well as how it may overlap with familiarity and difficulty. Figurative language is non-literal, and includes metaphors, idioms, and irony. A right hemisphere role in figurative language processing is consistent with  Beeman's (1998)  coarse semantic coding theory. According to Beeman's theory, the right hemisphere is involved in processing metaphors because they tend to have more distant semantic relationships than literal language. For example, literal sentences such as  All his money is from the lottery  contain nouns that have many overlapping semantic features ( money-lottery ) while metaphors ( Respect is a precious gem ) are more likely to contain nouns with less semantic overlap ( respect-gem ). 
 The association of the right hemisphere with metaphor processing has been supported by research in various domains. For example, when presented with a metaphorical phrase like  she gave him a hand , patients with right hemisphere brain lesions tend to select a picture representing the literal rather than the figurative meaning ( Mackenzie, Begg, Brady, & Lees, 1997 ;  Mackenzie, Begg, Lees, & Brady, 1999 ;  Rinaldi, Marangolo, & Baldassarri, 2004 ;  Winner & Gardner, 1977 ).  Anaki et al. (1998)  centrally presented word primes to participants, who then were required to make a lexical decision regarding words presented to their left or right visual fields. The target words were related either literally or metaphorically to the prime. A left visual field (right hemisphere) processing time advantage (faster overall reaction times) was obtained for the metaphorically related words, suggesting a right hemisphere advantage for processing the metaphorical meanings of words (see also  Faust & Mashal, 2007 ;  Mashal & Faust, 2008 ; and  Schmidt et al., 2007  for related findings). However, other studies do not support the right hemisphere theory (e.g.  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ;  2007 ). Thus the inclusion of the factor of figurativeness in the current study is critical. 
 
 
 Familiarity 
 The second factor that may affect right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor processing and that can be associated with the coarse semantic coding theory ( Beeman, 1998 ) is familiarity.  Schmidt et al. (2007)  demonstrated that metaphor familiarity may be a reasonable index of the coarseness of semantic relationship within the sentence, and that familiarity can be examined independently of figurativeness. An unfamiliar metaphor is more likely to have distant semantic relationships than a familiar sentence, and thus be processed efficiently in the right hemisphere. There are a number of reasons why this is so. Metaphors which utilize close associates may occur more frequently and therefore be more likely to become familiar over time. It could also be that associations have formed between these words due to speakers' experience with the familiar metaphor over time (see  Bowdle & Gentner, 2005  for discussion). For example, familiar metaphors such as  Babies are angels  contain nouns that have many overlapping semantic features ( babies-angels ). However, unfamiliar metaphors such as  Dictionaries are microscopes of words  contain nouns with less overlapping semantic features. Stimulus familiarity (based on stimulus norming data) was shown to differentially recruit the right and left hemispheres and to modulate right hemisphere recruitment for metaphor processing ( Schmidt et al., 2007 ). Both unfamiliar literal sentences and unfamiliar metaphors showed a right hemisphere processing time advantage (faster overall reaction times), whereas familiar literal sentences and familiar metaphors and showed a left hemisphere processing time advantage in a divided visual field study. 
 Modulation of neural activation on the basis of familiarity has been examined within the domain of metaphors. Metaphors differ greatly in familiarity, ranging from conventional, or very familiar metaphors ( babies are angels ), to novel or highly unfamiliar metaphors ( marriage is an alloy ). In many cases, familiar metaphors do not recruit the right hemisphere whereas unfamiliar metaphors do (e.g.  Mashal et al., 2005 ). The importance of metaphor familiarity can be seen by examining the published metaphor imaging literature to date (see  Table 1 ). To the best of our knowledge,  Table 1  includes all published functional neuroimaging studies of metaphor processing to date. These studies encompass a wide variety of tasks, including sentence (e.g.  Ahrens et al., 2007 ) and word pair (e.g.,  Mashal, et al., 2005 ) processing. All studies which report right hemisphere activation used novel or unfamiliar metaphors or semantic relationships (items 1–8 on  Table 1 ), while most studies not reporting right hemisphere involvement (items 9–14) do not use novel metaphors. This suggests that metaphor familiarity is a factor that is important in determining the role of the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension. This view is supported by a recent transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) study which demonstrated the critical involvement of right posterior temporal cortex in the processing of novel metaphors ( Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ). 
 
 
 Difficulty 
 Beeman's coarse semantic coding theory leads to the prediction that both figurativeness and familiarity will influence right hemisphere recruitment. However, right hemisphere recruitment may also depend on more general task demands that are not specifically semantic. One possibility is that right hemisphere homologs of left language processing areas are simply recruited when processing is generally speaking more difficult or effortful ( Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, & Thulborn, 1996 ). Right hemisphere homologs may be recruited to “help” the left hemisphere, or the right hemisphere may have some independent function more likely to be required in difficult tasks. Linguistic stimuli that are more difficult to process may thus recruit the right hemisphere more than easier ones. Across a variety of semantic and nonsemantic language tasks, the right hemisphere is recruited when task difficulty is relatively high, as summarized in the sample of functional neuroimaging language studies in  Table 2 . Difficulty here is operationally defined as requiring more cognitive processing, and is reflected in longer reaction times in each task. For example,  Seger, Desmond, Glover, and Gabrieli (2000)  found right hemisphere activation when participants generated an unusual verb to a presented noun as compared to simply generating the first verb to come to mind. The right hemisphere was also recruited when subjects generated rather than read the last word of a sentence ( Kircher, Brammer, Andreu, Williams, & McGuire, 2001 ). Incorrect responses in a lexical decision task recruited the right frontal lobes ( Rissman, Eliassen, & Blumstein, 2003 ), as did more degraded stimuli ( Sharp, Scott, & Wise, 2004 ). 
 Since a wide variety of tasks recruit the right hemisphere when the condition is more difficult ( Table 2 ), it could be that right hemisphere activations can be explained simply based on task difficulty rather than on factors related to semantic processing. Coarse semantic relationships may recruit the right hemisphere, not because of the nature of the semantic relationship, but simply because it is more difficult to process coarse semantic relationships. The difficulty explanation for right hemisphere recruitment of figurative language and coarse semantic relationships is supported by a number of the tasks in  Table 2 . Some of these tasks may be more difficult because they involve processing less familiar semantic relationships. For example, unusual verb generation involves accessing unusual semantic associations. Processing unrelated word pairs as compared to related word pairs may also require accessing a broad semantic network. However other tasks clearly do not involve broad semantic networks; for example processing degraded stimuli (which is difficult on a perceptual, not semantic level). It is beyond the scope of this paper to speculate on the processes underlying the performance of these tasks, but it is clear that a wide variety of linguistic tasks which are likely to differ substantially in terms of underlying processing mechanisms still recruit similar areas in the right hemisphere for difficult conditions. Thus it is possible that the difficulty of the task alone is responsible for right hemisphere recruitment. 
 
 
 Working Memory 
 Beeman's coarse coding theory suggests that right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor processing is due to the presence of coarse semantic relationships in metaphors ( Beeman, 1998 ). Such coarse semantic relationships may require extra-linguistic processes which are mediated in neural regions beyond semantic homologs. In particular, we reasoned that processing language that includes coarse semantic relationships may require working memory functions not typically associated with semantic processing in order to cope with the broad scope of possible meanings associated with each word. Right (but not left) middle and inferior frontal regions (BA10, BA46, BA47) have been specifically related to such working memory functions.  Wager and Smith (2003) , in a meta-analysis of working memory, report that these right hemisphere areas are specifically related to manipulation of information stored in working memory, an executive function. Manipulation is distinguished from other executive functions such as updating information in working memory and maintaining order information, and involves transforming the characteristics of stimuli in working memory by “shifting attention and inhibition of irrelevant stimulus dimensions” ( Wager & Smith, 2003, p. 270 ). In the current context this would involve invoking unusual or distant semantic characteristics or meanings of a word and inhibiting irrelevant meanings. Thus we suggest that right middle and inferior frontal regions will be recruited based on familiarity and figurativeness but not difficulty. Both figurativeness and familiarity factors are based on the concept of coarse semantic coding, suggesting that they will recruit qualitatively and quantitatively similar regions. However, if figurativeness on its own plays a role in right hemisphere recruitment, then there should be some right hemisphere activations for figurativeness which do not overlap with the familiarity activations. 
 
 
 The Current Investigation 
 The factors of familiarity and difficulty may be just as important as figurativeness in determining the role of the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension. The purpose of this study was to test this hypothesis and separate the effects of these three factors on the recruitment of neural systems involved in language, in particular right hemisphere mechanisms. This was achieved via contrasts between five sentence types ( Table 3 ): nonword sentences (Nonwords) literal sentences (Literal), metaphors that were familiar and easy to understand (Easy-Familiar), metaphors that were unfamiliar but easy to understand (Easy-Unfamiliar), and unfamiliar metaphors that were difficult to understand (Difficult-Unfamiliar; see  Methods  for details on how metaphors were selected). We examined five contrasts between sentence types: one Semantic contrast, two Figurativeness contrasts, a Familiarity contrast, and a Difficulty contrast. The Semantic contrast compared all four English sentence types (both literal and metaphor) with the nonword sentences. The first Figurativeness contrast compared neural activation associated with Literal sentences to all three groups of metaphors; the second compared literal sentences with the Easy-Familiar metaphors. This allowed for a general comparison of figurativeness in the first contrast, whereas in the second contrast the literal and metaphorical sentences were similar in terms of difficulty and familiarity. The Familiarity contrast compared the Easy-Familiar metaphors to the Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors. Finally, the Difficulty contrast compared the Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors with the Difficult-Unfamiliar metaphors. 
 We hypothesized that right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor comprehension is caused by a complex set of factors, which include difficulty, familiarity, and figurativeness. We hypothesized right hemisphere recruitment for all three factors, but with qualitatively different patterns of activation. Our specific predictions are based on  Beeman's (1998)  coarse coding theory, working memory findings in the literature, and the recruitment of the right hemisphere during difficult language tasks (e.g.  Just et al., 1996 ). 
 First, we predicted that left hemisphere areas associated with semantic processing would be recruited in the Semantic contrast comparing nonword sentences with literal and metaphor sentences. Left hemisphere semantic areas include a large extent of temporal lobe association areas extending longitudinally from temporal-occipito-parietal junction to the temporal poles ( Binder et al., 1997 ;  Bright, Moss, & Tyler, 2004 ;  Dronkers, Wilkins, VanValin, Redfern, & Jaeger, 2004 ;  Grossman et al. 2004 ;  Mummery, 2000 ). Left inferior frontal cortex (BA44, 45, 47) is also important for semantic processing ( Blaxton et al., 1996 ;  Demb et al., 1995 ;  Gabrieli et al., 1996 ,  Kapur et al., 1995 ;  Klein, Milner, Zatorre, Meyer & Evans, 1995 ;  Nathaniel-James, Fletcher, & Frith, 1997 ;  Phelps, Hyder, Blamire & Schulman, 1997 ;  Seger et al., 2000 ;  Vandenberghe, Price, Wise, Josephs, & Frackowiak, 1996 ;  Wagner, Desmond, Glover & Gabrieli, 1998 ). We also predict that the right homologs of these areas will be activated in other contrasts. 
 Second, we predicted that the Figurativeness contrast would recruit right hemisphere regions. In light of Beeman's coarse coding theory, we predict that some of these regions would be in right hemisphere homologs of left hemisphere semantic processing regions in the temporal lobe and inferior frontal gyrus. We predicted that semantic areas recruited by Figurativeness would also be recruited by Familiarity, since comprehension of both unfamiliar and figurative language depends on processing relatively distant semantic relationships. 
 Third, working memory findings in the literature ( Wager & Smith, 2003 ) lead us to predict that both the Figurativeness and Familiarity contrasts would recruit additional right hemisphere regions that have been associated with working memory, in particular the middle frontal gyrus (BA10, 46, 47). 
 Fourth, we predicted that right hemisphere recruitment in the Difficulty contrast would be limited to right homologs of left hemisphere linguistic processing areas, since the right hemisphere can be characterized as “helping” the left hemisphere when processing becomes computationally difficult. In addition, left hemisphere language areas should show quantitatively greater activation for difficult stimuli as well ( Just et al., 1996 ). 
 
 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were ten members of the Stanford University community, five male and five female, with a mean age of 25 years (range: 19 – 42). An eleventh subject was eliminated from the analysis due to scanner malfunction. Participants were right handed by self-report, native speakers of English, had an education level equal to at least one year of college, met the criteria for MRI scanning (no metallic implants, no claustrophobia, head size compatible with the custom head coil), and were neurologically healthy (no known neurological or psychiatric injury or disease; not taking any psychoactive medication or drugs). Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study, which was approved by the institutional review boards of Stanford and Colorado State Universities in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. 
 
 
 Stimuli 
 Experimental stimuli consisted of three types of metaphorical sentences, literal sentences, and nonword sentences; see  Table 3  for sample stimuli. The metaphors were taken from  Katz et al. (1988) , with normed values on 7-point scales based on (1) familiarity and (2) ease of interpretation. Metaphors were selected and divided into three lists such that the first two lists differed in terms of familiarity ( t  = 12.9,  p  < .001), but not difficulty ( p  > .05) while the second and third lists differed in terms of difficulty ( t  = 11.5,  p  < .001), but not familiarity ( p  > .05). The three resulting groups of metaphors were labeled  Easy-Familiar  (familiarity  M  = 4.99,  SD =.64; ease of interpretation  M  = 5.87,  SD =.53),  Easy-Unfamiliar  (familiarity  M  = 3.17,  SD =.28; ease of interpretation  M  = 5.75,  SD =.29) and  Difficult-Unfamiliar  (familiarity  M  = 3.04,  SD =.27; ease of interpretation  M  = 4.67,  SD =.36). It should be emphasized that while the metaphorical stimuli used varied along a familiarity dimension, none of them were highly familiar, conventional metaphors such as  She has a warm heart . This exclusion was necessary since conventional metaphors involve lexicalized meanings of metaphorically used words, and are processed in a qualitatively different way ( Bowdle & Gentner, 2005 ). Therefore, our “Familiar” stimuli were only  relatively  more familiar than the “Unfamiliar” stimuli; they were not highly familiar. Additional stimuli consisted of literal sentences and baseline sentences composed of pronounceable nonwords. The literal sentences were created using new combinations of the same words used in the three metaphor lists. The Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar, Difficult-Unfamiliar, and Literal sentence types did not differ in terms of average word frequency per sentence,  F (3,89) = 1.6,  p  > .05 ( Kucera & Francis, 1967 ). In terms of syntactic structure, sentences were simple, active, declarative sentences, about half with a modifying phrase; the number of such phrases did not vary across sentence types,  F (3,92) = 2.5,  p  > .05). 
 Nonwords formed by switching letters in words from the three metaphor lists were combined to form the nonword sentences. These were considered our baseline task. There were a total of 24 sentences of each type resulting in 120 sentences total. Sentences ranged in length from 3 to 12 words with a mean length of 6.0 words. A one-way ANOVA indicated that sentence length was not consistent across lists,  F (4,115) = 4.2,  p  < .01. Post hoc Tukey HSD and Scheffe comparisons revealed that Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors were significantly longer (mean word count = 7.0) than Easy-Familiar metaphors (mean word count = 5.5,  p  < .01) or Difficult-Unfamiliar metaphors (mean word count = 5.5,  p  < .01) but not the Literal (mean word count = 6.0,  p  > .05) or nonword sentences (mean word count = 6.0,  p  > .05). This difference was not possible to avoid in the list construction, since within the corpus of  Katz et al. (1988)  sentences that were both unfamiliar  and  easy to understand were characteristically longer. However, this difference in length was not reflected in a difference in processing time, as shown in  Behavioral Results , below. It should be kept in mind that this is a potential confound when interpreting the results. However, we suggest that a lack of difference in processing time across conditions is the most important determinant of comparable conditions in fMRI experiments, a view adopted by other researchers (e.g.  Kable, Lease-Spellmeyer, & Chatterjee, 2002 ). 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Prior to entering the scanner, participants were shown sample sentences and instructed that while in the scanner they should read each sentence and press the response key after each sentence as soon as they had understood it. For the nonword sentences, participants were asked to read the sentence without trying to pronounce the words and then press the response key. Participants were told to be prepared for a brief memory test based on the meanings of the sentences after they exited the scanner, to ensure that they would fully read the sentences. On each trial the entire sentence appeared at once in the center of the screen for 4800 ms, during which the participants silently read the sentence and made their button press response. The stimulus was followed by a blank screen for 200 ms, for a total of 5000 ms per sentence. The 120 sentences were randomly assigned to 20-second blocks of 4 sentences of the same type, with no repetition of stimuli across blocks. The resulting 30 blocks were arranged in pseudo random order with the constraints that there were no more than two consecutive metaphor blocks, literal and non-word blocks were not adjacent, and there were no consecutive blocks of the same metaphor type, as depicted in  Fig. 1 . A total scanning time of 10 minutes was required to complete the experiment. A block design was used in order to maximize statistical power. 
 After exiting the scanner, participants completed a short written memory and comprehension test based on a subset of sentences they had seen in the scanner. Questions were to be answered based on the sentences and not general knowledge. For the metaphors, this required comprehension of the metaphor rather than just recognition. 1  For example, to show memory of the metaphor  A degree is a doorway , participants responded to the question  Why is it good to get a degree?  by selecting one of  provides maturity, provides new opportunities  or  helps you to think better.  Literal sentences were tested in a similar way, but required only recall, not comprehension of the sentence. Nonword sentences were tested for recognition as in  Did you see this sentence? E blutch aw vot welond . A total of three questions per stimulus type was included in the test, for a total of fifteen questions (13 % of total stimuli). Since we only tested a subset of the stimuli, and did not directly test for understanding, a caveat of this study is that we can not be sure that they comprehended all the sentences in the way which we intended. 
 
 
 Functional MRI acquisition 
 Imaging was performed with a custom-built whole head coil in a 3.0 Tesla MRI Signa LX Horizon Echospeed (General Electric Medical Systems). Head movement was minimized for participants using a “bite-bar” formed with the participant's dental impression. In addition to the functional scans, three anatomical scans were performed: a coronal T1-weighted localizer scan, a three-dimensional high-resolution T1-weighted spoiled gradient echo scan with 124 contiguous 1.5 mm slices [minimum full echo time (TE), 30 degrees flip angle, 24 cm field of view, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix], and a inplane anatomical T1-weighted spin-echo scan with 22 contiguous 5 mm axial slices [minimum full TE; 500 ms TR, 24 cm field of view, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix]. Functional scanning was performed using a T2* sensitive gradient echo spiral in-out pulse sequence (Glover & Lai, 2001;  Preston et al., 2004 ) [30 ms TE; 1500 ms TR; 65 degree flip angle; 24 cm field of view; 64 × 64 acquisition matrix] of the same 22 contiguous 5 mm axial slices as the inplane images. Scanning order was ascending and slices were acquired in an interleaved sequence. 
 Stimuli were presented using a magnet-compatible projector (Resonance Technology, Inc., Van Nuys, CA) that back-projects visual images onto a screen mounted above the participant's head. E-prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) running on a personal computer was used to generate visual stimuli and control experimental parameters. Responses were obtained using a magnet compatible response system. The scanner was started 8 seconds before the behavioral task began in order to allow for steady stage magnetization to be achieved; the resulting initial 4 scans were discarded. 
 
 
 Image Processing 
 Individual participant image preprocessing and analysis was performed using BrainVoyager 2000 4.9, and the group whole brain analyses, ROI analyses, and signal change analyses were performed using BrainVoyager QX 1.0.9 and 1.7 (Brain Innovation, Maastricht, The Netherlands). The functional data were first subjected to preprocessing, consisting of scan time correction, then motion correction, and then temporal filtering. The scan time correction used a cubic spline interpolation and was corrected to the first slice. The 3D motion correction was rigid body, and used trilinear interpolation images which were realigned to the first image of the first scan. The temporal filtering used a high pass filter in frequency space and linear trend removal. A fast Fourier transform was performed, and frequencies of less than 3 cycles across the time course of the scan were cut off. 
 Each participant's high resolution anatomical image was normalized to the  Talairach and Tournoux (1988)  brain template. The normalization process in BrainVoyager consists of two steps, an initial rigid body translation into the AC-PC plane, followed by an elastic deformation into the standard space performed on 12 individual subvolumes. The resulting set of transformations was applied to the participant's functional image volumes to form volume time course representations to be used in subsequent statistical analyses. Finally, the volume time course representations were spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel, full width at half maximum of 6.0 mm. 
 
 
 Contrasts 
 A total of five contrasts were examined. The first contrast compared all four experimental sentence types with the baseline non-word sentences. Subsequently the four experimental sentences types were used in four additional contrasts to allow the examination of three characteristics of semantic stimuli.  Figurativeness  was examined by contrasting (a) the Literal sentences with all three types of metaphorical sentences and (b) the Literal sentences with the Easy-Familiar metaphors. The Easy-Familiar metaphors were most likely to match the literal sentences on the dimensions of ease and familiarity.  Familiarity  was examined by contrasting the Easy-Familiar metaphors with the Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors.  Difficulty  was examined by contrasting the Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors with the Difficult-Unfamiliar metaphors. The subtraction logic employed in these contrasts is based on the assumption that neural mechanisms common to both conditions in a contrast will be equivalent, so that when the two conditions are subtracted from each other, the remaining activation reflects only brain regions unique to the two conditions being subtracted ( Friston, Ashburner, Kiebel, Nichols, & Penny, 2007 ). For example, we assumed that the Literal and Figurative conditions each employ common sentence processing mechanisms, and that the only differences between the two sets of stimuli is the figurative nature of the later. Thus any positive brain activations resulting from the Figurative > Literal contrast reflect processing due only to the figurative nature of the stimuli while negative activations reflect processing due only to the literal nature of the stimuli. Such subtractions are used widely in fMRI research to compare two conditions with each other; however we offer the caveat that there are inherent issues with interpreting data derived from subtractions. This should be kept in mind when interpreting these data. 
 
 
 Statistical Analysis 
 Activation across the brain in the five block types (Nonword, Literal, Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar, Difficult-Unfamiliar) were compared using BrainVoyager QX 1.0.9. The hemodynamic response for each condition was modeled by convolving a prototypical hemodynamic response function with the time course of the conditions. Then conditions were compared using the general linear model in Brain Voyager with separate subject predictors and subjects treated as random effects, using the five contrasts described above. The threshold was set at  p  < .001, uncorrected for multiple comparisons, which corresponded to a  t -value threshold of 4.5. This is a commonly used threshold in fMRI research (e.g.  Badre & D'Esposito, 2007 ). Gyral locations and Brodmann area designations of regions of significant activation were confirmed using Talairach Daemon ( Lancaster, Summerln, Rainey, & Fox, 1997 ). 
 
 
 ROI Analyses 
 ROI templates were created in BrainVoyager QX 1.0.9 and 1.7. They were based on selected functionally activated clusters from the whole brain analysis. Selection was based on findings from the metaphor processing literature as indicated for each ROI in  Table 4 . The ROI is identified via a region growing process which starts with a central voxel indicated by mouse click, and which spreads to suprathreshold adjacent voxels, stopping at the boundaries of the functional cluster. The ROI general linear model (ROI GLM) tool of BrainVoyager QX 1.0.9 was used to analyze contrasts separately within each ROI. This tool calculates the average time course of all the voxels in the ROI for each subject, compares the time course across subjects and conditions in an ANOVA with subjects treated as random effects, and computes  t  and  p  values for contrasts of interest between specified conditions. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Performance 
 The dependent measure was defined as latency between presentation of the sentence and the participants' button press that indicated they had finished reading the sentence. A one-way ANOVA revealed that despite the different sentence lengths, there was no difference across conditions in sentence reading time,  F (4, 36) < 1. The mean response time was 1949 ms ( SD  = 627 ms). The high variability in response times suggests that there was not enough power to detect any potential differences with only ten subjects. Participant responses to the recognition test suggested that they remembered and understood at least a subset of the sentences; the mean rate of correct responses was 77% ( SD  = 19%). There were no significant differences in correct responses between the five sentence types,  F (4,36) = 1.2,  p  > .05. Overall the behavior findings are consistent with the notion that participants complied with task instructions and understood the different sentence types. 
 
 
 Neural Activations 
 The results of the whole brain analysis are reported in  Table 4 . All sentence types contrasted with nonword sentences showed activation in the left middle frontal gyrus and insula and the right middle frontal gyrus. As illustrated in  Fig. 2A and 2B , Metaphors (Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar and Difficult-Unfamiliar) showed selective activation in the left temporal pole and right insula when contrasted with Literal sentences and Easy-Familiar metaphors alone showed activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus in comparison to Literal sentences ( Fig. 2C ). The familiarity contrast (Easy-Familiar > Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors) showed a right middle frontal activation ( Fig. 2D ). A number of activations were found for easy metaphors (Easy-Unfamiliar > Difficult-Unfamiliar), including left middle frontal gyrus ( Fig.2F ) and bilateral medial frontal activations. In addition, the left inferior frontal gyrus was more active for difficult than for easy metaphors as seen in  Fig.2E . Across comparisons, right hemisphere activity was seen in addition to left. The right middle frontal gyrus was affected by familiarity, the right anterior cingulate gyrus by difficulty, and the right insula and inferior frontal gyrus by figurativeness. 
 Six ROIs were selected from the whole brain analysis based on areas of interest from the literature, as depicted in bold typeface in  Table 4 . The voxel size of each ROI is also shown in this table. Those selected included all those within the lateral frontal, temporal, and insular language areas in both hemispheres. Follow up analyses were performed on these ROIs to determine if any of these areas were significantly active in additional contrasts. The right insula ROI, in addition to being significantly more active for all three Metaphor types than Literal stimuli, was also more active for Easy-Unfamiliar than Easy-Familiar metaphors,  t (9) = 2.4,  p  = .04; see  Fig. 2A . The left temporal pole ROI, in addition to being significantly more active for all three Metaphor types than Literal stimuli, was also more active for Easy-Familiar metaphors in contrast with Literal sentences,  t (9) = 3.5,  p  = .007; see  Fig. 2B . The right inferior frontal gyrus BA47 ROI, in addition to being significantly more active for Easy-Familiar metaphors than Literal sentences, was also more active for all three Metaphor types than Literal stimuli,  t (9) = 2.9,  p  = .02; and affected by familiarity (more active for Easy-Familiar than Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors,  t (9) = 2.6,  p  = .03; see  Fig. 2C ). The right middle frontal gyrus BA8 ROI, in addition to being affected by familiarity (significantly more active for Easy-Familiar than Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors), was also affected by difficulty (more active for Difficult-Unfamiliar metaphors than Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors,  t (9) = 2.3,  p  < .05; see  Fig.2D .) 
 For each ROI defined, the opposite hemisphere homolog (left or right) was also defined as an ROI to facilitate examination of lateralized differences ( Rapp et al., 2007 ). Note that the homolog consisted of exactly the same voxels, but with the x coordinate changed in sign. As a result, we found that two left homolog of right hemisphere ROIs showed significant activations. The left insula showed a similar pattern of activation to the right insula ( Fig. 2A ), with greater activity for the three Metaphor sentences types than Literal sentences,  t (9) = 3.5,  p  = .007. The inferior frontal gyrus BA47 area, significantly more active for Easy-Familiar metaphors than Literal sentences on the right, was also more active on the left for all three Metaphor types than Literal stimuli,  t (9) = 2.2,  p  = .05 ( Fig.2C ). 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study investigated neural activations associated with reading metaphorical sentences which varied along three dimensions. We separately evaluated the effects of figurativeness ( Figs. 2A, and 2C ), familiarity ( Fig. 2D ), and difficulty ( Figs. 2E and 2F ) on brain activation. Each of these contrasts recruited distinct regions, supporting our hypothesis that all three factors are important for characterizing the neural basis of metaphor. The areas activated in these contrasts included classic left hemisphere semantic processing areas including the inferior frontal gyri and anterolateral temporal cortex ( Bright, et al., 2004 ;  Gabrieli et al., 1996 ;  Grossman et al. 2004 ;  Seger et al., 2000 ). Right hemisphere areas were also active for each of the contrasts, contrary to findings suggesting that the right hemisphere is not involved in metaphor comprehension (e.g.  Gagnon et al., 2003 ;  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ,  2007 ;  Stringaris et al., 2007 ;  Tompkins, 1990 ). 
 Our first prediction was confirmed; we report a large left hemisphere activation for all sentences compared to the nonword sentences in well established semantic areas in the left inferior frontal gyrus ( Blaxton et al., 1996 ;  Demb et al., 1995 ;  Gabrieli et al., 1996 ,  Kapur et al., 1995 ;  Klein, Milner, Zatorre, Meyer & Evans, 1995 ;  Nathaniel-James, Fletcher, & Frith, 1997 ;  Phelps, Hyder, Blamire & Schulman, 1997 ;  Seger et al., 2000 ;  Vandenberghe, Price, Wise, Josephs, & Frackowiak, 1996 ;  Wagner, Desmond, Glover & Gabrieli, 1998 ). 
 
 Figurativeness and Familiarity 
 Our second prediction was that right hemisphere homologs of left hemisphere semantic areas would be identified in the figurativeness and familiarity contrasts due to their dependence on course coding mechanisms ( Beeman, 1998 ). The results generally conformed to this prediction. Activations in the figurative contrast were located in the right inferior frontal gyrus, right insula, and left temporal pole; activity was modulated by familiarity in right middle frontal gyrus BA8 and right inferior frontal gyrus BA47 (in the ROI analysis of this area originally defined by the whole brain figurativeness contrast). 
 The right inferior frontal gyrus activation (BA47) was associated with both figurativeness and familiarity, in line with our third prediction that both factors would recruit similar right hemisphere regions due to the need to manipulate items in working memory during coarse semantic coding. This area is close to the right homologs of traditional language areas, and is known to be involved in manipulation of data stored in working memory, specifically on the right ( Wager & Smith, 2003 ). Such manipulation is required when processing figurative or unfamiliar language since in both cases a broad range of meanings must be manipulated in order for meaning selection to take place, suggesting why this left hemisphere area was recruited during metaphor tasks. Finally, since there were no right hemisphere activations unique to the figurativeness contrast, we cannot support the view that right hemisphere recruitment is due primarily to figurativeness. 
 The right middle frontal gyrus (BA8) familiarity activation includes an area documented in a language imaging meta-analysis ( Vigneau et al., 2006 ), in which it is identified as being central to semantic processing in its left hemisphere homolog. While Vigneau and colleagues did not investigate the right hemisphere, it is reasonable to expect homolog recruitment in various tasks ( Just et al., 1996 ). The right middle frontal gyrus is primarily recruited for controlled semantic retrieval, semantic priming ( Vigneau et al., 2006 ) and selection of responses or meanings ( Thomson-Schill, D'Esposito, Aguirre, & Farah, 1997 ,  Wagner, Pare-Blagoev, Clark, & Poldrack, 2001 ), as well as being part of a semantic working memory loop connected with the angular gyrus. It is furthermore identified as a supramodal semantic area encompassing both word and picture semantic processing ( Vandenberghe et al., 1996 ). Semantic selection is likely to be of increased importance in sentences where multiple meanings are possible, for example in less familiar sentences. Our earlier findings ( Schmidt et al., 2007 ) suggest that sentence familiarity may be a reasonable index of the coarseness of semantic relationship within the sentence. Thus for less familiar sentences, selection of appropriate meanings may be moredifficult, since less frequent meanings need to be retrieved, evaluated, and selected. Consequently the right homolog of this important left hemisphere semantic area is recruited. 
 One apparent contradiction is our finding of greater activation for Easy-Familiar metaphors than Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors in the right middle and inferior frontal gyri. However, these results need to be interpreted in light of the fact that we avoided using highly familiar or conventional metaphors, so that the range of familiarity across our stimuli extends from moderately familiar to very unfamiliar. For example, the following only moderately familiar metaphors were included in the Easy-Familiar condition: Indecision is a whirlpool; Education is a lantern; A pond is nature's mirror; The degree is a doorway; Dictators are the stranglers of liberty.  Mason and Just (2004)  observed a similar pattern in an inference processing tasks: inferences with an intermediate degree of casual relatedness to an antecedent condition resulted in more right hemisphere activation than either low or high degrees of relatedness. Their findings were reported across several brain regions including the right inferior frontal gyrus. 
 
 
 Difficulty 
 Current findings were in line with our fourth prediction that difficulty would result in increased activation in both left hemisphere language areas and their right hemisphere homologs. The difficulty contrast resulted in left hemisphere activations, with some regions being more active for difficult than easy (left inferior frontal) and some more active for easy than difficult (left middle frontal) stimuli. Right hemisphere homologs of left hemisphere language areas are also increasingly recruited when sentences become progressively difficult ( Just et al., 1996 ), and are progressively more active as contextual complexity increases ( Xu, Kemeny, Park, Frattali, & Braun, 2005 ). The ROI analysis revealed that the right middle frontal gyrus BA8 area, originally defined by the whole brain familiarity contrast was also affected by difficulty (Difficult > Easy). Thus difficulty did result in increased left hemisphere activation, and right hemisphere activations in metaphor processing were in part due to the difficulty of processing, not just relatively complex factors such as coarse coding. 
 
 
 The Right Hemisphere and Metaphor Processing 
 The current results speak to ongoing debate regarding the role of the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension (e.g.  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ;  Schmidt et al., 2007 ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ;  2007 ). These results support the findings and conclusions of  Ahrens et al. (2007)  who suggest that both left and right hemispheres play a role in metaphor comprehension, at least non-conventional metaphors. The view that the right hemisphere is not involved in metaphor comprehension (e.g.  Rapp et al., 2007 ) is not supported. A number of researchers ( Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Stringaris et al., 2007 ) found no evidence of right hemisphere involvement in metaphor processing, but used only conventional metaphors.  Stringaris et al., 2006  who did find right hemisphere activations also used conventional metaphors; however they tested the relationship between them and a final target word, where the relationship between the two could not be described as conventional.  Rapp et al. (2004 ;  2007 ) found no right hemisphere involvement for metaphors that did not turn up in an internet search and were thus considered unfamiliar. Thus the authors define familiarity based on an internet search. However, even a slightly different wording could result in a null result in an internet search, and no norming data were reported. Additionally, these metaphors may have only recruited the left hemisphere due to the fact that they had short, simple sentence structures, and the task required participants to categorize the stimuli (a non-linguistic task) rather than evaluate them on a semantic basis ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ). Similar arguments could be used with some of the lesions studies which report that patients with right hemisphere stroke can often understand metaphors correctly (e.g.  Giora, Zaidel, Soroker, Batori, & Kasher, 2000 ;  Rinaldi et al., 2004 ;  Zaidel, Kasher, Soroker, & Batori, 2002 ), providing an argument against right hemisphere involvement in metaphor comprehension. Each of these studies employed only highly familiar or conventional metaphors, which may not recruit the right hemisphere to the degree that less familiar metaphors do ( Schmidt et al., 2007 ). 
 Both the figurativeness and familiarity findings are consistent with theories of right hemisphere semantic processing.  Beeman's coarse coding theory (1998)  explains the proficiency of the right hemisphere in metaphor processing by suggesting that metaphors in general, and unfamiliar or unconventional metaphors more specifically, contain more distant semantic relationships, and take advantage of a right hemisphere proficiency in processing such relationships. For example, a familiar metaphor such as  Babies are angels  contains nouns that have many overlapping semantic features (babies-angels). However, an unfamiliar metaphor such as  Dictionaries are microscopes  contains nouns with less overlapping semantic features (dictionary-microscope). Giora's graded salience hypothesis ( Giora, 1997 ,  1999 ,  2003 ) suggests that the right hemisphere is more likely to be recruited for processing the less salient meanings of words. Salience is determined by various factors, such as familiarity and conventionality, but not difficulty or figurativeness per se. That the right hemisphere activations based on figurativeness were also associated with familiarity is consistent with the idea that both of these factors depend on the same underlying mechanisms and that any right hemisphere recruitment is not primarily due to figurativeness per se, but to a broader concept such as salience. 
 
 
 The Insula and Metaphor Processing 
 Across the whole brain and ROI analyses, we found greater activity in the right and left insula in contrasts comparing Metaphors with Literal sentences and Unfamiliar metaphors with Familiar metaphors ( Fig. 2A ). Insula activation has now been reported in several studies of metaphor and/or unfamiliar language, but not highlighted or discussed.  Kuperberg and colleagues (2000)  found bilateral insula activation for pragmatically anomalous (literal) sentences (The parents couldn't sleep because the baby would phone) as contrasted with normal sentences.  Ahrens et al. (2007)  found neural recruitment of the bilateral insula for anomalous Chinese metaphors ( Their financial capital has a lot of rhythm ) as contrasted with literal sentences. Mashal and colleagues found activation in an insular area for novel and conventional metaphorical word pairs when compared to unrelated word pairs ( Mashal et al., 2007 ). Using principal components analysis, they also found this area to be part of a network involved in processing both types of metaphors ( Mashal et al., 2005 ). 
 Our results, in conjunction with these other studies, suggest that the insula may have an important role in processing less familiar language. What might this role be? It has been suggested that the insula performs an important function in speech and language processing by coordinating the language areas of the frontal and temporal lobes. It is indeed almost adjacent to the classic Broca's and Wernicke's areas. Metaphor processing may require more integration between the temporal lobes, where lexical access occurs, and the frontal lobes, where meaning selection takes place ( Bennett & Netsell, 1999 ). Conversely, a number of studies have reported insula recruitment for practiced language tasks using relatively familiar stimuli ( Kircher et al., 2001 ;  Petersen, Fox, Posner, Mintun, and Raichle, 1988 ;  Raichle et al., 1994 ;  Seger et al., 2000 ; for discussion see  Bennett & Netsell, 1999 ). This apparent contradiction can be resolved by noting that the practiced, less effortful tasks recruit more posterior parts of the insula, while metaphors and other unusual language recruit more anterior parts of the insula, as in our study and other studies of figurative language ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;.  Kuperberg et al., 2000 ;  Mashal et al., 2007 ). 
 
 
 Limitations and Future Directions 
 There are several limitations to the current work. Overall, figurativeness, familiarity, and difficulty ratings of metaphors are highly correlated ( Katz et al., 1988 ), such that highly figurative language tends to be unfamiliar and difficult to understand. However, we were able to examine stimuli chosen to differ significantly in familiarity and difficulty ratings, and thus we were able to separate metaphor familiarity and difficulty at least within our experimental paradigm. Another limitation of our study is that due to scanning time limitations, we did not include literal sentences that varied in difficulty and familiarity in the same ways as the metaphors. Future studies are needed to address this shortcoming. Another potential limitation is that participants may not have comprehended the metaphors as we intended; due to scanning limitations we were unable to have an online evaluation of comprehension. Although we tested for comprehension, this test occurred after the scanning session was complete and included only a subset of the stimuli. For some subjects performance on this task was substantially below 100%, indicating that they may not have comprehended the metaphors. However, the original metaphorical sentences were not reproduced on the comprehension test, so good performance on the test required subjects to not only choose the answer matching the metaphorical meaning of the sentence, but to remember the metaphor and/or its meaning from the time of scanning to the time of test. The comprehension test was not performed until approximately 30 minutes after the scan, and was performed in a different context (outside the scanner, rather than inside). Therefore, we cannot be sure of whether the poor performance on the test was due to an initial failure to comprehend the metaphors, or merely a failure to retain the meaning. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The view that the right hemisphere is not involved in metaphor comprehension ( Rapp et al., 2004 ;  2007 ) is not supported by our data, since we obtained a number of right hemisphere activations for metaphor processing. On the other hand, the opposite view, that the right hemisphere has a unique role in metaphor processing due to the figurative nature of metaphors is not supported either, as we found that both left and right hemisphere activations were affected by the familiarity and difficulty of the metaphors. 
 Our finding that figurativeness alone cannot account for right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor processing is in contrast to theories that assume figurativeness is a distinct characteristic (e.g.  Grice, 1975 ). The quality of being figurative may not be the crucial factor in determining neural activation during metaphor processing. Indeed, it is the case that a large proportion of language has a nonliteral quality to it (Lakoff & Johnson, 1989), implying that whether or not language is figurative should not be the primary distinction determining the cognitive and neural organization of language. The existence of conventional metaphors (He has a warm heart; She stood up to her boss; That relationship isn't going anywhere) are so pervasive in our language, that it has even been argued that they form the basis of our cognition (Lakoff & Johnson, 1989). 
 For right hemisphere recruitment during language, the present results confirm the importance of two factors other than figurativeness: familiarity and difficulty. Familiarity was closely linked with figurativeness; there were a number of overlaps between familiarity and figurativeness activations, including right inferior frontal and insula regions. This is consistent with the coarse coding theory ( Beeman, 1998 ) explanation for right hemisphere metaphor processing. Difficulty alone did not account for right hemisphere activation during figurative language, but difficulty and familiarity together accounted for activation in the right middle frontal region. Collectively, the present findings reveal a pattern of figurative language processing in which the factors of metaphor familiarity and difficulty are nearly as important as figurativeness in determining patterns of neural recruitment. 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported in part by NIMH grant R03MH63784 and NIH T32 NS007413. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 This is true for all of the metaphorical sentences except one, which due to an oversight only tested for recall of the sentence. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Ahrens 
 K 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Lee 
 C 
 
 
 Gong 
 S 
 
 
 Fang 
 S 
 
 
 Hsu 
 Y 
 
 
 Functional MRI of conventional and anomalous metaphors in Mandarin Chinese 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 163 
 171 
 16298426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anaki 
 D 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Kravetz 
 S 
 
 
 Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries in processing lexical metaphors 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1998 
 36 
 353 
 362 
 9665646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arzouan 
 Y 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 A 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Dynamics of hemispheric activity during metaphor comprehension: electrophysiological measures 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 36 
 222 
 31 
 17428685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a hierarchical organization of the prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 2082 
 2099 
 17892391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Chiarello 
 C 
 
 
 Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehension 
 Right hemisphere language comprehension: Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience 
 1998 
 255 
 284 
 Erlbaum 
 Mahwah, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Friedman 
 RB 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Perez 
 E 
 
 
 Diamond 
 S 
 
 
 Lindsay 
 MB 
 
 
 Summation priming and coarse semantic coding in the right hemisphere 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1994 
 6 
 26 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bennett 
 S 
 
 
 Netsell 
 RW 
 
 
 Possible roles of the insula in speech and language processing: Directions for research 
 Journal of Medical Speech-Language Pathology 
 1999 
 7 
 255 
 272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Prieto 
 T 
 
 
 Human brain language areas identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 353 
 362 
 8987760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blaxton 
 TA 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 Figlozzi 
 CM 
 
 
 Gaillard 
 WD 
 
 
 Theodore 
 WH 
 
 
 Functional mapping of human memory using PET: comparisons of conceptual and perceptual tasks 
 Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1996 
 50 
 42 
 56 
 8653097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 S 
 
 
 Functional MRI of language: New approaches to understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2002 
 25 
 151 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bottini 
 G 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 R 
 
 
 Sterzi 
 R 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Schenone 
 P 
 
 
 Scarpa 
 P 
 
 
 
 The role of the right hemisphere in the interpretation of figurative aspects of language: A positron emission tomography activation study 
 Brain 
 1994 
 117 
 1241 
 1253 
 7820563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bowdle 
 BF 
 
 
 Gentner 
 D 
 
 
 The career of metaphor 
 Psychological Review 
 2005 
 112 
 193 
 216 
 15631593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bright 
 P 
 
 
 Moss 
 H 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Unitary vs. multiple semantics: PET studies of word and picture processing 
 Brain & Language 
 2004 
 89 
 417 
 432 
 15120534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brownell 
 HH 
 
 
 Simpson 
 TL 
 
 
 Bihrle 
 AM 
 
 
 Potter 
 HH 
 
 
 Gardner 
 H 
 
 
 Appreciation of metaphoric alternative word meanings by left and right brain-damaged patients 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1990 
 28 
 375 
 383 
 1692980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coulson 
 S 
 
 
 Van Petten 
 C 
 
 
 Conceptual integration and metaphor: An event-related potential study 
 Memory & Cognition 
 2002 
 30 
 958 
 968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 2005 
 493 
 154 
 66 
 16254997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Bonis 
 M 
 
 
 Epelbaum 
 C 
 
 
 Deffez 
 V 
 
 
 Feline 
 A 
 
 
 The comprehension of metaphors in schizophrenia 
 Psychopathology 
 1997 
 30 
 149 
 154 
 9186980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demb 
 JB 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Semantic encoding and retrieval in the left inferior frontal cortex: A functional MRI study of task difficulty and process specificity 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1995 
 15 
 5870 
 5878 
 7666172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Wilkins 
 DP 
 
 
 Van Valin 
 RD 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Redfern 
 BB 
 
 
 Jaeger 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lesion analysis of the brain areas involved in language comprehension 
 Cognition 
 2004 
 92 
 145 
 177 
 15037129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eviatar 
 Z 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Brain correlates of discourse processing: An fMRI investigation of irony and conventional metaphor comprehension 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 2348 
 2359 
 16806316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 RH advantage in processing novel metaphoric expressions: A DVF Study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 860 
 870 
 17010392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 JT 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Penny 
 WD 
 
 
 Statistical parametric mapping: The analysis of functional brain images 
 2007 
 Elsevier 
 Amsterdam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Demb 
 JB 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Stone 
 MV 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Function magnetic resonance imaging of semantic memory processes in the frontal lobes 
 Psychological Science 
 1996 
 7 
 278 
 283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gagnon 
 L 
 
 
 Goulet 
 P 
 
 
 Giroux 
 F 
 
 
 Joanette 
 Y 
 
 
 Processing of metaphoric and nonmetaphoric alternative meanings of words after right- and left-hemispheric lesion 
 Brain & Language 
 2003 
 87 
 217 
 226 
 14585291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Understanding figurative and literal language: The graded salience hypothesis 
 Cognitive Linguistics 
 1997 
 8 
 183 
 206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 On the priority of salient meanings: Studies of literal and figurative language 
 Journal of Pragmatics 
 1999 
 31 
 919 
 929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 On our mind: Salience, context and figurative language 
 2003 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Soroker 
 N 
 
 
 Batori 
 G 
 
 
 Kasher 
 A 
 
 
 Differential effects of right-and left-hemisphere damage on understanding sarcasm and metaphor 
 Metaphor and Symbol 
 2000 
 15 
 63 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Lai 
 S 
 
 
 Self-navigated spiral fMRI: Interleaved versus single-shot 
 Magnetic Resonance Medicine 
 1998 
 3 
 361 
 368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glucksberg 
 S 
 
 
 Understanding figurative language: From metaphors to idioms 
 2001 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grice 
 HP 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 P 
 
 
 Morgan 
 JL 
 
 
 Logic and conversation 
 Syntax and Semantics: Vol. 3. Speech Acts 
 1975 
 41 
 58 
 Academic Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 McMillan 
 C 
 
 
 Moore 
 P 
 
 
 Ding 
 L 
 
 
 Glosser 
 G 
 
 
 Work 
 M 
 
 
 Gee 
 J 
 
 
 What's in a name: voxel-based morphometric analyses of MRI and naming difficulty in Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementia and corticobasal degeneration 
 Brain 
 2004 
 127 
 628 
 649 
 14761903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herbert 
 MR 
 
 
 Ziegler 
 DA 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 CK 
 
 
 O'Brien 
 LM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DN 
 
 
 Filipek 
 PA 
 
 
 
 Brain asymmetries in autism and developmental language disorder: a nested whole-brain analysis 
 Brain 
 2005 
 128 
 213 
 26 
 15563515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language 
 Trends in Cognitive Science 
 2005 
 11 
 512 
 518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Brain activation modulated by sentence comprehension 
 Science 
 1996 
 274 
 114 
 6 
 8810246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kable 
 J 
 
 
 Lease-Spellmeyer 
 J 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 The neural substrate of action event knowledge 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 785 
 794 
 12167262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kacinik 
 NA 
 
 
 Chiarello 
 C 
 
 
 Understanding metaphors: Is the right hemisphere uniquely involved? 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 188 
 207 
 16325253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kapur 
 S 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Jones 
 C 
 
 
 Brown 
 GM 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Functional role of the prefrontal cortex in retrieval of memories: A PET study 
 NeuroReport 
 1995 
 6 
 1881 
 1884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katz 
 AN 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 Marschark 
 M 
 
 
 Clark 
 JM 
 
 
 Norms for 204 literary and 260 nonliterary metaphors on 10 psychological dimensions 
 Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 
 1988 
 3 
 191 
 214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TT 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Andreu 
 NT 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 Engagement of right temporal cortex during processing of linguistic content 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2001 
 39 
 798 
 809 
 11369403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klein 
 D 
 
 
 Milner 
 B 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 RJ 
 
 
 Meyer 
 E 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 The neural substrates underlying word generation: a bilingual functional-imaging study 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 1995 
 92 
 2899 
 903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kucera & Francis 
 WN 
 
 
 Computational Analysis of Present-Day American English 
 1967 
 Brown University Press 
 Providence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuperberg 
 GR 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rabe-Hesketh 
 S 
 
 
 Wright 
 I 
 
 
 
 Common and distinct neural substrates for pragmatic, semantic, and syntactic processing of spoken sentences: an fMRI study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2000 
 12 
 321 
 41 
 10771415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lakoff 
 G 
 
 
 Johnson 
 M 
 
 
 Metaphors We Live By 
 1980 
 University of Chicago Press 
 Chicago 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Summerln 
 JL 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 The Talairach Daemon, a database server for Talairach Atlas Labels 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 5 
 S633 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 SS 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Metaphorical vs. literal word meanings: fMRI evidence against a selective role of the right hemisphere 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 29 
 536 
 544 
 16165371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacKay 
 G 
 
 
 Shaw 
 A 
 
 
 A comparative study of figurative language in children with autistic spectrum disorders 
 Child Language Teaching & Therapy 
 2004 
 20 
 13 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mackenzie 
 C 
 
 
 Begg 
 T 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Lees 
 KR 
 
 
 The effects on verbal communication skills of right hemisphere stroke in middle age 
 Aphasiology 
 1997 
 11 
 929 
 945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mackenzie 
 C 
 
 
 Begg 
 T 
 
 
 Lees 
 KR 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 The communication effects of right brain damage on the very old and the not so old 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 1999 
 12 
 79 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Right hemisphere sensitivity to novel metaphoric relations: application of the signal detection theory 
 Brain and Language 
 2008 
 104 
 103 
 112 
 17445878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Processing conventional vs. novel metaphors by the two cerebral hemispheres: Application of principle component analysis to fMRI data 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2005 
 43 
 2084 
 2100 
 16243053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of the neural correlates underlying the processing of novel metaphoric expressions 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 115 
 126 
 16290261 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 An fMRI study of processing novel metaphoric sentences 
 Laterality 
 2008 
 16 
 1 
 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mason 
 RA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 How the brain processes causal inferences in text: A theoretical account of generation and integration component processes utilizing both cerebral hemispheres 
 Psychological Science 
 2004 
 15 
 1 
 7 
 14717824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 A voxel-based morphometry study of semantic dementia: Relationship between temporal lobe atrophy and semantic memory 
 Annals of Neurology 
 2000 
 47 
 36 
 45 
 10632099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nathaniel-James 
 DA 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 The functional anatomy of verbal initiation and suppression using the Hayling Test 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1997 
 35 
 559 
 66 
 9106283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Mintun 
 M 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Positron emission tomographic studies of the cortical anatomy of single-word processing 
 Nature 
 1988 
 331 
 585 
 589 
 3277066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Hyder 
 F 
 
 
 Blamire 
 AM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 RG 
 
 
 FMRI of the prefrontal cortex during overt verbal fluency 
 Neuroreport 
 1997 
 8 
 561 
 565 
 9080448 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pobric 
 G 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Lavidor 
 M 
 
 
 The role of the right cerebral hemisphere in processing novel metaphoric expressions: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 170 
 181 
 17919080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Comparison of spiral-in/out and spiral-out BOLD fMRI at 1.5T and 3T 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 291 
 301 
 14741667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Videen 
 TO 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Pardo 
 JV 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Practice-related changes in human brain functional anatomy during nonmotor learning 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1994 
 4 
 8 
 26 
 8180494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapp 
 AM 
 
 
 Leube 
 DT 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TTJ 
 
 
 Neural correlates of metaphor processing 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2004 
 20 
 395 
 402 
 15268917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapp 
 AM 
 
 
 Leube 
 DT 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TTJ 
 
 
 Laterality in metaphor processing: lack of evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging for the right hemisphere theory 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 142 
 149 
 16677700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rinaldi 
 MC 
 
 
 Marangolo 
 P 
 
 
 Baldassarri 
 F 
 
 
 Metaphor comprehension in right brain-damaged patients with visuo-verbal and verbal material: a dissociation (re)considered 
 Cortex 
 2004 
 40 
 479 
 490 
 15259328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Eliassen 
 J 
 
 
 Blumstein 
 SE 
 
 
 An event related fMRI investigation of implicit semantic priming 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 116 
 1175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rojas 
 DC 
 
 
 Camou 
 SL 
 
 
 Reite 
 ML 
 
 
 Rogers 
 SJ 
 
 
 Planum temporale volume in children and adolescents with autism 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
 2005 
 35 
 479 
 86 
 16134033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roskies 
 AL 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Task-dependent modulation of regions in the left inferior frontal cortex during semantic processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2001 
 13 
 829 
 843 
 11564326 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossell 
 SL 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 The anatomy and time course of semantic priming investigated by fMRIs and ERPs 
 Neuropsycholgia 
 2003 
 41 
 550 
 564 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 GL 
 
 
 DeBuse 
 CJ 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Right hemisphere metaphor processing? Characterizing the lateralization of semantic processes 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 127 
 141 
 17292739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Function magnetic resonance imaging evidence for right-hemisphere involvement in processing unusual semantic relationships 
 Neuropsychology 
 2000 
 14 
 361 
 369 
 10928739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJS 
 
 
 Monitoring and the controlled processing of meaning: Distinct prefrontal systems 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 1 
 10 
 14654452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sotillo 
 M 
 
 
 Carretié 
 L 
 
 
 Hinojosa 
 JA 
 
 
 Tapia 
 M 
 
 
 Mercado 
 F 
 
 
 López-Martín 
 S 
 
 
 Albert 
 J 
 
 
 Neural activity associated with metaphor comprehension: spatial analysis 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 2005 
 373 
 5 
 9 
 15555767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stringaris 
 A 
 
 
 Medford 
 N 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 CV 
 
 
 Brammer 
 JM 
 
 
 David 
 SA 
 
 
 How metaphors influence semantic relatedness judgments: The role of the right frontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 33 
 784 
 793 
 16963282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stringaris 
 AK 
 
 
 Medford 
 NC 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 David 
 AS 
 
 
 Deriving meaning: Distinct neural mechanisms for metaphoric, literal, and non-meaningful sentences 
 Brain & Language 
 2007 
 100 
 150 
 162 
 16165201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 Thieme 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge: a reevaluation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 
 1997 
 94 
 14792 
 14797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tompkins 
 CA 
 
 
 Knowledge and strategies for processing lexical metaphor after right or left hemisphere brain damage 
 Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 
 1990 
 33 
 307 
 316 
 2359271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Wise 
 R 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Functional anatomy of a common semantic system for words and pictures 
 Nature 
 1996 
 383 
 254 
 256 
 8805700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Beaucousin 
 V 
 
 
 Herve 
 PY 
 
 
 Duffau 
 H 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Houde 
 O 
 
 
 
 Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: Phonology, semantics, and sentence processing 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 30 
 1414 
 32 
 16413796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Smith 
 E,E 
 
 
 Neuroimaging studies of working memory: a meta-analysis 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2003 
 3 
 255 
 274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex and recognition memory: Functional MRI evidence for context-dependent retrieval processes 
 Brain 
 1998 
 121 
 1985 
 2002 
 9798751 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Pare-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Clark 
 J 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Recovering meaning, left prefrontal cortex guides controlled semantic retrieval 
 Neuron 
 2001 
 31 
 329 
 338 
 11502262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 Gardner 
 H 
 
 
 The comprehension of metaphor in brain-damaged patients 
 Brain 
 1977 
 100 
 717 
 729 
 608117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Kemeny 
 S 
 
 
 Park 
 G 
 
 
 Frattali 
 C 
 
 
 Braun 
 A 
 
 
 Language in context: Emergent features of word, sentence, and narrative comprehension 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 15 
 1002 
 15 
 15809000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Kasher 
 A 
 
 
 Soroker 
 N 
 
 
 Batori 
 G 
 
 
 Effects of right and left hemisphere damage on performance of the “Right Hemisphere Communication Battery.” 
 Brain & Language 
 2002 
 80 
 510 
 535 
 11896655 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Fig. 1 
 
 Experimental Design 
 For each trial the sentence appeared in the center of the screen for 4800 ms, followed by a blank screen for 200 ms, for a total of 5000 ms per sentence. The 120 sentences were randomly assigned to 20-second blocks of 4 sentences of the same type. Blocks were arranged in pseudo random order with the constraints that there were no more than two consecutive metaphor blocks, literal and non-word blocks were not adjacent, and there were no consecutive blocks of the same metaphor type. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 2 
 
 Primary activations for each of the three principal contrasts in the whole brain analysis. Activations shown at  p  < .001, uncorrected. Brain figures shown in neurological convention (left = left). The primary contrast from the whole brain analysis is listed under each brain area. Each of these areas was then used in a region of interest (ROI) analysis. Additional contrasts that showed significant activation in the ROI analysis are depicted in smaller type below the primary contrast.  Figs. 2A, 2B and 2C. Figurativeness contrast . Selected Metaphor > Literal activations are depicted. Fig. 2A displays the right insula; the left insula was also active for this contrast in the ROI analysis. Figs. 2B and 2C depict the left temporal pole and right inferior frontal gyrus, respectively.  Figs. 2C and 2D. Familiarity contrast . Middle frontal gyrus activation (Fig. 2D) from the Familiar > Unfamiliar contrast. The inferior frontal area (Fig. 2C) also showed activation for this contrast in the ROI analysis.  Figs. 2E and 2F. Difficulty contrast . Left inferior frontal and left middle frontal activations from the Easy (orange; 2F) > Difficult (blue; 2E) contrast. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Metaphor Imaging Literature 
 All known functional neuroimaging studies of metaphor processing published to date. Studies are listed with stimulus types grouped together, based on our reading of each paper. In addition, studies that found activation in right hemisphere areas are listed first (1–8). 
 
 
 
 
 Source 
 Experiment Design 
 Stimuli 
 Main findings 
 
 
 
 
 1.  Bottini et al., 1994 
 n=6, PET, block design 
 Complex sentences:  Novel  metaphors, uncommon literal sentences. 
 Right  frontal and temporal activations for metaphors compared to literal sentences. 
 
 
 2.  Sotillo et al., 2005 
 n=24, ERP LORETA spatial analysis 
 Complex/poetry style phrases:  Spanish  unfamiliar  metaphorical phrase followed by metaphorically related or unrelated word. 
 Higher N400 activation for metaphoric words localized to  right  MTG and STG. 
 
 
 3.  Mashal et al., 2005 
 n=15, 1.5T fMRI block design, principal component analysis 
 Word pairs:  Literal relationship, conventional metaphorical relationship, or  novel  metaphor relationship. 
 Novel metaphor processing: large network including left frontal and temporal areas, and  right  Wernicke's area, precuneus and insula. 
 
 
 4.  Mashal et al., 2007 
 n=15, 1.5T fMRI block design, ROI analysis 
 Word pairs:  Literal relationship, conventional metaphorical relationship, or  novel  metaphor relationship. 
 Bilateral  inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus and superior temporal activations for metaphors, including  right  Wernicke's area. 
 
 
 5.  Arzouan et al., 2007 
 n=29, ERP LORETA spatial analysis 
 Word pairs:  Literal relationship, conventional metaphorical relationship, or  novel  metaphor relationship. 
 Right  temporal and superior frontal involvement in novel metaphor processing. 
 
 
 6.  Pobric et al., 2008 
 n=12, rTMS 
 Word pairs:  Literal relationship, conventional metaphorical relationship, or  novel  metaphor relationship. 
 rTMS of  right  posterior superior temporal sulcus disrupted processing of novel but not conventional metaphors. 
 
 
 7.  Stringaris et al., 2006 
 n=12, 1.5 T fMRI, event related, nonparametric analysis 
 Simple sentence - word combinations:  Conventional metaphors and literal sentences with related or unrelated words as targets. 
 Right  ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activation to target words in the metaphoric but not literal condition. 
 
 
 8.  Ahrens et al., 2007 
 n=8, 1.5TfMRI, block design 
 Simple sentences:  Mandarin Chinese anomalous  ( novel )  and conventional metaphors and literal sentences. 
 Bilateral  middle frontal gyrus and precentral gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus and fusiform,  right  superior frontal gyrus activations for anomalous metaphors compared to literal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9.  Stringaris et al., 2007 
 n=11, 1.5T fMRI, event related, nonparametric analysis 
 Simple sentences:  Conventional  metaphors and literal sentences of the form 'Some X are Y.' 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus and thalamus active for metaphors, no right activation specific to metaphors. 
 
 
 10.  Eviatar & Just, 2006 
 n=16, 3T fMRI event related, ROI 
 Simple Sentences:  Conventional  metaphoric, ironic and literal sentences, following two sentence 'story.' 
 Metaphors recruited mainly LH areas: inferior frontal and inferior temporal. 
 
 
 11.  Rapp et al., 2004 
 n=15, 1.5T fMRI event-related design 
 Simple sentences:  German metaphors and literal sentences with the form an X is a Y, may have been moderately  familiar. 
 Virtually no right hemisphere activations when comparing metaphors to literal sentences or grey screen baseline. 
 
 
 12.  Rapp et al., 2007 
 Reanalysis of  Rapp et al., 2004  data. ROIs subjected to laterality index calculation 
 Simple sentences:  German metaphors and literal sentences with the form an X is a Y, may have been moderately  familiar. 
 No differences in laterality patterns between literal and metaphorical sentences. 
 
 
 13.  Mashal et al., 2008 
 n=14, 1.5T fMRI 
 Sentences:  novel metaphors, literal sentences, and unfamiliar nonsensical sentences. 
 Stronger left dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior middle temporal activation for novel metaphors than for literal and nonsensical sentences. 
 
 
 14.  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 
 n=12, 3T fMRI 
 Word triads:  Literal relationship or  conventional  metaphorical relationship. 
 Only left prefrontal and tempo-parietal activations, no right activations for metaphorical relationships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Right hemisphere task attributions by area in a sampling of imaging studies 
 A sample of studies was selected, all of which employed some type of linguistic task. These studies demonstrate the fact that the right hemisphere is recruited for tasks of higher difficulty, as indexed by response time, since each task that recruited the RH had slower response times. 
 
 
 
 
 RH Area 
 Task 
 Reference 
 
 
 
 
 Superior Frontal 
 semantic decision for degraded > clear auditory stimuli 
 
 Sharp et al., 2004 
 
 
 
 
 unusual verb generation > first verb to come to mind 
 
 Seger et al., 2000 
 
 
 
 
 incorrect > correct stimuli in lexical decision 
 
 Rissman et al., 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle/ Inferior Frontal 
 unrelated > related stimuli in lexical decision 
 
 Rissman et al., 2003 
 
 
 
 
 incorrect > correct stimuli in lexical decision 
 
 Rissman et al., 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate 
 generate > read (sentence ending in low cloze word) 
 
 Kircher et al., 2001 
 
 
 
 
 synonym > rhyme judgment 
 
 Roskies, et al., 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Superior/Middle Temporal 
 decide or generate > read (sentence ending) 
 
 Kircher et al., 2001 
 
 
 
 
 synonym > rhyme judgment 
 
 Roskies, et al., 2001 
 
 
 
 
 unusual verb generation > first verb to come to mind 
 
 Seger et al., 2000 
 
 
 
 
 unrelated > related stimuli in lexical decision at long SOA 
 
 Rossell et al., 2003 
 
 
 
 
 lexical decision > tone decision 
 
 Rissman et al., 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Sample Stimuli 
 
 
 
 
 Stimulus Category 
 Sentence 
 
 
 
 
 Pronounceable nonword sentences 
 Sla inseriot rull hake slub fuggler. 
 
 
 
 Erents hust fress ut hegrets. 
 
 
 Literal sentences 
 The computers at my house are new. 
 
 
 
 All his money is from the lottery. 
 
 
 
 The mirror is through that doorway. 
 
 
 
 Many newspapers are successful. 
 
 
 Easy-Familiar metaphors 
 Freedom is a breath of fresh air. 
 
 
 
 Respect is a precious gem. 
 
 
 
 Books are treasure chests of information. 
 
 
 
 A pond is nature's mirror. 
 
 
 Easy-Unfamiliar metaphors 
 A shadow is a piece of night. 
 
 
 
 The dog's stomach is his master's alarm clock. 
 
 
 
 Dictionaries are microscopes of words. 
 
 
 
 Ritual is the prison of individuality. 
 
 
 Difficult-Unfamiliar metaphors 
 Political success is a house of cards. 
 
 
 
 A smile is an ambassador. 
 
 
 
 Skyscrapers are honeycombs for glass. 
 
 
 
 The waltz is the nightingale of dance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Whole Brain Analysis 
 All activations for the three contrasts that are significant at t = 4.5, p < .001, uncorrected are depicted.. Areas identified in the whole brain analysis that are also listed as findings in the metaphor processing literature were subsequently selected as ROIs. These are listed in the  References  column and listed at the bottom of the table. Activations used as ROIs are indicated in  bold  typeface. BA = Brodmann area, x, y, z = coordinates from the atlas of  Talairach and Tournoux (1988) , R= right hemisphere, L = left hemisphere. 
 
 
 
 
 Activated Brain Area 
 BA 
 # Voxels 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Sentences (Literal, Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar, Difficult-Unfamiliar) > Nonword Sentences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus to insula 
 46–13 
 4140 
 −34 
 18 
 13 
 
 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 - 
 201 
 27 
 −3 
 24 
 
 
 
 L hippocampus 
 
 92 
 −34 
 −10 
 −13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Literal Sentences > Metaphors (Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar, Difficult-Unfamiliar) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 no significant activations at p < .001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metaphors (Easy-Familiar, Easy-Unfamiliar, Difficult-Unfamiliar) > Literal Sentences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L precentral gyrus 
 4 
 251 
 −64 
 −8 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 R insula 
 
 
 13 
 
 
 160 
 
 
 36 
 
 − 4 
 
 8 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 L temporal pole 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 367 
 
 − 57 
 
 21 
 
 − 9 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 L inferior parietal lobe 
 - 
 105 
 −42 
 −38 
 27 
 
 
 
 R precuneus 
 7 
 155 
 13 
 −51 
 40 
 
 
 
 L lingual gyrus 
 18 
 915 
 −18 
 −72 
 −1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Literal Sentences > Easy-Familiar Metaphors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 no significant activations at p < .001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Easy-Familiar Metaphors > Literal Sentences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R precuneus 
 7 
 37 
 6 
 −65 
 34 
 
 
 
 L precentral gyrus 
 3 
 300 
 −64 
 −9 
 24 
 
 
 
 L precuneus 
 18 
 1042 
 −13 
 −78 
 22 
 
 
 
 R cuneus 
 18 
 197 
 15 
 −85 
 22 
 
 
 
 L posterior cingulate 
 30 
 27 
 −24 
 −65 
 13 
 
 
 
 L middle occipital gyrus 
 18 
 15 
 −31 
 −80 
 7 
 
 
 
 L lingual gyrus 
 18/19 
 570 
 −27 
 −73 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 R inferior frontal gyrus BA47 
 
 
 47 
 
 
 302 
 
 
 60 
 
 
 28 
 
 − 4 
 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 
 
 
 L fusiform/lingual gyrus 
 19 
 23 
 −29 
 −61 
 −4 
 
 
 
 L parahippocampal gyrus 
 35 
 89 
 −15 
 −32 
 −10 
 
 
 
 R inferior frontal gyrus 
 47 
 15 
 14 
 12 
 −26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Familiar Metaphors (Easy-Familiar) > Unfamiliar Metaphors (Easy-Unfamiliar) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus BA8 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 170 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 38 
 
 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 
 
 
 L middle occipital gyrus 
 18 
 52 
 −29 
 −99 
 7 
 
 
 
 L middle occipital gyrus 
 18 
 276 
 −24 
 −89 
 2 
 
 
 
 R occipital lobe 
 
 13 
 25 
 −52 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Unfamiliar Metaphors (Easy-Unfamiliar)> Familiar Metaphors (Easy-Familiar) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L cingulate gyrus 
 24 
 28 
 −12 
 −11 
 30 
 
 
 
 L hippocampus 
 - 
 23 
 −29 
 −36 
 −2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Easy Metaphors (Easy-Unfamiliar) > Difficult Metaphors (Difficult-Unfamiliar) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L precuneus 
 7 
 47 
 −24 
 −54 
 49 
 
 
 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus BA46 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 597 
 
 − 46 
 
 37 
 
 
 22 
 
 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 
 
 
 L/R anterior cingulate 
 24 
 519 
 1 
 20 
 18 
 
 
 
 L anterior cingulate 
 24 
 36 
 −5 
 30 
 17 
 
 
 
 L anterior cingulate 
 32 
 2466 
 −10 
 40 
 3 
 
 
 
 L caudate head 
 - 
 748 
 −15 
 19 
 5 
 
 
 
 R anterior cingulate 
 32 
 827 
 17 
 34 
 1 
 
 
 
 L putamen 
 - 
 1378 
 −28 
 0 
 −6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Difficult Metaphors (Difficult-Unfamiliar) > Easy Metaphors (Easy-Unfamiliar) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L superior parietal lobe 
 7 
 52 
 −33 
 −73 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus BA9 
 
 
 9 
 
 
 31 
 
 − 65 
 
 11 
 
 
 34 
 
 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 Bottini et al., 1994 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 Rapp et al., 2004 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 Mashal et al., 2005 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 Mashal et al., 2007 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 Lee & Dapretto, 2006 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 Stringaris et al., 2007 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 Ahrens et al., 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
