
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 NeuroImage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 20006716 
 2827259 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.011 
 NIHMS165820 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 Catie 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 Gary H. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 1  Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 
 2  Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 
 
 Address for Correspondence: Catie Chang, Lucas MRI/S Center, MC 5488, 1201 Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305-5488, Tel: 1-650-725-8432, Fax: 1-650-723-5795,  catie@stanford.edu 
 
 
 23 
 12 
 2009 
 
 
 16 
 12 
 2009 
 
 
 3 
 2010 
 
 
 1 
 3 
 2011 
 
 50 
 1 
 81 
 98 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Most studies of resting-state functional connectivity using fMRI employ methods that assume temporal stationarity, such as correlation and data-driven decompositions computed across the duration of the scan. However, evidence from both task-based fMRI studies and animal electrophysiology suggests that functional connectivity may exhibit dynamic changes within time scales of seconds to minutes. In the present study, we investigated the dynamic behavior of resting-state connectivity across the course of a single scan, performing a time-frequency coherence analysis based on the wavelet transform. We focused on the connectivity of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), a primary node of the default-mode network, examining its relationship with both the “anticorrelated” (“task-positive”) network as well as other nodes of the default-mode network. It was observed that coherence and phase between the PCC and the anticorrelated network was variable in time and frequency, and statistical testing based on Monte Carlo simulations revealed the presence of significant scale-dependent temporal variability. In addition, a sliding-window correlation procedure identified other regions across the brain that exhibited variable connectivity with the PCC across the scan, which included areas previously implicated in attention and salience processing. Although it is unclear whether the observed coherence and phase variability can be attributed to residual noise or modulation of cognitive state, the present results illustrate that resting-state functional connectivity is not static, and it may therefore prove valuable to consider measures of variability, in addition to average quantities, when characterizing resting-state networks. 
 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 resting state 
 networks 
 wavelets 
 dynamics 
 negative correlations 
 spontaneous activity 
 functional connectivity 
 default mode network 
 nonstationarity 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Studies of the human brain using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have revealed collections of distributed regions that exhibit low-frequency, temporally correlated BOLD signal fluctuations in the absence of an explicit task (resting state). Remarkably, these “resting-state networks” tend to comprise regions that are co-activated during tasks and are observed with consistency across subjects and scanning sessions ( Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  De Luca et al., 2006 ;  Shehzad et al., 2009 ), suggesting a general principle of functional organization. In recent years, a large number of studies have emerged in an effort to understand the purpose of resting-state networks in subserving cognitive function or basic brain physiology (for reviews, see ( Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ;  Fox and Raichle, 2007 )). 
 Currently, the analysis of resting-state networks across a single scanning session typically employs techniques that assume temporal stationarity: measures of linear dependence are computed over the entire scan and used to characterize the strength of connections across regions. Popular methods include seed-based region-of-interest (ROI) analysis, in which the time series of an ROI is used as a regressor to query regions of similar temporal behavior across the brain ( Biswal et al., 1995 ;  Greicius et al., 2003 ;  Lowe et al., 1998 ), and independent component analysis ( Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Kiviniemi et al., 2003 ;  McKeown et al., 1998 ), which is a model-free approach for identifying spatial regions with temporally coordinated activity. Other methods for characterizing resting-state networks include partial correlation ( Fransson and Marrelec, 2008 ), coherence and partial coherence ( Salvador et al., 2005 ), phase relationships ( Sun et al., 2005 ), clustering ( Cordes et al., 2002 ;  Mezer et al., 2009 ), and graph theory ( Achard et al., 2006 ;  Dosenbach et al., 2007 ). 
 Previous studies have demonstrated dynamic changes in network connectivity throughout development ( Fair et al., 2008 ;  Supekar et al., 2009 ), aging ( Beason-Held et al., 2009 ), visual state ( Bianciardi et al., 2009 ) and as a function of conscious awareness ( Greicius et al., 2008 ;  Horovitz et al., 2009 ;  Martuzzi et al., 2009 ;  Picchioni et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, there is evidence that inter-regional correlations can be modulated by cognitive processes that occur on time-scales of a typical (several-minute) scan. Task-based studies have revealed that attention ( Esposito et al., 2006 ;  Fransson, 2006 ), learning ( Sun et al., 2007 ), and muscle fatigue ( Deshpande et al., 2006 ) can effect changes in low-frequency dynamics and/or connectivity throughout the performance of the task and in subsequent resting-state scans ( Barnes et al., 2009 ;  Duff et al., 2008 ;  Waites et al., 2005 ). Because the resting state is a condition of undirected wakefulness that may encompass varying levels of attention, mind-wandering, and arousal, one may hypothesize that the connectivity between and within networks may undergo substantial changes across the duration of a scan. 
 The aim of the present study was to investigate the temporal dynamics of connectivity between nodes of resting-state networks within the course of a 12- or 15-minute scanning session. Here, we focus specifically on the default-mode network (DMN) and regions with which it has negative correlations (the “anticorrelated” network, also referred to as the “task-positive” or “executive-control” network) ( Fox et al., 2005 ;  Fransson, 2005 ;  Greicius et al., 2003 ). These networks, comprised of spatially distinct brain regions, have been shown to have negative correlations in the resting state, a finding that mirrors the opposing signal changes displayed by the two networks during controlled tasks ( Toro et al., 2008 ) and which may emerge in simulated cortical networks ( Deco et al., 2009 ). However, compared with the positive correlations exhibited between nodes within the same network, the magnitude of negative correlations between the two networks have been reported to be weaker and much less consistent ( Shehzad et al., 2009 ), particularly without the controversial processing step of global signal removal ( Chang and Glover, 2009 ;  Fox et al., 2009 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ). 
 A possible explanation for the relative weakness of negative correlations is that the presence of common noise across the brain, such as that due to respiration and cardiac processes ( Birn et al., 2006 ;  Chang et al., 2009 ;  Shmueli et al., 2007 ;  Wise et al., 2004 ), biases inter-regional correlation coefficients in the positive direction. A second possibility is that the phase difference between the two networks is variable in time, driven perhaps by cognitive state. Using local field potentials recorded in the feline homologues of the DMN and its anticorrelated network, ( Popa et al., 2009 ) found variable phase differences between gamma power fluctuations of the two networks wherein negative correlations were more frequent during waking and REM sleep compared to slow-wave sleep. 
 As previous fMRI studies of temporal relationships between the DMN and its anticorrelated network have computed correlation coefficients across all time points in the scan, the observed relative weakness of the negative correlations raises a number of interesting questions. For instance, to what extent, and at what frequencies, do the magnitude and the phase relationships between the networks fluctuate over time? Are negative correlations between the two networks consistently weak, or marked by transient periods of strong negative correlation? 
 In the current study, we apply a time-frequency analysis -- in particular, wavelet transform coherence -- to examine temporal variability in the relationship between nodes of the DMN and its anticorrelated network. Time-frequency methods are popular in the analysis of EEG, MEG, and electrophysiological data (e.g. see ( Le Van Quyen and Bragin, 2007 ;  Mitra and Pesaran, 1999 ;  Roach and Mathalon, 2008 )). Wavelet transform coherence has previously been applied to the analysis of neural signals using spike trains and EEG (e.g. ( Klein et al., 2006 ;  Li et al., 2007 ;  Zhan et al., 2006 ) and to fMRI data to study the temporal variability in the phase relationships between different brain regions in a visual task ( Muller et al., 2004 ), and to study resting-state network nodes throughout the course of a working-memory task ( Almeida et al., 2007 ). In addition, to explore regions of the brain having potentially interesting dynamic connectivity with the default-mode network, a whole-brain sliding correlation analysis was applied and regions with large temporal variability in connectivity were identified. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Data acquisition and standard processing 
 
 Subjects 
 Participants included 12 healthy adults (6 female, aged 27.7 ± 12.4 yrs) recruited from the Stanford University community. All subjects provided written, informed consent, and all protocols were approved by the Stanford Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
 Imaging parameters 
 Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 3.0 T using GE whole-body scanners (GE Healthcare Systems, Milwaukee, WI). Four of the 12 subjects (those henceforth labeled as Subjects 1–4) were scanned on a GE Signa HDX (rev. 12M5) using a custom quadrature birdcage head coil, while the remaining 8 subjects were scanned on a GE Signa 750 (rev. 20M3) using an 8-channel head coil. Head movement was minimized with a bite bar. Thirty oblique axial slices were obtained parallel to the AC-PC with 4-mm slice thickness, 1-mm skip. T2-weighted fast spin echo structural images (TR = 3000 ms, TE = 68 ms, ETL = 12, FOV = 22 cm, matrix 192 × 256) were acquired for anatomical reference. A T2*-sensitive gradient echo spiral-in/out pulse sequence ( Glover and Lai, 1998 ;  Glover and Law, 2001 ) was used for functional imaging (TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 77°, matrix 64 × 64, FOV = 22 cm, same slice prescription as the anatomic images). A high-order shimming procedure was used to reduce B0 heterogeneity prior to the functional scans ( Kim et al., 2002 ). Importantly, a frequency navigation correction was employed during reconstruction of each image to eliminate blurring from breathing-induced changes in magnetic field; no bulk mis-registration occurs from off-resonance in spiral imaging ( Pfeuffer et al., 2002 ). 
 
 
 Resting state scan 
 All subjects underwent a resting state scan, for which they were instructed only to keep their eyes closed and remain awake. For 5 of the subjects, the duration of the scan was 12 min; for 6 subjects, the total scan duration was 16 min, from which the latter 15 min were extracted for analysis. This is because subjects had been cued to perform a single 10s breath hold at the beginning of the scan as part of a separate study, and breath-holding has been shown to affect the BOLD signal for approximately 40 s ( Birn et al., 2008 ). One subject was scanned for 16 min without performing the initial BH, but only 12 min was used for analysis due to excessive motion during the final minutes of the scan, despite the bite bar. 
 
 
 Physiological monitoring 
 Cardiac and respiratory processes were monitored using the scanner s built-in photoplethysmograph placed on a finger of the left hand and a pneumatic belt strapped around the upper abdomen, respectively. Cardiac and respiratory data were both sampled at 40 Hz on the Signa HDX, and at 100 Hz and 25 Hz, respectively, on the Signa 750. A file containing cardiac trigger times and respiratory waveforms was generated for each scan by the scanner’s software. 
 
 
 fMRI pre-processing and physiological noise reduction 
 Functional images were pre-processed using custom C and Matlab routines. The first 5 time frames were discarded to allow the MR signal to achieve T1 equilibration. Preprocessing included slice-timing correction using sinc interpolation, spatial smoothing with a 3D Gaussian kernel (FWHM=5 mm), and removal of linear and quadratic temporal trends. No additional temporal band-pass filtering was performed. Images were corrected for physiological noise by (1) applying RETROICOR ( Glover et al., 2000 ) for the removal of time-locked cardiac and respiratory artifacts, and (2) filtering of low-frequency respiratory volume and heart rate effects using methods (“RVHRCOR”) described in ( Chang and Glover, 2009 ). The time series of ROIs in the white matter and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and 6 affine motion parameters were also regressed out of the data. The white matter and CSF ROIs were 3mm-radius spheres centered at MNI coordinates (26,−12,35) and (19, −33, 18), reverse-normalized to each subject s brain (described below), and are identical to those used in ( Chang and Glover, 2009 ). Importantly, global signal removal was  not  performed, as it is known to falsely increase anticorrelations between time series ( Murphy et al., 2009 ). Motion parameters were calculated using methods described in ( Friston et al., 1996 ). 
 
 
 Normalization and Group analysis 
 Unless otherwise mentioned, analyses were performed in native subject space. ROIs at specific standard coordinates were defined in MNI space using MarsBar ( http://marsbar.sourceforge.net ) and reverse-normalized to each subject s mean functional image using SPM5 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). To examine results at the group level, the relevant single-subject images were normalized to the SPM5 EPI template and entered into a group-level random-effects analysis using SPM5. A nuisance factor of “scanner” was included since subjects had been scanned on 1 of 2 different scanners. Single-subject correlation maps were converted to Fisher z-statistics prior to group analysis using the formula 
 z = tanh − 1 ( r ) · N − 3 , where  r  is the correlation coefficient and  N  is the number of time points. All coordinates are reported in MNI space, and all figures of group-level activation appear in neurological convention, superimposed on the ch2 template from the MRIcron software ( http://www.mricron.com ). 
 
 
 
 Defining network regions of interest 
 
 Default-mode and “anticorrelated” network 
 A region in the posterior cingulate (3mm-radius sphere, centered at (x = −6, y = −58, z = 28)) was selected as the primary ROI for the default-mode network. This region corresponds to a peak coordinate in a meta-analysis of task-based coactivation with DMN regions ( Toro et al., 2008 ), and has been shown to display resting-state connectivity with other DMN regions with high test-retest reliability ( Shehzad et al., 2009 ). To examine the set of voxels with similar temporal behavior across the entire duration of the scan, the Pearson correlation coefficient was computed between the full time series of the PCC ROI and that of every other voxel in the brain. It was verified that the PCC ROI exhibited strong correlations with high specificity, at both the individual and group level ( Fig. 1 ), with other regions reported to be involved in the DMN. 
 One objective of the current study is to examine the dynamic behavior of regions that are most strongly and consistently negatively correlated with the DMN. Because having a large magnitude of overall negative or positive correlation implies small variability of correlation across time, the degree of coupling between these regions and the DMN over time may be considered to yield an upper bound on the stationarity, or constant nature, of negative correlations within the current dataset. Accordingly, regions demonstrating strong negative correlations with the DMN were identified with the following approach. First, single-subject correlation maps with the PCC ROI (computed across all time points, as described above) were entered into a group-level analysis. The resulting (negative) contrast map was thresholded at p<0.01 uncorrected ( t >2.76), and bilateral clusters in the supramarginal gyrus (SMG), dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and insula were extracted ( Table 1 ). These 6 clusters were reverse-normalized to each subject, and – within each cluster – the voxel having the maximum negative correlation with the PCC across the entire scan was identified. Spheres of 3mm-radius were then drawn around each such voxel, yielding 6 subject-specific “anticorrelated” ROIs. 
 The above procedure aims to maximize the sensitivity of selecting voxels having negative correlation with the PCC, while maintaining anatomical constraints such that results may be compared between subjects and across different brain regions. Two alternative approaches – selecting the peak coordinate of the group analysis to be the same ROI for all subjects, or using independent coordinates from the literature – were not found to yield the strongest negative correlations for all subjects. 
 For comparison, regions with the strongest positive correlation were defined in a similar manner. The most significant clusters ( Table 1 ), occurring in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and the left and right angular gyri, were extracted by thresholding the positive contrast of the group-level analysis at  t >8 (this threshold is more stringent than that used for negative clusters due to the very large cluster sizes). These 3 clusters were reverse-normalized to each subject, and voxels having maximum  positive  correlation with the PCC across the entire scan within each cluster were used to define 3 subject-specific 3mm-radius “default-mode” ROIs. 
 
 
 Detecting regions with variable default-mode connectivity 
 In addition to examining the dynamics of regions having the most consistent positive and negative correlations with the PCC, regions of the brain demonstrating  variable  correlations with the PCC were queried. For each subject, a whole-brain sliding-window correlation analysis (further described below) was performed against the time series of the PCC ROI. Window sizes of both 2 min and 4 min (60 and 120 time frames, respectively) were used. For each voxel, the standard deviation of its sequence of sliding-window correlation coefficients across the scan was computed. Maps were created to depict the standard deviation values across the brain for each subject, and a group analysis was performed by averaging the spatially-normalized single-subject maps. 
 
 
 
 Dynamic analysis methods 
 
 Wavelet transform coherence 
 Wavelet transform coherence (WTC) is a method for analyzing the coherence and phase lag between two time series as a function of both time and frequency ( Torrence and Compo, 1998 ), and is therefore well-suited to investigating nonstationary changes in coupling between fMRI time series. WTC is based on the continuous wavelet transform, which decomposes a single time series into time-frequency space by successively convolving the time series with scaled and translated versions of a wavelet function  ψ 0  ( Mallat, 1999 ). The continuous wavelet transform of a time series  x n  of length N, sampled from an underlying continuous waveform at equal time steps of size Δ t , is defined as: 
 (1) W X ( n , s ) = Δ t s ∑ n ′ = 1 N x n ψ 0 ∗ [ ( n ′ − n ) ( Δ t s ) ] ,  where  n  is a time index and  s  denotes the wavelet scale. The function  ψ 0  is chosen to be the complex Morlet wavelet: 
 ψ 0 ( η ) = π − 1 / 4 e i ω 0 η e − η 2 / 2 ,  where the parameter  ω 0  governs the relative time and frequency resolution; here,  ω 0 = 6, which has been shown to provide a good trade-off between time and frequency localization ( Grinsted et al., 2004 ;  Muller et al., 2004 ). For the Morlet wavelet with  ω 0 = 6, the Fourier period ( T ) associated with scale  s  is approximately equal to the value of  s  ( T  = 1.03 s ). Note that  ψ 0  is normalized to unit energy at each scale in  Eq. 1 , so that the wavelet transforms at each scale are directly comparable. 
 The wavelet transform  W  X  ( n , s ) is a complex quantity whose modulus expresses the amount of power in  x  as a function of time and frequency (scale), and whose angle represents the local phase. Similarly, the cross-wavelet transform can be defined for two time series as: 
 W X Y ( n , s ) = W X ( n , s ) W Y ∗ ( n , s ) ,  whose modulus | W  XY  ( n , s )|, known as the  cross-wavelet power , expresses the amount of joint power between  x  and  y  as a function of time and frequency, and whose angle tan −1 (Im{  W  XY  ( n , s )}/Re{ W  XY  ( n , s )) ( cross-wavelet phase ) describes their relative phase. Following ( Torrence and Webster, 1999 ), the wavelet transform coherence is defined as 
 
 (2) R 2 ( n , s ) = | 〈 s − 1 W X Y ( n , s ) 〉 | 2 | 〈 s − 1 | W X ( n , s ) | 〉 | 2 | 〈 s − 1 | W Y ( n , s ) | 〉 | 2 ,  which reveals localized regions of phase-locked behavior. R 2  ranges between 0 and 1, and can be conceptualized as a localized correlation coefficient in time and frequency space ( Grinsted et al., 2004 ). The brackets 〈·〉 indicate smoothing in both time and scale: the filter for temporal smoothing is a Gaussian function, which is matched to the Morlet wavelet; the scale smoothing is a boxcar filter (for further discussion, see ( Torrence and Webster, 1999 )). Implementation of the WTC and cross-wavelet transform was based on a library of MATLAB functions provided by Grinsted et al. ( http://www.pol.ac.uk/home/research/waveletcoherence/ ). 
 
 
 Illustrative example 
 An example of the cross-wavelet power and WTC for simulated time series is shown in  Fig. 2 . The 2 simulated time series consist of negatively-correlated sinusoids with variable frequency ( f =1/16 Hz for 0<t<200 sec,  f =1/32 Hz for 200<t<400 sec, and  f =1/96 Hz for 400<t<720 sec), embedded in additive independent Gaussian noise with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 1.25. Time is plotted on the x-axis, scale (which has been converted to its equivalent Fourier period) is on the y-axis. For the cross-wavelet power, the color scale represents the normalized log-spectrum (
 log 2 | W X Y σ x σ y | ) and in the CWT plot, the color scale represents the magnitude of coherence (R 2 ;  Eq. 2 ). The phase angle between the 2 time series at particular samples of the time-frequency plane is indicated by an arrow: a rightward-pointing arrow indicates that the time series are in phase, or positively correlated (φ = 0); a leftward-pointing arrow indicates anticorrelation (φ=π), and the downward- and upward-pointing arrows indicate phase angles of π/2 and −π/2, respectively. Areas inside the “cone of influence”, which are locations in the time-frequency plane where edge-effects give rise to lower confidence in the computed values, are shown in faded color outside of the conical contour. At longer Fourier periods, more time points are included in the cone of influence since wavelets at larger scales have substantial energy over a time window whose length approaches the total length of the data record. Note that due to the smoothing necessary for the WTC, there is poorer time and frequency resolution in the WTC relative to the cross-wavelet power. 
 
 
 Significance testing of wavelet transform coherence variability 
 It is of interest to know whether the observed pattern of coherence over time between brain regions exhibits significantly greater temporal variability than would be expected if the underlying relationship between the two signals were stationary (time-invariant). To this end, statistical testing of WTC temporal variability was performed using a Monte Carlo procedure based on time-series bootstrapping ( Efron and Tibshirani, 1986 ), described as follows. 
 Let  x  and  y  represent the BOLD signal time series from 2 different ROIs. We first fit a (stationary) vector autoregressive (VAR) model to  x  and  y: 
 (3) { x ( t ) = ∑ i = 1 p a i x x ( t − i ) + ∑ i = 1 p b i x y ( t − i ) + u x ( t ) y ( t ) = ∑ i = 1 p a i y x ( t − i ) + ∑ i = 1 p b i y y ( t − i ) + u y ( t ) ,  where the optimal model order  p  is chosen according to the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) score, and  t  is a time index. Coefficients of the VAR model are estimated using least squares. Secondly, we generate 1000 bootstrap time series pairs having the same VAR coefficients (i.e. same stationary relationship) as  Eq. 3 ; see  Appendix A  for further detail concerning the generation of bootstrap samples. For each bootstrap time series pair, the WTC is computed, yielding both a coherence magnitude (R 2 b (n,s)) and phase (φ b (n,s)) which can be represented together as the complex quantity 
 WTC b ( n , s ) = R b 2 ( n , s ) · e i φ b ( n , s ) , where n denotes time, s denotes scale, and b denotes the bootstrap iteration. A measure of  temporal  variability at each scale  s  is computed on WTC b (n,s) (i.e. for each row in the WTC matrix). Specifically, we define the variability at scale s to be σ b 2 (s) =  var (WTC b (n,s)), where the function  var (z) = <(z−μ z )(z−μ z )*> is the sample variance over a set of complex values (brackets <·> denote the sample mean, * denotes complex conjugate, and μ z  = <z>). By storing σ b 2 (s) for each of the 1000 bootstrap samples, we obtain a null distribution for the complex variance at each scale of the WTC, which can be used to obtain confidence intervals and  p -values for the WTC of real data (σ 2 (s)). We have treated each wavelet scale independently because the smoothness characteristics of the WTC are scale-dependent. Note that throughout this procedure, only WTC indices outside the cone of influence (i.e. those less susceptible to edge-effects) are considered. 
 
 
 Significance testing of wavelet transform coherence magnitude 
 Statistical significance of WTC magnitude (R 2 (n,s)) is estimated using a similar Monte Carlo approach. An autoregressive process of order  p  was fit to each input pair of time series ( x  and  y ), and a large number (here, 300) of bootstrapped time series pairs with the same AR coefficients and model order as  x  and  y  were generated. For each bootstrapped pair, one can calculate the WTC and estimate a null distribution for each scale, from which significance levels are derived. Unlike the above case, which involves testing for significant temporal  variation  in the WTC, here we are testing for significant coherence  magnitude , and thus we do not model AR dependences between the surrogate time series pairs (as the null hypothesis is that a given coherence magnitude can arise between independently-generated processes). The model order for each time series was determined according to the BIC score. 
 
 
 Sliding window correlation analysis 
 The sliding-window correlation between two time series ( x  and  y ) is defined as 
 ρ ( t ) = corr ( x t t + w − 1 , y t t + w − 1 ) , where  w  is the window size, 
 x t t + w − 1  and 
 y t t + w − 1  denote the portion of the time series from time  t  to  t+w − 1 , and  corr( )  denotes computation of the correlation coefficient. Sliding window correlation was performed to complement the wavelet coherence analysis and investigate the variability of correlations across the scan. Whole-brain sliding window calculations were implemented in C. 
 
 
 
 Analysis of potential confounds 
 
 Relationship between motion and variable connectivity 
 Although motion parameters are regressed out of the data as a pre-processing step, it is still possible that intermittent motion may contribute to any observed nonstationarity in the relationship between BOLD signal time series. We thus tested for relationships between motion and correlation variability on both an inter- and intra-subject basis. 
 Each subject s sequence of 6 rigid-body motion parameters across the scan was converted into two summary measures: (1) maximum drift (peak-to-peak excursion) and (2) maximum root-mean-square (RMS) fluctuation, where the maximum was taken across all 6 parameters. The Pearson correlation coefficient was used to compare, on an inter-subject basis, each of the two motion statistics with each of two different measures of connectivity variability between the PCC and anticorrelated ROIs: (1) the standard deviation of the 2-min sliding-window correlation coefficients and (2) the variance of the WTC at each wavelet scale (σ 2 (s), defined above). To examine the relationship between motion and connectivity variability on an intra-subject (intra-scan) basis, we partitioned the scan into non-overlapping time intervals of length 20 frames and calculated the fluctuation across motion parameters for each interval; more precisely, the motion fluctuation for the  k th  interval (having time points t k ….t k+20−1 ) was defined as 
 M k = ∑ j = 1 6 ∑ t = t k t k + 20 − 1 ( m j ( t ) − m ¯ j , k ) 2 , where  m j  is the  j th  motion parameter and  m̄ j , k  is the mean of  m j  within the  k th  interval. We then calculated the fluctuation across the sliding-window correlation coefficients that were temporally aligned with the same non-overlapping intervals used in the calculation of M k ; i.e., connectivity fluctuation associated with the for the  k th  interval was defined as 
 V k = ∑ r = 1 6 ∑ t = t k t k + 20 − 1 ( ρ r ( t ) − ρ ¯ r , k ) 2 , where  ρ r ( t ) is the sliding-window correlation coefficient (formula provided above) between the PCC and the  r th  anticorrelated ROI ( r  ranges over A1,…A6 in  Table 1 ), and  ρ̄ r , k  is the mean of  ρ r  within the  k th  interval. The resulting sequence M k  of motion-based deviations were then compared to the sequence V k  of connectivity-based deviations using Pearson correlation. Note that non-overlapping time intervals were used in order to minimize autocorrelations between the observations. Note also that V k  represents a longer effective time window than M k , as each  ρ ( t ) already integrates over a window of data in order to estimate a connectivity value, so this analysis in effect tests whether motion has an influence on the subsequent evolution of correlation variability. Sliding window sizes of both 40 s and 2 min were examined. 
 
 
 Effects of scanner and breath-holding 
 Inter-subject differences in connectivity variability across subjects may also relate to differences in the scanner used (Signa HDX vs. Signa 750) or the performance of the initial 10-s breath hold (BH) by a subset of subjects. We hypothesized that because the BOLD-signal response to a single deep breath is well-modeled by a function that decays to 0 after approximately 40 s ( Birn et al., 2008 ), then discarding the first 1 min of data would largely remove the effects of the BH. However, the effect of a brief BH on longer-term correlation dynamics has not yet been studied, and it has been reported that more extreme challenges (e.g. ( Kiviniemi et al., 2009 ), who used 2-min of hyperventilation) can alter the dynamic properties of individual BOLD time series. We compared connectivity variability between the 6 “non-BH” subjects and 6 “BH” subjects, where a measure of connectivity variability for each subject was obtained by taking the variance over the sequence of 2-min sliding-window correlation coefficients between the PCC and each of the 6 anticorrelated ROIs over 12 min of data, and summing the resulting variance across the 6 ROI pairs (similar to the above test for the influence of motion). Measures from the BH and non-BH groups were compared using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test, both with and without covarying for motion (maximum drift and RMS fluctuation) and scanner. Differences between subjects scanned at the Signa HDX and those scanned on the Signa 750 were queried using the same procedure. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Default-mode network and anticorrelations 
 Figure 1  shows group-level  t -maps of positive and negative correlation with the PCC ROI, where correlations for each subject were taken over all time points. The maps in  Fig. 1  are displayed at a threshold identical to that used for obtaining the default-mode and anticorrelated clusters used as masks for deriving the subject-specific ROIs. Cluster locations (centroids and Brodmann areas) are provided in  Table 1 . The correlation coefficient (over all time points) between the PCC ROI and the subject-specific ROIs within the default-mode and anticorrelated clusters are provided in  Table 2 . Negative correlations with the anticorrelated network were weaker than positive correlations within the DMN, having across-subject mean values ranging from −0.26 (L. insula) to −0.40 (L. and R. SMG); those of the positive correlations ranged from 0.78 (R. angular gyrus) to 0.82 (MPFC). 
 
 
 Wavelet coherence between default-mode and anticorrelated ROIs 
 The wavelet transform coherence was computed between the PCC ROI and each of the 6 anti-correlated ROIs and 3 default-mode ROIs. Results of the WTC analysis for anticorrelated ROIs in the right SMG, right insula, and right DLPFC are shown in  Fig. 3  for 6 subjects (see  supplementary Fig. S1  for all subjects). Also shown are the WTC results between the PCC ROI and the 3 ROIs of the default-mode network ( Fig. 4 ; see  supplementary Fig. S2  for all subjects). The WTC maps of  Figs. 3  and  4  are of a similar format as  Fig. 2 . however, for ease of visualization, only pixels whose coherence magnitude exceeds a 95% significance threshold are shown, and discrete ranges of the coherence phase are color-coded as indicated in the figure. 
 Figures 3  demonstrates that the anticorrelated ROIs exhibit considerable modulation of coherence across the time-frequency plane and that significant coherence was often focal in time, information that would be lost if performing a single (stationary) Fourier coherence analysis across the entire time series. The degree to which coherence varied over time was not uniform across subjects, as some subjects (e.g. Subject 8) showed more persistent significant negative correlations than others (e.g. Subject 12). On the other hand, positive correlations were more widespread for all subjects, as shown in  Fig. 4 . We note that using the peak (maximal negatively-correlated) voxel in each anticorrelated cluster, instead of spatially averaging voxels across the 3mm spheres, yielded very similar results (data not shown). 
 A statistical test based on Monte Carlo simulations was used to quantify the significance of variability in the wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and each of the anticorrelated ROIs. The results are summarized in  Figure 5 , which depicts the number of subjects having significantly nonstationary variation (as a function of scale) at both the 90% and 95% confidence levels. The identities of the subjects comprising the elements of each plot in  Fig. 5  are indicated in  Supplementary Figure S3 . The BIC model order used for the significance testing is reported for each subject in  Table 3A . 
 To examine the distribution of phase values for which significant coherence was attained, we defined the time-averaged coherence as: 
 (4) c ( s , φ ) = 1 N coi ( s ) ∑ t ∉ COI ( s ) R 2 ( t , s ) · I { R 2 ( t , s ) > a 95 } · I { arg ( R 2 ( t , s ) ) ∈ [ φ ± π / 4 ] }  where  N coi  is the number of pixels outside the cone of influence, I{·} is the indicator function (equal to 1 when its argument is true, and 0 otherwise),  a 95  is the 95% significance level for coherence magnitude, R 2  is as defined in  Eq. 2 .,  arg (R 2 ) is the coherence phase, and  φ  ∈ {0, π/2, π, −π/2}. Only scales that were common to all subjects were used (4< s <241.6, corresponding to 4.13< T <249.6 sec). The value of c( s ,φ) is, in other words, the total significant coherence at scale s occurring within a phase range of φ±π/4, normalized by the maximum possible coherence at scale  s  (which is equal to N coi ( s ), as maximum coherence would mean that R 2 =1 at each pixel outside the COI at scale  s ). 
 Figure 6  shows the time-averaged coherence across subjects (mean±SE, N=12). Because of disparities in time/frequency resolution across scales, c( s ,φ) for a given φ does not strictly represent the “time” spent in significant coherence, and caution should be taken when comparing across scales for a given φ. However, the shape of the curve, and the relative magnitudes of different values of φ at a given scale, can be compared across distinct WTC analyses, indicating possible differences in the time-frequency relationships of different time series pairs. It can be seen that the anticorrelated ROIs have a distribution that is predominantly unimodal, peaking around a period of  T  = 32 sec ( f  ~ 0.03 Hz). Note that the time-averaged coherence differs from standard (stationary) cross-spectral analysis because the latter estimates a single magnitude and phase value for each frequency, while the former depicts the extent to which coherence can transition between different phase ranges (across time) at a given frequency. 
 Figure 7  shows the percentage of the total coherence that occurred within each phase range (φ±π/4), quantified separately for 5 frequency bands: (1) 0.128–0.242 Hz (T ~ 4–8 sec), (2) 0.064–0.128 Hz (T ~ 8–16 sec), (3) 0.032–0.064 Hz (T ~ 16–32 sec), (4) 0.016–0.032 Hz (T ~ 32–64 sec), and (5) 0.008–0.016 Hz (T ~ 64–128 sec). Within a given frequency band, the anticorrelated ROIs were similar to one another with respect to phase content. The high frequency bands exhibited the greatest diversity of phase angles. 
 
 
 Wavelet coherence: comparing positive and negative correlations 
 We also examined the coherence properties between the PCC and voxels having  positive  correlation coefficients of approximately the same magnitude as the negative correlation coefficients observed between the PCC and the anticorrelated ROIs. The motivation for this comparison was to see whether there is a symmetry between the coherence patterns of positive and negative correlation in the brain at an equivalent signal-to-noise ratio, wherein the source of the “noise” is embedded in the fMRI signal itself. 
 For each subject, a single voxel whose correlation with the PCC fell between 0.28 and 0.41 was identified for this comparison. To maintain a degree of spatial localization (and thus noise homogeneity), this voxel was constrained to lie within the MPFC cluster ( Fig. 1 ,  Table 1 ). A WTC analysis between the PCC and this voxel was computed ( Fig. 8(A) ), and the time-averaged coherence was obtained to summarize the WTC results over all 12 subjects. This procedure was repeated 50 times, each time with a different choice of voxels. The grand average over the 50 time-averaged coherence curves is displayed in  Fig. 8(B) . It can be seen that the primary peak of the time-averaged coherence occurs at a period slightly shorter than 64 sec ( f  ~ 0.016 Hz), a lower frequency than was observed for the anticorrelated ROIs in  Fig. 6 . The same procedure was repeated when constraining voxels to lie in the cluster of the right angular gyrus; the plot was similar to that of the MPFC cluster, though the peak occurred at an even lower frequency (96 sec; data not shown). 
 
 
 Brain regions of variable default-mode connectivity 
 A map of variability (standard deviation) over the sequence of 2-min sliding-window correlation coefficients is shown in  Fig. 9(A) , averaged across all 12 subjects. The map corresponding to 4-min sliding window was qualitatively similar, with identical maxima. Regions of highest variability included voxels in the supplementary motor area (SMA)/anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)/superior medial frontal cortex (BA 8, 24, 32); superior and inferior parietal cortex (BA 7, 40); precentral (BA 6) and frontal operculum (BA 44, 48); ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC; BA 45) and middle/inferior orbitofrontal cortex (BA 47); and superior (BA 21, 22) and middle (BA 37) temporal cortex. Five foci corresponding to local maxima were defined as ROIs ( Fig. 9A ): these included regions in the right inferior parietal cortex (“ROI1”, x=34, y=−58, z=44), right inferior frontal operculum/BA44 (“ROI2”; x=50, y=18, z=32), right inferior temporal cortex (“ROI3”; x=58, y=−38, z=−16), right inferior orbitofrontal cortex (“ROI4”; x=50, y=26, z=−8), and ACC/BA24 (“ROI5”; x=−2, y=26, z=24). For comparison, the  t -maps for the DMN and its anticorrelated network are shown in  Fig. 9(B)  along with a thresholded version of the map in  Fig 9(A) . 
 Ranges of sliding-window correlation coefficients for ROIs 1–5 and window lengths of 2 min and 4 min are described in  Fig. 10  and  Table 4 . Due to the smoothing properties of longer sliding-window lengths, the range of variation within a given subject was smaller for a window length of 4 min compared to 2 min. As can be seen from  Fig. 10 , there are subjects and ROIs for which the correlation coefficients range from negative to positive over time. Across subjects, the range of sliding correlation values were centered more closely around zero for ROIs 4–5 compared to ROIs 1–3. 
 To examine whether the locations of high variability exhibit temporal activity that is similar to one another, correlation coefficients between the raw time series of the 5 ROIs were computed ( Fig. 11 ). In addition, each ROI was used as a seed to generate a correlation map for each subject, using all time-points in the scan. As expected by their high mutual correlation, a group analysis of the correlation map for each ROI revealed that ROIs 1, 2, and 3 generated highly overlapping networks, and that ROIs 4 and 5 generated overlapping networks that were primarily distinct from those of 1, 2, and 3 ( Fig. 9(C) ). The network formed by the intersection of seeded correlation maps from ROIs 1, 2, and 3 includes the ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex (BA 45, 47) extending into DLPFC (BA 46), superior/inferior parietal lobule (BA 7,40) and the middle/inferior temporal cortices (BA 21, 20, 37). The network formed by the intersection of seeded correlation maps from ROIs 4 and 5 includes the anterior cingulate cortex (BA 24, 32), supplementary motor area (BA 6), basal ganglia, and SMG extending into the superior temporal cortex (BA 40, 42). These resemble resting-state networks that have previously been reported in the literature ( Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ), and thus further analysis of the time-frequency dynamics of their seed ROIs relative to the PCC (default-mode) is of interest. 
 WTC analyses were performed between the PCC and each of the 5 ROIs; the resulting time-averaged coherence and scale-dependent significance in temporal variability are shown in  Fig. 12 . The BIC model order used for the significance testing is reported for each subject in  Table 3B . WTC maps for two ROIs (ROI2 and ROI5) are provided in  supplementary Fig. S4 . Examples of raw time series from ROIs 2 and 5, along with their sliding-window correlation sequences for window lengths of 2 min and 4 min, are shown in  Fig. 13  for one subject (Subject 1). 
 
 
 Effects of motion, scanner, and breath-holding on connectivity variability 
 Motion parameters for each subject are reported in  Table 5 , and were minimal (mean drift = 0.9 mm, mean RMS deviation = 0.12 mm). The inter-subject comparison between motion and connectivity variability yielded no significant relationships (p>0.05) with either the maximum drift or maximum RMS deviation. The inter-subject comparison between motion and scale-dependent variability in the WTC showed a significant (p<0.05) relationship at some scales for some ROIs ( supplementary Table S1 ); however, this occurred only for very high frequencies (T<6.5s) and very low frequencies (T>112 s). Thus a large fraction of the spectrum does not appear to be related to motion, including frequencies in which high variability was observed (such as 16–64 s; see  Fig 5 ). The intra-subject correlations between the sequence of motion-based deviations and the sequence of correlation-based deviations were not significant for any subject, for either of the 2 sliding-window lengths examined. 
 Results of the comparison between BH and non-BH subjects were not significant (p=0.24), even after covarying for effects of motion and scanner (p=0.39). Results of the between-scanner comparison were also not significant (p=0.68). We further verified that none of these comparisons became significant when using 1- and 4-min sliding-window lengths, in addition to the 2-min sliding window, to compute the connectivity variability measure. Therefore, while scanner and BH do not appear to influence variability in the current dataset, the number of subjects in these between-group comparisons is small (N 1 =N 2 =6 for the BH comparison and N 1 =4/N 2 =8 for the scanner comparison) and thus further study with larger subject groups would be necessary to attain the power required for a more conclusive inference concerning these effects. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study presents a preliminary analysis of dynamic behavior between nodes of resting-state networks. We demonstrate the use of wavelet coherence analysis for analyzing time-varying interactions between brain regions in the resting state, focusing on the default-mode network and its negative correlations with regions of the “anticorrelated” network. In addition, regions of the brain with temporally-variable connectivity to the PCC, a major node of the default-mode network, were identified using sliding-window correlations. Results indicate that resting-state BOLD connectivity has dynamic properties that may be overlooked by stationary analyses, observations that complement recent studies of dynamic spontaneous activity in animal models ( Majeed et al., 2009 ;  Popa et al., 2009 ). 
 When considering all time points in the data, correlation coefficients between the PCC and its anticorrelated regions were found to be substantially weaker than those of the positive correlations within regions of the DMN, in agreement with previous literature. WTC analysis showed clear fluctuations in the magnitude of coherence for phase angles of π±π/4 within the course of a single scan, revealing the presence of temporally-localized periods of negative correlation. Significance tests indicated the existence of scale-dependent temporal variability beyond that which may be expected by a stationary VAR model. In addition, differences in the time-averaged coherence were observed between the anticorrelated and positively-correlated ROIs of approximately the same SNR, indicating either (a) functional differences in the way negatively- and positively-correlated regions couple to the PCC, and/or (b) differences in the noise characteristics of these anatomic regions. 
 A sliding-window correlation procedure was applied in order to detect areas across the whole brain whose linear relationship with the PCC had high relative variation across the duration of the scan. Interestingly, high variation was found in brain areas that have been implicated in higher-level cognitive function, such as attention and salience processing ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ), and a seed-based ROI analysis suggested a general organization of these regions into two disjoint networks that resemble resting-state networks reported in previous studies (e.g. ( Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ). Further dynamic analysis of the associated seed ROIs revealed that for some subjects and ROIs, sliding-window correlation coefficients were ranged from positive to negative over time, particularly for ROIs in the ACC and right orbitofrontal cortex (ROIs 4 and 5;  Table 4 ). For ROIs 1–3, WTC analyses revealed that the phase distribution associated with significant coherence magnitude was dominated by phase angles centered around 0 (positive correlation) at most scales; however, a suppression of positive correlations (and accompanying increase of negative correlations) was observed in the range of ~16–32 Hz, particularly for ROI 2. ROIs 4 and 5 exhibited a more uniform phase distribution ( Fig. 12 ). 
 Further studies will be required to address the potential functional relevance of the observed temporal variability between these region and the default-mode networks in the resting state. In addition, because the map in  Fig. 9  represents an average variability rather than a proper statistical measure, further analysis will be required to identify other regions of the brain that may have lower average variability and yet equal (or higher) statistical significance when accounting for autoregressive properties on a voxel-wise basis, as was done here for significance testing of the WTC. 
 One implication of the present findings is that the appearance of negative correlations, as calculated by seed-based correlation of ICA, may depend on the temporal segment of data considered for analysis. Thus, one is likely to observe inter-trial variability across scans of, e.g., 6 min in length, which is a typical acquisition time for a resting-state scan ( Fig. 14 ). Furthermore, where weak and/or negative correlations are concerned, a single correlation coefficient computed across the duration of a longer scan may oversimplify the dynamic relationship between time series. Phase variability over time, such as observed in the ROIs identified by the sliding-window method, is also likely to confound measurements of causality computed across the entire scan. Therefore, quantifying the variability of interactions, in addition to averages across a scan, may be informative for characterizing the dynamics of resting-state networks. 
 Yet, the wealth of information provided by a time-frequency analysis of connectivity (beyond than that of a conventional stationary analysis) presents additional challenges when studying multiple subjects and spatial locations. One way of handling this growth of information is to summarize the dynamic information (e.g. WTC maps) along several potentially-relevant dimensions such as those presented herein, e.g. time-averaged coherence, scale-dependent variability, and variance of the sliding-window correlations. Metrics that take into account even more “higher-order” aspects of variability, such as the rate at which correlations and phase are modulated in addition to the overall degree of change, may also prove important. Such metrics can be examined for variability within and between groups of subjects, yielding features that can complement those of static analyses when characterizing neural activity across subject groups and cognitive states. Future work will be required to determine the most informative metrics for a given hypothesis and subject population. 
 Given the design of this study, it is not possible to resolve the cause of the observed nonstationary relationships. As there are few constraints on a subject s cognitive processes during a resting-state scan, it is possible that changes in network dynamics may reflect changes in brain state or arousal. However, it is also possible that the apparent changes are driven simply by the noise (e.g. motion, physiological) at a given time, despite efforts to correct for known sources based on previous models and despite the lack of significant relationship between motion and variability using the tests described herein. Further experiments involving task manipulations or multiple modalities, such as combined fMRI-EEG or electrophysiology, will be required to better understand the sources of the time-varying dynamics between brain regions in the resting state. 
 Additional limitations pertaining to the methodology used herein suggest avenues of future work. For example, although we focus on connectivity with the PCC, previous studies have indicated the presence of heterogeneity across components of the DMN and their respective anticorrelations ( Uddin et al., 2009 ), and thus greater insight may be obtained by examining the dynamics within subsets of networks. In addition, wavelet coherence was applied here to pairs of time series. In the future, it may be fruitful to apply multivariate analysis methods to resting-state data in a nonstationary sense, such as with sliding-window ICA ( Karvanen and Theis, 2004 ) and adaptive multivariate autoregressive models ( Deshpande et al., 2006 ;  Sato et al., 2006 ). 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 Figure S1.  Wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and 3 of its anticorrelated ROIs: (A) right SMG, (B) right insula, and (C) right DLPFC, for all subjects. For further detail, please refer to the caption of  Fig. 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 Figure S2.  Wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and default-mode ROIs: (A) MPFC, (B) right angular gyrus, (C) left angular gyrus. For further detail, please refer to the caption of  Fig. 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 03 
 
 Figure S3.  Subjects exhibiting significant variability between the PCC and anticorrelated ROIs at the 90% (gray) and 95% (black) levels, as a function of wavelet scale (Fourier period). 
 
 
 
 
 04 
 
 Figure S4.  Wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and two ROIs with highly variable connectivity: (A) ROI 2, (B) ROI5. For further detail, please refer to the caption of  Fig. 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 05 
 
 Table S1.  Wavelet scales having a significant (p<0.05) positive correlation with max RMS motion. (Results using drift as the motion parameter were similar.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Group-level thresholded  t -maps for positive (red) and negative (blue) correlations with the PCC. Clusters are labeled according to  Table 1 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Example of the cross-wavelet power (above left) and wavelet transform coherence (above right) for simulated data (bottom). The simulated data consist of negatively-correlated sinusoids with piecewise frequency content (f = 1/16 Hz for 0<t<200 sec, f = 1/32 Hz for 200<t<400 sec, and f = 1/96 Hz for 400<t<720 sec; thick lines in figure), embedded in Gaussian white noise (SNR=1.25; thin lines in figure). For the WTC, the phase angle between the 2 time series at particular locations in the time-frequency plane is indicated by an arrow (see text for further detail). Regions inside the cone of influence appear in faded color. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and 3 of its anticorrelated ROIs, shown for 6 subjects: (top row) right SMG, (middle row) right insula, and (bottom row) right DLPFC. For each WTC map, time is on the x-axis and scale (Fourier period) is on the y-axis. Maps have been thresholded to include only regions that were significant at 95% confidence based on Monte Carlo tests. Colors indicate ranges of the wavelet coherence phase. A phase difference of 0 indicates positive correlation; π indicates negative correlation; π/2 indicates that the PCC ROI leads the anticorrelated ROI; −π/2 indicates that the anticorrelated ROI leads the PCC ROI. Regions of insignificant coherence appear in dark blue, and areas inside the cone of influence are in purple. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Wavelet transform coherence between the PCC and default-mode ROIs, shown for 6 subjects: (top row) MPFC, (middle row) right angular gyrus, (bottom row) left angular gyrus. For further detail, please refer to the caption of  Fig. 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Significance of temporal variability in the wavelet transform coherence. Each plot shows the number of subjects for which the variance in the WTC between the PCC and the indicated ROI exceeded the 90% (blue) and 95% (red) confidence levels, for each wavelet scale (Fourier period). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Time-averaged coherence (see  Eq. 4 ), shown for default-mode (top row) and anticorrelated (middle and bottom rows) ROIs. Thick lines represent the mean across subjects (N=12), and error bars represent standard error. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Percentage of the total significant coherence occurring within each phase range (φ±π/4), within each of 5 different frequency bands. Lines and error bars represent the mean±SD, respectively, across the 3 DMN ROIs (left) and 6 anticorrelated ROIs (right). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 (A) WTC analysis and (B) time-averaged coherence between the PCC ROI and voxels in the MPFC having an overall correlation coefficient with the same approximate SNR as the anticorrelated ROIs in the actual data (for the instance shown here, r = 0.35±0.03 (mean±SD across subjects)). For the time-averaged coherence, error bars indicate the standard error of the mean over 50 iterations. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 (A) Variability (standard deviation) over the sequence of 2-min sliding-window correlation coefficients, averaged across all 12 subjects. Five ROIs chosen for further analysis are labeled. (B)  t -maps of positive and negative correlations with the PCC (red and blue, respectively, and thresholded identically to  Fig. 1 ), superimposed for anatomical comparison with regions of high variability (SD>0.18; magenta). (C) The intersection of group-level seeded correlation maps (computed across all time points in the scan) using ROIs 1, 2, and 3 as seed regions (green overlay), and using ROIs 4 and 5 as seed regions (cyan overlay). The slice location (z, mm) appears in white numerals and also applies to parts (A) and (B). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10 
 
 Range of sliding-window correlation values for ROIs 1–5 ( Fig. 9A ), for window sizes of 2 min (top row) and 4 min (bottom row). Vertical lines indicate the minimum and maximum values of the windowed correlation coefficient across the scan, and the dot on each bar indicates the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11 
 
 Group average (N=12) of Fisher  z -transformed correlation coefficients between 5 ROIs ( Fig. 9A ) whose correlation with the PCC was highly variable over time. High mutual correlation was observed between ROIs 1–3, and between ROIs 4–5. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12 
 
 (Top row) Time-averaged coherence for for the 5 ROIs indicated in  Fig. 9A . Thick lines represent the mean across subjects (N=12), and error bars represent standard error. (Bottom row) Histograms of the number of subjects for which the variance in the WTC between the PCC and the indicated ROI exceeded the 90% (blue) and 95% (red) confidence levels, for each wavelet scale (Fourier period). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 13 
 
 Raw time series and sliding-window correlation coefficients between the PCC and (A) ROI5 and (B) ROI2, shown for one subject (Subject 1). Sliding-window correlation coefficients are plotted at the time point corresponding to the center of its associated window. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 14 
 
 Negative correlations with the PCC across two successive 7-min segments of resting-state data, shown for one subject. (A) First 7 min, (B) second 7 min. Intensity values represent correlation coefficient (color scale is 0.08<r<0.4), and map is superimposed on the subject s T2-weighted anatomic image. Substantial differences between the two segments are apparent. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Clusters of positive and negative correlation with the PCC ROI selected for analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 cluster centroid (mm) 
 
 
 
 No. 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D1 
 MPFC 
 32/10 
 −2 
 50 
 17 
 
 
 Positive 
 D2 
 R. angular gyrus 
 39 
 50 
 −62 
 28 
 
 
 
 D3 
 L. angular gyrus 
 39 
 −44 
 −69 
 34 
 
 
 
 A1 
 L. insula 
 48 
 −39 
 8 
 5 
 
 
 
 A2 
 L. DLPFC 
 46/45 
 −46 
 45 
 26 
 
 
 Negative 
 A3 
 L. SMG 
 40 
 −63 
 −36 
 41 
 
 
 
 A4 
 R. insula 
 48 
 45 
 13 
 4 
 
 
 
 A5 
 R. DLPFC 
 46 
 45 
 48 
 26 
 
 
 
 A6 
 R. SMG 
 40 
 59 
 −36 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 The column ‘No.’ contains the label of the cluster within  Fig. 1 . BA, Brodmann area; L, left; R, right; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; SMG, supramarginal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Correlation coefficients ( r ) between the PCC ROI and subject-specific ROIs corresponding to the 6 anticorrelated and 3 default-mode clusters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anticorrelated clusters (r) 
 Default-mode clusters ( r ) 
 
 
 subject 
 N 
 L SMG 
 R SMG 
 L DLPFC 
 R DLPFC 
 L insula 
 R insula 
 MPFC 
 L angular 
 R angular 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 355 
 −0.43 
 −0.41 
 −0.44 
 −0.35 
 −0.30 
 −0.40 
 0.83 
 0.83 
 0.82 
 
 
 2 
 355 
 −0.42 
 −0.28 
 −0.26 
 −0.33 
 −0.20 
 −0.22 
 0.80 
 0.78 
 0.80 
 
 
 3 
 355 
 −0.36 
 −0.38 
 −0.40 
 −0.41 
 −0.29 
 −0.39 
 0.88 
 0.83 
 0.83 
 
 
 4 
 355 
 −0.27 
 −0.30 
 −0.28 
 −0.22 
 −0.21 
 −0.27 
 0.69 
 0.74 
 0.76 
 
 
 5 
 355 
 −0.46 
 −0.42 
 −0.29 
 −0.40 
 −0.39 
 −0.39 
 0.83 
 0.80 
 0.77 
 
 
 6 
 355 
 −0.29 
 −0.39 
 −0.36 
 −0.36 
 −0.25 
 −0.26 
 0.76 
 0.80 
 0.75 
 
 
 7 
 451 
 −0.43 
 −0.47 
 −0.32 
 −0.26 
 −0.22 
 −0.38 
 0.83 
 0.75 
 0.70 
 
 
 8 
 451 
 −0.36 
 −0.40 
 −0.38 
 −0.29 
 −0.25 
 −0.32 
 0.85 
 0.88 
 0.80 
 
 
 9 
 451 
 −0.30 
 −0.37 
 −0.32 
 −0.38 
 −0.24 
 −0.19 
 0.79 
 0.68 
 0.73 
 
 
 10 
 451 
 −0.57 
 −0.59 
 −0.54 
 −0.47 
 −0.33 
 −0.40 
 0.85 
 0.77 
 0.78 
 
 
 11 
 451 
 −0.42 
 −0.43 
 −0.17 
 −0.25 
 −0.24 
 −0.40 
 0.84 
 0.84 
 0.74 
 
 
 12 
 451 
 −0.50 
 −0.42 
 −0.44 
 −0.47 
 −0.19 
 −0.40 
 0.83 
 0.86 
 0.82 
 
 
 
 mean 
 
 
 − 0.40 
 − 0.40 
 − 0.35 
 − 0.35 
 − 0.26 
 − 0.33 
 
 0.82 
 
 
 0.80 
 
 
 0.78 
 
 
 
 
 stdev 
 
 
 
 0.09 
 
 
 0.08 
 
 
 0.10 
 
 
 0.08 
 
 
 0.06 
 
 
 0.08 
 
 
 0.05 
 
 
 0.06 
 
 
 0.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 N, total number of time points analyzed in the scan; L, left; R, right; SMG, supramarginal gyrus; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Model order  p  ( Eq. 3 ), as determined by the BIC score, for the vector autoregressive model fit between the PCC and (A) each anticorrelated ROI, and between the PCC and (B) each of the 5 ROIs indicated in  Fig. 9A . 
 
 
 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 
 
 subject 
 L SMG 
 R SMG 
 L DLPFC 
 R DLPFC 
 L insula 
 R insula 
 ROI1 
 ROI2 
 ROI3 
 ROI4 
 ROI5 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 
 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 3 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 4 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 2 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 5 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 6 
 3 
 2 
 2 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 
 
 7 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 3 
 4 
 3 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 8 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 
 
 9 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 3 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 
 
 10 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 
 
 11 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 3 
 2 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 12 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 2 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 L, left; R, right; SMG, supramarginal gyrus; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Summary of sliding-window correlation coefficients for 5 ROIs  (Fig. 9A)  having variable connectivity with the PCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Window size = 2 min 
 Window size = 4 min 
 
 
 ROI 
 Mean 
 SD 
 % windows < 0 
 mean 
 SD 
 % windows < 0 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 0.28 
 0.19 
 0.16 
 0.28 
 0.12 
 0.13 
 
 
 2 
 0.17 
 0.22 
 0.32 
 0.17 
 0.13 
 0.28 
 
 
 3 
 0.18 
 0.21 
 0.24 
 0.19 
 0.13 
 0.19 
 
 
 4 
 0.04 
 0.22 
 0.44 
 0.04 
 0.15 
 0.42 
 
 
 5 
 0.07 
 0.20 
 0.39 
 0.06 
 0.12 
 0.35 
 
 
 
 
 
 The mean value, variability (standard deviation; SD), and percentage of sliding-window correlation coefficients that were less than 0 are shown for each of 5 ROIs, averaged across all 12 subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Summary of subject motion. Values are specified in mm, and refer to the maximum over all 6 motion parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 Subject 
 Drift 
 RMS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 0.30 
 0.04 
 
 
 2 
 0.87 
 0.07 
 
 
 3 
 0.43 
 0.06 
 
 
 4 
 0.39 
 0.05 
 
 
 5 
 1.07 
 0.12 
 
 
 6 
 1.36 
 0.14 
 
 
 7 
 0.88 
 0.09 
 
 
 8 
 1.55 
 0.23 
 
 
 9 
 0.98 
 0.21 
 
 
 10 
 0.76 
 0.09 
 
 
 11 
 1.02 
 0.15 
 
 
 12 
 1.16 
 0.18 
 
 
 
 mean 
 
 
 0.90 
 
 
 0.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by NIH grants F31-AG032168 (CC) and P41-RR009784 (GHG). The authors gratefully acknowledge Jonathan Taylor, Ryan Tibshirani, Richard Olshen, Noah Simon, Mike Love, and Nelson Ray for valuable discussions regarding statistical methodology, and two anonymous reviewers for suggestions that have substantially improved this manuscript. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Achard 
 S 
 
 
 Salvador 
 R 
 
 
 Whitcher 
 B 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network with highly connected association cortical hubs 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 63 
 72 
 16399673 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Almeida 
 M 
 
 
 Botelho 
 LF 
 
 
 da Silva 
 AM 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Anton 
 J-L 
 
 
 Andrade 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 Time-frequency analysis of brain connectivity with fMRI: A new method based on Wavelet Transform Coherence 
 Organization for Human Brain Mapping, 12th Annual Meeting 
 Chicago 
 Poster 250 M-PM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barnes 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Endogenous human brain dynamics recover slowly following cognitive effort 
 PLoS One 
 4 
 e6626 
 19680553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beason-Held 
 LL 
 
 
 Kraut 
 MA 
 
 
 Resnick 
 SM 
 
 
 2009 
 Stability Of Default-Mode Network Activity In The Aging Brain 
 Brain Imaging Behav 
 3 
 123 
 131 
 19568331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 DeLuca 
 M 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2005 
 Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 360 
 1001 
 1013 
 16087444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bianciardi 
 M 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 van Gelderen 
 P 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 de Zwart 
 JA 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 2009 
 Modulation of spontaneous fMRI activity in human visual cortex by behavioral state 
 Neuroimage 
 45 
 160 
 168 
 19028588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Diamond 
 JB 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2006 
 Separating respiratory-variation-related fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 1536 
 1548 
 16632379 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2008 
 The respiration response function: the temporal dynamics of fMRI signal fluctuations related to changes in respiration 
 Neuroimage 
 40 
 644 
 654 
 18234517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Yetkin 
 FZ 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 1995 
 Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI 
 Magn Reson Med 
 34 
 537 
 541 
 8524021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 2007 
 Unrest at rest: default activity and spontaneous network correlations 
 Neuroimage 
 37 
 1091 
 1096 
 discussion 1097–1099 
 17368915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Cunningham 
 JP 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 2009 
 Influence of heart rate on the BOLD signal: the cardiac response function 
 Neuroimage 
 44 
 857 
 869 
 18951982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations 
 Neuroimage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cordes 
 D 
 
 
 Haughton 
 V 
 
 
 Carew 
 JD 
 
 
 Arfanakis 
 K 
 
 
 Maravilla 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 Hierarchical clustering to measure connectivity in fMRI resting-state data 
 Magn Reson Imaging 
 20 
 305 
 317 
 12165349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damoiseaux 
 JS 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2006 
 Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 13848 
 13853 
 16945915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2006 
 fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain 
 Neuroimage 
 29 
 1359 
 1367 
 16260155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deco 
 G 
 
 
 Jirsa 
 V 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Kotter 
 R 
 
 
 2009 
 Key role of coupling, delay, and noise in resting brain fluctuations 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 106 
 10302 
 10307 
 19497858 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deshpande 
 G 
 
 
 LaConte 
 S 
 
 
 Peltier 
 S 
 
 
 Hu 
 X 
 
 
 2006 
 Directed transfer function analysis of fMRI data to investigate network dynamics 
 Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 
 1 
 671 
 674 
 17946850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 RA 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2007 
 Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 104 
 11073 
 11078 
 17576922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duff 
 EP 
 
 
 Johnston 
 LA 
 
 
 Xiong 
 J 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Mareels 
 I 
 
 
 Egan 
 GF 
 
 
 2008 
 The power of spectral density analysis for mapping endogenous BOLD signal fluctuations 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 29 
 778 
 790 
 18454458 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Efron 
 B 
 
 
 Tibshirani 
 R 
 
 
 1986 
 Bootstrap Methods for Standard Errors, Confidence Intervals, and Other Measures of Statistical Accuracy 
 Statistical Science 
 1 
 54 
 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Bertolino 
 A 
 
 
 Scarabino 
 T 
 
 
 Latorre 
 V 
 
 
 Blasi 
 G 
 
 
 Popolizio 
 T 
 
 
 Tedeschi 
 G 
 
 
 Cirillo 
 S 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Di Salle 
 F 
 
 
 2006 
 Independent component model of the default-mode brain function: Assessing the impact of active thinking 
 Brain Res Bull 
 70 
 263 
 269 
 17027761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2008 
 The maturing architecture of the brain’s default network 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 105 
 4028 
 4032 
 18322013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2007 
 Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 700 
 711 
 17704812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2005 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 102 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2009 
 The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks 
 J Neurophysiol 
 101 
 3270 
 3283 
 19339462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 26 
 15 
 29 
 15852468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 2006 
 How default is the default mode of brain function? Further evidence from intrinsic BOLD signal fluctuations 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 2836 
 2845 
 16879844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 Marrelec 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a pivotal role in the default mode network: Evidence from a partial correlation network analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 42 
 1178 
 1184 
 18598773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 S 
 
 
 Howard 
 R 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 1996 
 Movement-related effects in fMRI time-series 
 Magn Reson Med 
 35 
 346 
 355 
 8699946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Lai 
 S 
 
 
 1998 
 Self-navigated spiral fMRI: interleaved versus single-shot 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 39 
 361 
 368 
 9498591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Law 
 CS 
 
 
 2001 
 Spiral-in/out BOLD fMRI for increased SNR and reduced susceptibility artifacts 
 Magn Reson Med 
 46 
 515 
 522 
 11550244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Li 
 TQ 
 
 
 Ress 
 D 
 
 
 2000 
 Image-based method for retrospective correction of physiological motion effects in fMRI: RETROICOR 
 Magn Reson Med 
 44 
 162 
 167 
 10893535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Kiviniemi 
 V 
 
 
 Tervonen 
 O 
 
 
 Vainionpaa 
 V 
 
 
 Alahuhta 
 S 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2008 
 Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light sedation 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 29 
 839 
 847 
 18219620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 100 
 253 
 258 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grinsted 
 A 
 
 
 Moore 
 JC 
 
 
 Jevrejeva 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Application of the cross wavelet transform and wavelet coherence to geophysical time series 
 Nonlinear Proc Geophys 
 11 
 561 
 566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 Braun 
 AR 
 
 
 Carr 
 WS 
 
 
 Picchioni 
 D 
 
 
 Balkin 
 TJ 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 2009 
 Decoupling of the brain’s default mode network during deep sleep 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 106 
 11376 
 11381 
 19549821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karvanen 
 J 
 
 
 Theis 
 F 
 
 
 2004 
 Spatial ICA of fMRI data in time windows 
 AIP Conference Proceedings 
 735 
 312 
 319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 DH 
 
 
 Adalsteinsson 
 E 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Spielman 
 DM 
 
 
 2002 
 Regularized higher-order in vivo shimming 
 Magn Reson Med 
 48 
 715 
 722 
 12353290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiviniemi 
 V 
 
 
 Kantola 
 JH 
 
 
 Jauhiainen 
 J 
 
 
 Hyvarinen 
 A 
 
 
 Tervonen 
 O 
 
 
 2003 
 Independent component analysis of nondeterministic fMRI signal sources 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 253 
 260 
 12814576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiviniemi 
 V 
 
 
 Remes 
 J 
 
 
 Starck 
 T 
 
 
 Nikkinen 
 J 
 
 
 Haapea 
 M 
 
 
 Silven 
 O 
 
 
 Tervonen 
 O 
 
 
 2009 
 Mapping Transient Hyperventilation Induced Alterations with Estimates of the Multi-Scale Dynamics of BOLD Signal 
 Front Neuroinformatics 
 3 
 18 
 19636388 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klein 
 A 
 
 
 Sauer 
 T 
 
 
 Jedynak 
 A 
 
 
 Skrandies 
 W 
 
 
 2006 
 Conventional and wavelet coherence applied to sensory-evoked electrical brain activity 
 IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 
 53 
 266 
 272 
 16485755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Le Van Quyen 
 M 
 
 
 Bragin 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 Analysis of dynamic brain oscillations: methodological advances 
 Trends Neurosci 
 30 
 365 
 373 
 17559951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 X 
 
 
 Yao 
 X 
 
 
 Fox 
 J 
 
 
 Jefferys 
 JG 
 
 
 2007 
 Interaction dynamics of neuronal oscillations analysed using wavelet transforms 
 J Neurosci Methods 
 160 
 178 
 185 
 16973218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lowe 
 MJ 
 
 
 Mock 
 BJ 
 
 
 Sorenson 
 JA 
 
 
 1998 
 Functional connectivity in single and multislice echoplanar imaging using resting-state fluctuations 
 Neuroimage 
 7 
 119 
 132 
 9558644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Majeed 
 W 
 
 
 Magnuson 
 M 
 
 
 Keilholz 
 SD 
 
 
 2009 
 Spatiotemporal dynamics of low frequency fluctuations in BOLD fMRI of the rat 
 J Magn Reson Imaging 
 30 
 384 
 393 
 19629982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mallat 
 S 
 
 
 1999 
 A wavelet tour of signal processing 
 Academic Press 
 London, U.K 
 79 
 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martuzzi 
 R 
 
 
 Ramani 
 R 
 
 
 Qiu 
 M 
 
 
 Rajeevan 
 N 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional connectivity and alterations in baseline brain state in humans 
 Neuroimage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKeown 
 MJ 
 
 
 Makeig 
 S 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Jung 
 TP 
 
 
 Kindermann 
 SS 
 
 
 Bell 
 AJ 
 
 
 Sejnowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into independent spatial components 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 6 
 160 
 188 
 9673671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mezer 
 A 
 
 
 Yovel 
 Y 
 
 
 Pasternak 
 O 
 
 
 Gorfine 
 T 
 
 
 Assaf 
 Y 
 
 
 2009 
 Cluster analysis of resting-state fMRI time series 
 Neuroimage 
 45 
 1117 
 1125 
 19146962 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitra 
 PP 
 
 
 Pesaran 
 B 
 
 
 1999 
 Analysis of dynamic brain imaging data 
 Biophys J 
 76 
 691 
 708 
 9929474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muller 
 K 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 Grigutsch 
 M 
 
 
 Mildner 
 T 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004 
 Investigating the wavelet coherence phase of the BOLD signal 
 J Magn Reson Imaging 
 20 
 145 
 152 
 15221820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2009 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 Neuroimage 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeuffer 
 J 
 
 
 Van de Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Hu 
 X 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 2002 
 Correction of physiologically induced global off-resonance effects in dynamic echo-planar and spiral functional imaging 
 Magn Reson Med 
 47 
 344 
 353 
 11810679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picchioni 
 D 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 Carr 
 WS 
 
 
 Braun 
 AR 
 
 
 Balkin 
 TJ 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 2008 
 fMRI differences between early and late stage-1 sleep 
 Neurosci Lett 
 441 
 81 
 85 
 18584959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Popa 
 D 
 
 
 Popescu 
 AT 
 
 
 Pare 
 D 
 
 
 2009 
 Contrasting activity profile of two distributed cortical networks as a function of attentional demands 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 1191 
 1201 
 19176827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roach 
 BJ 
 
 
 Mathalon 
 DH 
 
 
 2008 
 Event-related EEG time-frequency analysis: an overview of measures and an analysis of early gamma band phase locking in schizophrenia 
 Schizophr Bull 
 34 
 907 
 926 
 18684772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salvador 
 R 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Schwarzbauer 
 C 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 2005 
 Undirected graphs of frequency-dependent functional connectivity in whole brain networks 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 360 
 937 
 946 
 16087438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sato 
 JR 
 
 
 Junior 
 EA 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 DY 
 
 
 de Maria Felix 
 M 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Morettin 
 PA 
 
 
 2006 
 A method to produce evolving functional connectivity maps during the course of an fMRI experiment using wavelet-based time-varying Granger causality 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 187 
 196 
 16434214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 2349 
 2356 
 17329432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Gotimer 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Lee 
 SH 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Roy 
 AK 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2009 
 The Resting Brain: Unconstrained yet Reliable 
 Cereb Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shmueli 
 K 
 
 
 van Gelderen 
 P 
 
 
 de Zwart 
 JA 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 Jansma 
 JM 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 2007 
 Low-frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-state fMRI BOLD signal 
 Neuroimage 
 38 
 306 
 320 
 17869543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stine 
 RA 
 
 
 1987 
 Estimating Properties of Autoregressive Forecasts 
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 
 82 
 1072 
 1078 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sun 
 FT 
 
 
 Miller 
 LM 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Measuring temporal dynamics of functional networks using phase spectrum of fMRI data 
 Neuroimage 
 28 
 227 
 237 
 16019230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sun 
 FT 
 
 
 Miller 
 LM 
 
 
 Rao 
 AA 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Functional connectivity of cortical networks involved in bimanual motor sequence learning 
 Cereb Cortex 
 17 
 1227 
 1234 
 16855008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Musen 
 M 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children 
 PLoS Biol 
 7 
 e1000157 
 19621066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toro 
 R 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional coactivation map of the human brain 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 2553 
 2559 
 18296434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torrence 
 C 
 
 
 Compo 
 G 
 
 
 1998 
 A Practical Guide to Wavelet Analysis 
 Bull Am Meteo Soc 
 79 
 61 
 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torrence 
 C 
 
 
 Webster 
 P 
 
 
 1999 
 Interdecadal changes in the ENSO-Monsoon system 
 J Clim 
 12 
 2679 
 2690 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Xavier Castellanos 
 F 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional connectivity of default mode network components: correlation, anticorrelation, and causality 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 625 
 637 
 18219617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waites 
 AB 
 
 
 Stanislavsky 
 A 
 
 
 Abbott 
 DF 
 
 
 Jackson 
 GD 
 
 
 2005 
 Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 24 
 59 
 68 
 15382248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 RG 
 
 
 Ide 
 K 
 
 
 Poulin 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tracey 
 I 
 
 
 2004 
 Resting fluctuations in arterial carbon dioxide induce significant low frequency variations in BOLD signal 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 1652 
 1664 
 15050588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhan 
 Y 
 
 
 Halliday 
 D 
 
 
 Jiang 
 P 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Feng 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Detecting time-dependent coherence between non-stationary electrophysiological signals--a combined statistical and time-frequency approach 
 J Neurosci Methods 
 156 
 322 
 332 
 16563517 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 
 
 Bootstrapping procedure 
 Given a VAR model of order  p  on the actual data ( Eq. 3 ), each bootstrap time series pair (( x b [ n ], y b [ n ]),  n  = 1.... N ,  b  1…1000) is generated as follows: 
 
 
 Select a time point  n 0 , 1≤  n 0  ≤ ( N  −  p ), uniformly at random. 
 
 
 Set ( x b [ n ], y b [ n ]),  n  = 1… p  to be equal to ( x [ m ], y [ m ]),  m n 0 …( n 0  +  p  − 1). This step thus initializes the first  p  values of the bootstrap process to be a randomly-selected contiguous block of  p  observations from the actual data ( Stine, 1987 ). 
 
 
 For each  n  = ( p + 1 )… N,  select a time index  n̂  (1 ≤  n  ≤  N ) uniformly at random, and let  û x [ n ] =  u x [ n̂ ] and  û  y [ n ]  u y [ n̂ ]. In other words, the innovation term of the bootstrap process at the current time step consists of a randomly-sampled residual of the VAR fit to the original data. 
 Then, let 
 
 { x b [ n ] = ∑ i = 1 p a i x x b [ n − i ] + ∑ i = 1 p b i x y b [ n − i ] + u ^ x [ n ] y b [ n ] = ∑ i = 1 p a i y x b [ n − i ] + ∑ i = 1 p b i y y b [ n − i ] + u ^ y [ n ] , 
 
 
 where the coefficients a x i,  a y i,  b x i,  b y i  had been estimated by least-squares fit of the  p th-order VAR model to the original data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
