
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0142657 
 6792 
 Psychophysiology 
 
 Psychophysiology 
 
 0048-5772 
 1540-5958 
 
 
 20070577 
 3086589 
 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00958.x 
 NIHMS279809 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Localization of Asymmetric Brain Function in Emotion and Depression 
 
 
 
 
 Herrington 
 John D. 
 
 Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 Wendy 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 Aprajita 
 
 Northwestern University 
 
 
 
 Engels 
 Anna S. 
 
 Pennsylvania State University 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 Marie T. 
 
 University of Colorado-Boulder 
 
 
 
 Webb 
 Andrew G. 
 
 Pennsylvania State University 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 Gregory A. 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Address Correspondence to: John D. Herrington, Ph.D., Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3535 Market Street, Suite 800, Philadelphia, PA 19103,  jherringt@gmail.com , Phone: (203) 589-7067, Fax: (267) 426-7590 
 
 
 29 
 3 
 2011 
 
 
 11 
 1 
 2010 
 
 
 1 
 5 
 2010 
 
 
 3 
 5 
 2011 
 
 47 
 3 
 442 
 454 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Although numerous EEG studies have shown that depression is associated with abnormal functional asymmetries in frontal cortex, fMRI and PET studies have largely failed to identify specific brain areas showing this effect. The present study tested the hypothesis that emotion processes are related to asymmetric patterns of fMRI activity, particularly within dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Eleven depressed and 18 control participants identified the color in which pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant words were printed. Both groups showed a leftward lateralization for pleasant words in DLPFC. In a neighboring DLPFC area, the depression group showed more right-lateralized activation than controls, replicating EEG findings. These data confirm that emotional stimulus processing and trait depression are associated with asymmetric brain functions in distinct subregions of the DLPFC that may go undetected unless appropriate analytic procedures are used. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health  : NIMH 
 T32 MH019554-11 || MH 
 
 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse  : NIDA 
 R21 DA014111-01 || DA 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health  : NIMH 
 R01 MH061358-05 || MH 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health  : NIMH 
 P50 MH079485-02 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 The past decade has witnessed a rapid expansion of research on the neural correlates of emotion. The advance of hemodynamic imaging techniques has led to the refinement of longstanding theories about the structure of emotion and the biological correlates of mood disorders. However, in some instances it has proven difficult to reconcile findings from new techniques with established work. A prominent example of this problem has been the failure of hemodynamic imaging studies to replicate EEG findings on frontal asymmetries in emotion. 
 It was recently estimated that over 70 published EEG studies report emotion-modulated asymmetries in frontal cortex ( Coan & Allen, 2004 ). These studies have established differential roles of left and right prefrontal cortex (PFC) for processing pleasant and unpleasant emotional information, respectively. Resting EEG measures figure prominently in this literature. In non-clinical samples, resting EEG asymmetries in PFC have been found subsequent to the induction of pleasant and unpleasant mood states ( Ahern & Schwartz, 1985 ;  Davidson, Ekman, Saron, Senulia, & Friesen, 1990 ; Jones & Fox 1992;  Nitschke, Heller, Etienne, & Miller, 2004 ;  Tucker, Stenslie, Roth, & Shearer, 1981 ). 
 In addition, numerous EEG studies have shown that depression is associated with a shift toward greater right than left PFC activity, consistent with findings for unpleasant emotion (for reviews, see  Davidson et al., 2002 ;  Heller & Nitschke, 1997 ;  Miller & Cohen, 2001 ). Analyses of spectral activity across frontal electrodes indicate that left/right frontal activity differences in depression are relative rather than absolute ( Bell, Schwartz, Hardin, Baldwin, & Kline, 1998 ;  Bruder et al. 1997 ;  Gotlib et al., 1998 ). It also appears that this asymmetry is superimposed on less bilateral activity in frontal cortex for depressed people in general (see  Heller & Nitschke, 1998 ;  Herrington et al., 2005 ). Studies have shown that these patterns can be altered through psychological interventions and pharmacotherapy ( Davidson, Irwin, et al., 2003 ;  Davidson, Kabat-Zinn, et al., 2003 ). 
 Nonetheless, few studies to date have reliably localized frontal EEG asymmetries to a specific area of prefrontal cortex. Furthermore, recent meta-analyses examining hemodynamic imaging studies of emotion have yielded few or no consistent findings of frontal asymmetries in emotion, leading some researchers to question the validity of the EEG results ( Murphy, Nimmo-Smith, & Lawrence, 2003 ;  Wager, Phan, Liberzon, & Taylor, 2003 ; examining 106 and 65 studies, respectively). The general conclusion reached by these meta-analyses was summarized by  Murphy et al. (2003)  who stated that hypotheses regarding frontal asymmetries “may be too coarse, in terms of both their neural underpinnings and the aspect of emotion under consideration” (p. 227). 
 Despite the conclusions of recent meta-analyses, existing evidence suggests that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) may function asymmetrically for emotion processes, possibly driving the observed EEG asymmetries ( Davidson, 2004 ;  Herrington et al., 2005 ;  Nitschke et al., 2004 ; see also  Davidson, Pizzagalli, Nitschke, & Putnam, 2002 ;  Heller & Nitschke, 1997 ;  Miller & Cohen, 2001 ). Evidence in favor of this view comes from numerous studies of depression, where decreased right DLPFC activity has been found superimposed on bilateral DLPFC decreases (for reviews, see  Davidson, 1998 ;  Heller & Nitschke, 1997 ;  Nitschke & Heller, 2002 ). Importantly, these studies have relied on both resting state and task-based paradigms. In a review of what was then a 25-year history of frontal asymmetry research,  Davidson (2004)  wrote that “tasks that involve a response component will be more likely to show affect-related PFC activation asymmetry in the dorsolateral regions [of prefrontal cortex], and it is activity in these regions that are more likely to be reflected in scalp-recorded brain electrical signals” (p. 221). Conversely, Davidson pointed out that other frontal regions with clear roles in emotion processes – namely orbitofrontal cortex – are less likely candidates for observed frontal asymmetries. Data and conclusions from these articles suggest that the localization of emotion-related frontal asymmetries is likely to prove most fruitful in DLPFC. 
 To date DLPFC activity has been associated primarily with executive functions ( Cohen, Braver, & O’Reilly, 1996 ;  Fuster, 1989 ;  Owen, Evans, & Petrides, 1996 ;  Rajkowski & Goldman-Rakic, 1995 ;  Stuss & Levine, 2002 ). However, a growing literature implicates DLPFC in various emotion processes, particularly those related to attentional maintenance and deployment (e.g.,  Compton et al., 2003 ;  Gray et al., 2002 ;  Herrington et al., 2005 ;  Engels et al., 2007 ;  Perlstein et al., 2002 ). Unfortunately, it is surprisingly rare for hemodynamic imaging studies to perform direct tests of asymmetry. Instead, considerations of functional asymmetries are generally based on the isolation of clusters that pass some predetermined activation threshold in one hemisphere and not the other. This approach is problematic, insofar as it does not test the reliability of the difference between regions and their contralateral homologues ( Davidson & Irwin, 1999 ; Friston, 2003;  Herrington et al., 2005 ). The virtual absence of robust tests of asymmetry among hemodynamic imaging studies leaves the role of regional specificity in emotion-modulated EEG asymmetries an open question. 
 The present study provided a direct investigation of lateralized activity by conducting per-voxel ANOVAs that include hemisphere as a factor. Higher-order effects within this ANOVA included the interaction of hemisphere with one of two manipulations involving emotion. The first consisted of a within-subject manipulation of stimulus valence (positive, neutral, negative) in an emotion-word Stroop paradigm. Previous studies using the emotion-word Stroop task have shown that activation in DLPFC varies as a function of the valence of a word ( Compton et al., 2003 ;  Herrington et al., 2005 ;  Mohanty et al., 2005 ,  2007 ;  Engels et al., 2007 ). The second was a between-subjects manipulation using trait negative affect (high, low) via selection of individuals based on self-rating of depressive symptoms. The primary substantive hypotheses were that asymmetric activity would be observed in DLPFC according to the valence of potent to-be-ignored emotional stimuli and that this asymmetry would be abnormal among individuals with depression. Furthermore, given theorizing about differential roles for subregions of the PFC, the design of the study allowed us to address potential distinctions between valence of the emotional stimuli and trait negative affect. 
 In order to effectively address the possibility that distinct brain regions in DLPFC are involved in distinct emotional functions, the present study implemented contrasts that reflect two distinct theoretical perspectives on the dimensional structure of emotion. The valence perspective holds that basic emotions (e.g., happiness, fear) follow a two-dimensional structure with axes representing valence (pleasant vs. unpleasant) and arousal ( Bradley & Lang, 1994 ;  Heller, 1990 ;  Lang, 1980 ;  Russell, 1980 ;  Osgood, 1952 ) referred to as the circumplex model of emotion ( Heller, 1993 ;  Russell & Bullock, 1986 ). Studies have shown that the pleasant/unpleasant axis (valence) can be used to describe patterns of lateralized activity in frontal cortex among non-clinical samples and that abnormalities in these patterns are related to psychopathology, particularly depression and anxiety disorders (for review, see  Coan & Allen, 2004 ). The second perspective, articulated by  Watson and Tellegen (1985) , holds that pleasant and unpleasant emotions do not belong on the same dimension (valence) and should be considered separately. Positive and negative affect (this perspective is henceforth referred to as PA/NA) are terms for the axes formed after a rotation of the circumplex axes that integrates valence and arousal dimensions ( Watson & Tellegen, 1985 ;  Zevon & Tellegen, 1982 ). 
 The valence and PA/NA perspectives are thus closely related but capture different aspects of variance related to emotion. Variance captured by the valence perspective is maximized when pleasant and unpleasant emotions function exclusively or are negatively correlated ( Green, Goldman, & Salovey, 1993 ). The PA/NA perspective, on the other hand, better characterizes variance when positive and negative affect function in parallel, operating simultaneously but independently. The two models therefore reflect somewhat different aspects of the same underlying emotion structure. Considerable debate surrounds which of these two models is better suited to the study of emotion processes ( Stewart, Levin-Silton, Sass, Heller, & Miller, 2008 ). One reason that this debate persists is that the two models cannot be readily contrasted with one another (such as in an ANOVA) due to their inherent overlap. 
 These models provided the framework for this experiment not only because of the interest and controversy surrounding them, but due to the imbalanced manner in which they are reflected in fMRI studies of emotion. A review of emotion paradigms used in hemodynamic imaging studies indicates that the vast majority of studies more directly fit the PA/NA perspective, in that most exclude pleasant stimuli and compare unpleasant emotional stimuli to neutral stimuli. The unpleasant-neutral comparison nicely captures the concept of negative affect but confounds valence and arousal. The present study employs separate analyses, following both valence and PA/NA perspectives, in order to maximize the probability of isolating asymmetry effects. In the context of this study, valence refers specifically to whether the emotional characteristics of the experimental stimuli were rated as pleasant versus unpleasant. Therefore, the research reported here does not attempt to take on the issue of whether the valence perspective or the motivation distinction of approach/withdrawal (for review, see  Heller, Koven, & Miller, 2003 ) better accounts for frontal asymmetries associated with emotion. 
 Finally, controversy exists regarding whether the amygdala functions asymmetrically for emotion processes in general and depression in particular.  Abercrombie et al. (1998)  found a relationship between increased metabolic rate and depressive symptoms in right amygdala among individuals diagnosed with major depressive disorder (measured at rest). This is contrary to a meta-analysis by  Baas, Aleman, and Kahn (2004) , who concluded that left amygdala is generally more responsive to emotion manipulations than is right amygdala, regardless of the experimental paradigm. Such discrepancies are further complicated by the near absence of statistical analyses directly contrasting signal from left and right amygdala. The present study therefore reports direct tests of asymmetric amygdala function with respect to emotional stimuli and depressive symptoms. 
 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants and Selection Procedures 
 Participants were selected by screening large groups of undergraduates and inviting restricted subsets to participate in laboratory research. These subsets were chosen based on dimensional measures of depression and anxiety that have been shown to distinguish between these highly comorbid conditions ( Nitschke, Heller, Palmieri, & Miller, 1999 ): the Anhedonic Depression and Anxious Arousal scales of the Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ;  Watson et al., 1995 ) and the Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ;  Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec, 1990 ;  Molina & Borkovec, 1994 ). Cutoff scores for group membership were assigned using 50th and 80th percentiles based on sample distributions for each measure. A large number of undergraduate volunteers were screened (1688) in order to obtain 90 participants who met experimental criteria for presence/absence of depression and anxiety. Seventy-six completed all components of the experiment (fMRI, EEG, and diagnostic interview; data from the latter two are reviewed elsewhere). Of these, 29 (11 females, mean age = 20.241, SD = 5.429) reported no more than moderate anxiety and could be classified as depressed (N = 11; 3 female) or control (N = 18; 8 female). (Behavioral performance data for two of 11 depressed participants with viable fMRI data were not collected due to computer error, leaving behavioral data Ns of nine for the depressed group and 18 for the control group.) All participants in the depressed and control groups scored below the 50 th  percentile on the PSWQ. The depressed group scored above the 80th percentile on an eight-item subscale of the MASQ Anhedonic Depression scale that has been shown to reflect depressed mood ( Nitschke et al., 2001 ) and below the 50th percentile on the PSWQ and MASQ Anxious Arousal scales. The control group scored below the 50th percentile on the PSWQ and the MASQ Anxious Arousal and Anhedonic Depression subscales (see  Table 1  for means and standard deviations for each group). The groups did not differ in age. All participants were right-handed, native speakers of English with self-reported normal color vision. 
 The PSWQ and MASQ were administered again, this time individually, prior to the fMRI session (except for one participant, who received the MASQ but not the PSWQ). As expected, the two groups did not differ on PSWQ scores,  t (26) = .050, n.s, or MASQ Anxious Arousal scores,  t (27) = .813, n.s, but did differ appropriately in MASQ-Anhedonic Depression (depressive mood subscale) scores,  t (27) = 4.851,  p  < .001. Gender x Group ANOVAs indicated that men and women did not differ in any of the three scores, nor were there any Gender x Group interactions. 
 
 
 Experimental Task 
 The participants completed two tasks, the emotion-word Stroop and the color-word Stroop. Only data from the emotion-word Stroop task are considered here, as a priori asymmetry predictions focused on emotion processes. The task was implemented as blocks of pleasant or unpleasant emotion words alternating with blocks of neutral words. Several studies have indicated that the most effective emotion-word Stroop designs use blocked stimuli ( Compton, Heller, Banich, Palmieri, & Miller, 2000 ;  Dalgleish, 1995 ;  Holle, Neely, & Heimberg, 1997 ). Participants received 256 trials in 16 blocks (four pleasant, eight neutral, four unpleasant) of 16 trials, with a variable ITI (±225 ms) averaging 2000 ms between trial onsets. A trial began with the presentation of a word for 1500 ms, followed by a fixation cross for an average of 500 ms. Each trial consisted of one word presented in one of four ink colors (red, yellow, green, blue) with each color occurring equally often with each word type (pleasant, neutral, unpleasant). Each participant received one of eight orders that were designed to ensure that the emotional and neutral words preceded each other equally often. Familiarity was controlled by ensuring that no word was repeated throughout the experiment. Within a block, each color appeared four times, and trials were pseudorandomized such that no more than two trials featuring the same color appeared in a row. After every fourth block (except the last), there was a brief rest period. In addition to the 16 word blocks, there were four fixation blocks – one at the beginning, one at the end, and two in the middle of the session. In the fixation condition, instead of a word, a brighter fixation cross was presented for 1500 ms. 
 The 256 word stimuli included in the emotion-word Stroop task were selected from the Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) set (see  Table 2 ; Bradley & Lang, 1999). Sixty-four were pleasant (e.g., birthday, ecstasy, laughter), 64 were unpleasant (e.g., suicide, war, victim), and two sets of 64 were neutral (e.g., hydrant, moment, carpet). The words were carefully selected on the basis of established norms for valence, arousal, frequency of usage in the English language (Bradley & Lang, 1999; Toglia & Battig, 1978) and number of letters. Each word appeared centered on a black background. Participants responded with their middle and index fingers using left- and right-hand response boxes for both tasks. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Collection 
 A series of 370 fMRI images were acquired using a gradient-echo echo-planar pulse sequence (TR 2000 ms, TE 25 ms, flip angle 60°, FOV = 24 cm) on a 3T Siemens Allegra head-only scanner. Twenty contiguous oblique axial slices (slice thickness 7 mm, in-plane pixel size 3.75 × 3.75 mm) were acquired parallel to the anterior and posterior commissures. These scan parameters were selected to minimize susceptibility artifacts in orbitofrontal and medial temporal areas. 
 Prior to the fMRI sequence, a 20-slice T1-weighted structural scan was administered using the same slices as the functional acquisition (slice thickness 7 mm, in-plane pixel size .5 × .5 mm). After the fMRI sequence, a 128-slice MPRAGE structural sequence was acquired (slice thickness 1.3 mm, in-plane pixel size 1 × 1 mm). Both of these structural sequences were used to register the participant’s structural and functional data into standard space. 
 
 
 Behavioral Performance Analysis 
 The primary hypothesis for behavioral performance was that depressed and control participants would take longer to respond to emotion than to neutral words (an arousal effect). It was also predicted that this difference would be greater for unpleasant than for pleasant words across groups (a valence effect). A third hypothesis was that individuals with depression would show a larger emotion-word Stroop effect for unpleasant words than would controls, i.e., longer reaction time for unpleasant than for neutral, as has been reported previously (see  Mogg, Bradley, Williams, & Mathews, 1993 ). 
 Each of the three behavioral performance hypotheses was tested using a Group x Emotion ANOVA. The hypothesis of longer reaction time for high-arousal (pleasant and unpleasant) words was tested with all three emotion levels via the Emotion quadratic trend. Similarly, the hypothesis of longer reaction time for unpleasant versus pleasant words was tested via the Emotion linear trend. Finally, the prediction that the depression group would show a greater emotion-word Stroop effect for unpleasant words was tested via the Group x Emotion interaction, including just unpleasant and neutral levels of the Emotion factor (thus, a negative affect comparison). 
 
 
 fMRI Data Reduction and Analysis 
 Functional image processing and statistical analyses were implemented primarily using FEAT (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool,  http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/analysis/research/feat/ ), part of FMRIB’s Software Library (FSL) analysis package ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl ). Group-level analyses were carried out using locally written Matlab and C++ programs. 
 Prior to image processing, the first three time points of each dataset were discarded to allow the MR signal to reach a steady state. Each subject’s time series was motion-corrected via the FSL program MCFLIRT, intensity-normalized, and temporally filtered (nonlinear high-pass filter with a 1/256 Hz cutoff;  Jenkinson & Smith, 2001 ;  Jenkinson et al., 2002 ). A 3D Gaussian filter (FWHM = 7 mm) was applied to account for hemisphere and individual differences in brain morphology affecting image alignment and local variations in noise. A pre-coloring filter using a Tukey taper was applied to each voxel to account for serial autocorrelation in the time series. The autocorrelation structure introduced by the filter was then incorporated into analyses carried out for each voxel (see  Woolrich, Ripley, Brady, & Smith, 2001 ). 
 Regression analyses were performed on each participant’s time series using FILM (FMRIB’s Improved Linear Model). Statistical maps were generated via multiple regression on each intracerebral voxel ( Woolrich, Ripley, Brady, & Smith, 2001 ). An explanatory variable (EV) was created for each trial type (pleasant, neutral, unpleasant, and rest) and convolved with a gamma function to better approximate the temporal course of the blood-oxygen-dependent (BOLD) hemodynamic response (e.g.,  Aguirre, Zarahn, & D’Esposito, 1998 ;  Miezin, Maccotta, Ollinger, Petersen, & Buckner, 2000 ). Each EV yielded a per-voxel effect-size parameter estimate (s) map representing the magnitude of activity associated with that EV. All functional activation maps and their corresponding structural MRI maps were transformed into a common stereotactic space (henceforth referred to as Talairach space or Talairach coordinates;  Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ) using FMRIB’s Linear Image Registration Tool (FLIRT). 
 Group-level ANOVAs addressed two different perspectives on emotion lateralization: valence (comparing pleasant to unpleasant words) and PA/NA (comparing pleasant or unpleasant words to neutral). The valence perspective was examined via a Valence × Hemisphere statistical map calculated in the context of a Group × Valence × Hemisphere ANOVA. The dependent measure for this ANOVA consisted of participant-wise s maps representing the contrasts of unpleasant to pleasant stimuli. The PA/NA perspective was examined via a Group × Hemisphere statistical map including only unpleasant versus neutral β maps as the dependent measure. The effect of hemisphere was examined on a per-voxel basis, contrasting each voxel in one hemisphere to its contralateral homologue. In practice, this entailed comparing each voxel to that with identical coordinates in the axial and coronal dimensions (y and z in MNI space), but with the sagittal coordinate multiplied by −1. (The same analysis was carried out using pleasant versus neutral β maps, but these data did not directly inform a priori depression hypotheses and are not reported here). Both of these ANOVAs included subject nested within group as a random effect (all other effects were fixed; for model specifications see  Kirk, 1995 , chapter 12). Family-wise Type I error was controlled via the simultaneous application of a per-voxel statistical threshold of  p  < .01 and a cluster size threshold determined from Monte-Carlo simulations (implemented via the program AlphaSim; Ward, 2000). Monte-Carlo simulations were run separately within DLPFC, amygdala, and non-DLPFC/amygdala areas, separately for each of the two statistical maps focused on in this paper (i.e., “partial-volume correction”; see  Bencherif, Stumpf, Links, & Frost, 2004 ). All reported clusters were significant at a corrected  p -value of < .05. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Performance Analyses 
 As predicted, reaction times were longer for high-arousal words than for neutral words, quadratic Emotion  F (1, 50) = 3.986,  p  = .026 (see  Figure 1 ). The two groups did not significantly differ in this effect, Group × quadratic Emotion  F (1,50) = 1.108, n.s. The Depressed group responded more quickly overall, though this effect was only a statistical trend,  F (1,79) = 3.337,  p  = .078. 
 Contrary to the valence hypothesis, reaction times for pleasant words were greater than for unpleasant words across groups,  F (1,25) = 5.436,  p  = .028. This effect did not vary by group, Group × Valence  F (1,25) = 1.350, n.s. For unpleasant words the depressed group did not show more Stroop interference than controls, Group × Emotion (unpleasant, neutral)  F (1,25) = 1.714, n.s. 
 
 
 FMRI Analyses 
 Two ANOVAs were examined corresponding to valence and PA/NA emotion perspectives. Only those findings related to hypotheses within frontal cortex and amygdala are detailed below (significant activation clusters outside of these areas are listed in  Table 3 ). 
 
 Valence Analyses 
 A per-voxel statistical map was generated representing the interaction of Valence (pleasant versus unpleasant words) and Hemisphere in the context of a Group × Valence × Hemisphere ANOVA. The key a priori prediction was increased left-lateralized activity within DLPFC for pleasant words ( Herrington et al., 2005 ), predominantly in the control group. Monte Carlo simulations based on this statistical map determined that contiguous clusters of greater than 18 voxels thresholded at  p  < .01 occurred randomly at a probability of  p  < .05 within the DLPFC mask, 10 voxels in the amygdala mask, and 67 voxels in the non-DLPFC/amygdala mask. Four significant clusters of activity were observed for the Valence X Hemisphere interaction (see  Table 3 ). 
 
 Frontal lobe activation 
 Two Valence X Hemisphere interaction clusters were located in frontal cortex. The first cluster was in DLPFC, centered on ±36, 34, 16 (see  Figure 2 , top panel). The pattern of means in this cluster closely replicated that of the DLPFC cluster in  Herrington et al. (2005) , showing more left-lateralized activity for pleasant than for unpleasant words, Valence × Hemisphere  F (1, 27) = 14.215,  p  < .001. Although in the same direction as  Herrington et al. (2005) , activation was not significantly greater for pleasant than for unpleasant words averaged across hemisphere when including both depressed and control groups,  F (1, 27) = 1.673, n.s. However, pleasant words did show significantly more bilateral activity in this cluster when examining the control group alone [relevant because  Herrington et al. (2005)  used participants unselected for psychopathology],  F (1, 17) = 4.446,  p  = .05. The control group was marginally more left-lateralized than the depressed group across pleasant and unpleasant conditions,  F (1, 27) = 3.024,  p  = .093. 
 The second frontal cortex cluster (not tested in  Herrington et al., 2005 ) showing a Valence × Hemisphere interaction was centered in superior frontal gyrus (within DLPFC), ±41, 16, 49 (see  Figure 2 , middle panel). The activation pattern in this region was opposite that of a priori hypotheses: activation for unpleasant words was more left-lateralized in this cluster, whereas activation for pleasant words was more right-lateralized, Valence × Hemisphere  F (1, 27) = 12.212,  p  = .002. In simple-effects analyses, activation for unpleasant words was lateralized,  F (1, 27) = 12.019,  p  = .002, whereas pleasant-word activation was not reliably lateralized. The unpleasant word lateralization was carried primarily by the control group,  t (17) = 3.025,  p  = .004. Even though the depressed group showed the same trend,  t (17) = 1.627,  p  = .067, the effects in that group were mainly driven by deactivation in this region. Accordingly, the Group × Valence × Hemisphere interaction was not significant. 
 
 
 Amygdala activation 
 A Valence (pleasant versus unpleasant words) × Hemisphere interaction cluster of activation was found in amygdala and adjacent superior temporal gyrus, centered on ±30, 1, −16 (see  Figure 2 , bottom panel). Activation for pleasant words was more left-lateralized than for unpleasant words, Valence x Hemisphere  F (1, 27) = 15.592,  p  < .001. This interaction was driven primarily by less left hemisphere cluster activation for negative words in the depressed group, though the effect was only a trend,  t (27) = 1.516,  p  = .071 (right hemisphere n.s.). 
 
 
 
 Negative Affect Analyses 
 The second statistical map represents the interaction of Group and Hemisphere in the context of a Group × Hemisphere ANOVA, where the dependent variable was unpleasant word activation (unpleasant minus neutral fMRI signal). The a priori prediction for this analysis was increased right-lateralized activation in the depression group. Monte Carlo simulations determined that contiguous clusters of greater than 16 voxels thresholded at  p  < .01 occurred randomly at a probability of  p  < .05 within the DLPFC mask, 31 voxels in the amygdala mask, and 63 voxels in the non-DLPFC/amygdala mask. This statistical map yielded six significant clusters of activity (see  Table 3 ). 
 
 Frontal lobe activation 
 One Group × Hemisphere interaction cluster was found in the frontal lobes, centered on ±44, 6, 30 (see  Figure 3 , top panel). This cluster spanned middle and inferior frontal gyrus, Brodmann areas 9 and 44 (including DLPFC). Activation in this area was more right-lateralized for the depressed than the control group,  F (1, 27) = 22.020,  p  < .001. This pattern was consistent with the key hypothesis, based on EEG findings, that depression would involve a greater asymmetry in favor of right frontal regions. This interaction was driven primarily by greater unpleasant word activation for the depressed group than for the control group in the right hemisphere,  t (27) = 2.091,  p  = .004 (left hemisphere n.s.). In fact, unpleasant word activation was right-lateralized for the depressed group,  t (10) = 3.219,  p  = .005, and left-lateralized for controls,  t (17) = 2.974,  p  = .004. 
 
 
 Amygdala activation 
 For unpleasant words, significant group differences in lateralized activation were observed in a cluster encompassing amygdala and immediately adjacent superior temporal gyrus (see  Figure 3 , bottom panel). As amygdala encompasses such a small region, a higher per-voxel threshold of p < .025 was used for Monte-Carlo simulation, allowing for broader areas of activity. This simulation yielded a 51-voxel threshold, which was exceeded by the present amygdala cluster (centered on ±29, 4, −18). This indicates that activation in the cluster lacks a “peak” of sufficient size to exceed the initial cluster threshold but is nevertheless statistically reliable as a whole. 
 Consistent with previous lateralized amygdala findings ( Glascher & Adolphs, 2003 ;  Markowitsch, 1998 ), activation for the depressed group was more right-lateralized than for the control group,  F (1,27) = 9.180,  p  = .005. The depressed group showed a rightward lateralization for unpleasant words in the amygdala cluster,  t (10) = 2.436,  p  = .018, whereas the control group showed a nonsignificant leftward lateralization,  t (17) = 1.145, n.s. The interaction was driven primarily by less left amygdala activation in the depression group,  t (17) = 2.012,  p  = .027 (right hemisphere n.s.). Activation in this cluster was right-lateralized, though not significant,  F (1,27) = 2.781,  p  = .108. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 
 DLPFC asymmetry 
 The present fMRI study supports and extends EEG findings of asymmetric brain activation in frontal brain regions in response to emotional information. In this experiment, participants were asked to name the color in which a series of words were presented. Although participants were instructed to ignore word meaning, a manipulation of the emotional valence of the words elicited asymmetric activation consistent with decades of research on frontal lobe contributions to emotion and depression. 
 In particular, a region of DLPFC in Brodmann’s area 46 showed differential activation depending on whether the information to be ignored was of positive or negative valence, replicating  Herrington et al. (2005)  and consistent with EEG findings. The pattern of activity for this region did not distinguish depressed and non-depressed participants. Responding to the valence manipulation, this DLPFC cluster showed more activity in the context of pleasant but not unpleasant words. Furthermore, this area showed less activity in the context of unpleasant than neutral words. These two findings indicate that this area of DLPFC functions differentially across the valence spectrum – up-regulated for pleasant emotional stimuli and down-regulated for unpleasant emotional stimuli. The greater sensitivity of this left-hemisphere DLPFC region to pleasant and unpleasant emotional stimuli resulted in the observed functional asymmetry (e.g., an interaction between valence and hemisphere, illustrated in  Figure 2 , top panel). Although predicted by EEG studies (see  Nitschke et al., 2004 ), this experiment and its predecessors ( Herrington et al., 2005 ;  Engels et al., 2007 ) 1  are apparently the first fMRI studies to confirm directly that DLPFC functions asymmetrically while processing emotional stimuli 2 . 
 Furthermore, the present study is the first to explicitly demonstrate abnormal DLPFC asymmetries with symptoms of depression. Methods used emotional stimulus manipulations conforming to two perspectives on the structure of emotion, referred to here as valence and PA/NA. Although not created to describe brain function per se, these perspectives have provided a framework for numerous EEG and hemodynamic imaging studies of and theoretical papers on brain mechanisms in emotion (e.g.,  Davidson, 1992 ;  Heller, 1990 ,  1993 ;  Heller & Nitschke, 1998 ;  Keller, Hicks, & Miller, 2000 ; Nitschke et al., 1997,  1999 ,  2001 ,  1999 ;  Wacker, Heldmann, & Stemmler, 2003 ;  Williams, Watts, MacLeod, & Mathews, 1997 ). 
 A more posterior DLPFC cluster that revealed an asymmetry consistent with EEG findings for depression emerged only when comparing unpleasant trials to neutral trials, in line with the PA/NA perspective. Although activation in this cluster was greater for pleasant than unpleasant words (suggesting some sensitivity to valence), depression was characterized by an abnormal asymmetry for unpleasant but not pleasant words. This second DLPFC asymmetry arose from a group difference in which hemisphere showed the larger response to unpleasant words (right for depression, left for control). 
 In addition to confirming the existence of two asymmetries for processing emotional stimuli and depression, the fMRI paradigm allowed for further localization of different regions in DLPFC for state versus trait emotional processes. The more anterior location of the region in left DLPFC has now been found in several studies to be more active in the context of pleasant stimuli, showing more activity even when valence is to be ignored ( Herrington et al., 2005 ;  Engels et al., 2007 ). In contrast, trait affect was associated with less activity in a more posterior region of DLPFC. Although it remains to be confirmed that state versus trait emotion is associated with distinct DLPFC regions, the results are consistent with a model of cognitive control suggesting that mid-DLPFC is more involved in selecting and maintaining task-relevant representations of stimuli (Milham, Banich, & Barad, 2003), whereas regions of posterior DLPFC are more involved in biasing or steering posterior brain regions such as parietal cortex toward task-relevant processing, such as ink color identification (in the case of the Stroop task) and away from task-irrelevant processing (such as word reading). In this model, the more anterior mid-DLPFC region is stimulus-driven and involves more transient aspects of attentional control, whereas the more posterior DLPFC region is driven by top-down processes and may represent more static aspects of attentional control. 
 With regard to emotion-modulated attention, activity in DLPFC may therefore be signaling an “affective set” comparable to the hypothesized “cognitive set” often attributed to this region. Mid-DLPFC may signal more stimulus-driven aspects of the “affective set” whereas activity in posterior DLPFC may be reflecting more persistent, internalized, and trait-related aspects of the “affective set.” 
 These considerations lead to the hypothesis that activity in the left mid-DLPFC region signals the presence of a safe, pleasant, and affiliative context, in which threat is minimal, and in which left-hemisphere functions such as talking, reading, reflecting, and writing (behaviors that require selective attention to detail or internal focus, highly incompatible with scanning the environment for danger) are promoted. Thus, the affective dimensions of positive affect, pleasant valence, and approach motivation that have been associated with left prefrontal activity support efficient processing of the cognitive functions implemented by distributed left hemisphere brain regions. Trait-related activity associated with the more posterior region in DLPFC is likely to interact with that of the more anterior region to determine the net impact and nature of the overall “affective set.” 
 In contrast, we have argued that a distinct set of cognitive characteristics is implemented in various right hemisphere regions that taken together are ideally suited for a threat-response system (for review see  Nitschke, Heller, & Miller, 2000 ). For example, parietally mediated visual and spatial abilities allow for rapid processing of threat-relevant information (e.g., facial expression, attentional monitoring of space), and frontally mediated mechanisms inhibit ongoing behavior and interrupt ongoing activity to stop and take stock of a situation. Thus, depression-related activity in more posterior right DLPFC signals the presence of threat and is associated with negative affect, avoidance or withdrawal behavior, anxious arousal, and other behavioral manifestations indicative of a threat response. 
 Another brain region located in a more posterior region of DLPFC, in superior frontal gyrus, showed the opposite asymmetry, in which activation for unpleasant words was left-lateralized. This region did not distinguish the groups, thus reflecting a more stimulus-driven pattern. The role of this brain region in a Stroop task is unknown, but it is similar to asymmetries that have been reported for orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). 
 Some hemodynamic imaging studies have indicated that OFC may respond asymmetrically to emotion, particularly when elicited via olfaction ( Anderson et al., 2003 ,  Zald & Pardo, 2000 ). Although seldom explicitly tested, these studies generally localize processing of pleasant stimuli to right OFC and unpleasant stimuli to left OFC. As this OFC pattern was not observed in the present study, it is possible that the OFC emotion asymmetries are to some degree limited to olfaction or to an aspect of emotion that is tightly coupled with olfactory processing. One important difference between olfactory stimuli and emotional words is that the former are more likely to invoke an immediate change in mood state (e.g., disgust or fear). The paradigm used in this study is not likely as effective in triggering such a change. 
 Indeed, OFC activation prompted by emotionally valenced information, identified in a variety of studies examining, among other things, olfaction, taste, and somatosensory processing (for review see  O’Doherty, 2004 ), seems to track the affective relevance of highly situation-specific stimuli. For example, OFC activity in response to appetizing food increases and decreases with satiety ( Kringelbach, O’Doherty, Rolls, & Andrews, 2003 ). DLPFC, in contrast, may be more involved in producing a more general “affective set”, as suggested above, reflecting both stimulus-driven and trait-related emotional factors. OFC-mediated responses to smells, tastes, and other stimuli with immediate and rapidly-changing reward value would then be superimposed on this more general affective backdrop. A related distinction has been suggested by Pizzagalli, Sherwood, Henriques, and Davidson (2003), who argued for DLPFC-mediated goal representation and OFC-mediated learning of stimulus-incentive associations. 
 A leftward DLPFC asymmetry in the same task as a rightward asymmetry for OFC (and also perhaps for the region identified in superior frontal gyrus) may indicate simply that there are two separate systems recruited. The systems could be independent, reciprocal, or in some more complex way interactive. For example, when activity in the critical regions of left DLPFC is low, signaling a low positive affect context, left OFC may become more active when confronted with an unpleasant stimulus. Chronic low activity (e.g., as in depression) in left DLPFC could lead to chronic over-activity in left OFC. Conversely, high activity in left DLPFC could modulate the degree to which left OFC becomes active when confronted with an unpleasant stimulus, accounting for a pattern of resilience in some individuals as well as findings that positive affect leads to superior emotional coping, greater generosity in social situations, and higher accuracy in processing social and cognitive information (for review see Isen, in press). 
 The present study obtained support for both valence and PA/NA models of emotion, involving distinct frontal regions, with the PA/NA model better capturing abnormal DLPFC asymmetries in depression. Given the likely functional diversity of frontal subregions, the two models need not be mutually exclusive. With such regional differentiation, not yet accomplished in the EEG literature, the considerable evidence in favor of prefrontal asymmetry for emotional valence is easily reconciled with the more recent evidence in favor of prefrontal asymmetry for PA/NA and approach motivation. 
 
 
 Amygdala asymmetry 
 Observing rightward amygdala asymmetry for the depressed group is consistent with the findings of least one other study.  Abercrombie et al. (1998)  reported a relationship between increased metabolic rate and depressive symptoms among individuals with depression (but not a control group), measured at rest. The present study extends this finding to activation during an emotion provocation task. 
 Present data may be relevant to some theories of amygdala function. For example,  Glascher and Adolphs (2003)  showed decreased electrodermal activity in response to pleasant and unpleasant emotional pictures among individuals with damage to the right amygdala. They concluded that right amygdala function is related to general physiological arousal, independent of valence.  Sabatinelli, Bradley, Fitzsimmons, and Lang (2005)  reached the same conclusion in an fMRI assessment of amygdala response to diverse emotional pictures. Although depression may be associated with low levels of sympathetic arousal, it is also associated with heightened responsiveness to arousing unpleasant information ( Clark & Watson, 1991 ;  Koster, De Raedt, Goeleven, Franck, & Crombez, 2005 ), which may in turn be associated with more rightward amygdala lateralization. This proposal fits with present data and those of Glascher and Adolphs. However, present data are somewhat inconsistent with Glascher and Adolphs in a different respect. If amygdala functioned according to Glascher and Adolph’s proposal, one would expect an overall rightward lateralization of amygdala function for both emotion conditions across both groups. This pattern did not emerge here. 
 The amygdala activation pattern was also somewhat consistent with  Markowitsch’s (1998)  proposal implicating right amygdala in the rapid processing of emotion-related material. Markowitsch based his conclusions in part on studies by  Morris, Ohman, and Dolan (1998  1999) showing enhanced right amygdala activity during the perception of masked emotional faces. Present amygdala findings may therefore reflect hyperactivation in depression of a rapid response system for processing emotional information. However, as noted above, this conclusion would be more strongly supported if a more general rightward lateralization were observed in amygdala across groups and emotion word conditions. In particular, it is possible that the emotion words in the present study were not associated with sufficient arousal to engage the amygdala in such a way that asymmetry effects are detectable; these may emerge only in the context of trait depression coupled with unpleasant valence. This interpretation is consistent with  Glascher and Adolphs (2003) , insofar as they used emotional pictures that are likely more arousing than words. 
 
 
 Behavioral performance 
 Reaction-time data served the dual purpose of confirming the effectiveness of the emotion manipulation and evaluating possible group differences in overt performance in the face of emotional challenge. Results supported the hypothesis that emotionally arousing words slow performance, replicating work from our lab and elsewhere ( Compton et al., 2003 ;  Koven, Heller, Banich, & Miller, 2003 ;  Stormack, Nordby, & Hugdahl, 1995 ;  Williams, Mathews, & MacLeod, 1996 ). Thus, in the present study, behavioral performance data were more consistent with a PA/NA than a valence perspective, in that pleasant and unpleasant words differed from neutral but not from one another. The observed emotion-word Stroop effect indicates that the emotional content of the words was being processed (and not ignored), despite being irrelevant to the color naming task. These data support the assertion that observed asymmetries in brain activation were driven by the emotional content of the words. 
 The individual difference manipulation (depressed versus control group contrast) did not increase the emotional Stroop effect for unpleasant words. The overall trend towards decreased response times in the depression group was somewhat unexpected, given the association between depression and diminished attentional processes. Nevertheless, this result is consistent with depression studies that have failed to show reliable performance biases for tasks involving automatic attentional processes (see  Mogg et al., 1993 ). Thus, depressed and control groups responded to emotional stimuli differently (as detected by the fMRI data) but in a manner that is not necessarily evident when measuring rapid behavioral responses. As suggested by  Mogg et al. (1993) , the behavioral manifestations of attentional biases in depression may emerge only during tasks that demand more attentional resources than the emotion-word Stroop task. The trend toward decreased response time in the depression group is also unexpected given the psychomotor delays that often accompany a major depressive disorder diagnosis ( American Psychiatric Association, 2000 ;  Levin, Heller, Mohanty, Herrington, & Miller, 2007 ). Conceivably, the observed increase in right DLPFC activity for depressed participants provided an alternative approach to cognitive control on the task (e.g., by boosting inhibition of response to negative words as opposed to the more normative top-down attentional emphasis on task set — respond to color — mediated by the left DLPFC). If the observed response time decrease proves more robust in future emotional Stroop studies, this issue could be more systematically assessed via additional tests of psychomotor functions and paradigms that manipulate aspects of cognitive control and executive function . 
 
 
 Heterogeneity of DLPFC function 
 The present differentiation of brain areas responsive to emotional stimulus characteristics and depressive symptoms may also help to explain the failure of hemodynamic imaging studies to replicate the substantial EEG literature. In fact, just such a replication failure emerged in a preliminary analysis using these data (not reported here). A statistical map representing the main effect of Hemisphere in a Group x Valence x Hemisphere ANOVA did not yield a significant DLPFC cluster, as was predicted by EEG findings. Stated another way, DLPFC clusters emerged only by 1) contrasting the levels of either the Valence or Group factors via Valence × Hemisphere or Group × Hemisphere interactions, or 2) examining pleasant and unpleasant word conditions separately. Thus, lateralized DLPFC activation conforms to both valence and PA/NA perspectives and to group manipulations but effects may not be robust enough to emerge in typical fMRI studies with typical group sizes. Present findings avoid the failure of many relevant hemodynamic imaging studies to replicate the EEG literature on frontal lateralization in emotion and underscore the need for appropriate analytic strategies to advance this literature. 
 In addition to careful selection of emotion conditions, methodological advances will likely permit more detailed considerations of DLPFC heterogeneity. Although this study demonstrates the potential of testing asymmetry hypotheses via direct comparisons of per-voxel contralateral homologues, it is important to note that left and right hemispheres are not morphological mirror images of one another. There seems little reason to conclude that the amount of error induced by finding a simple geometric homologue is any greater than that inherent in typical registration procedures, or that this error is likely to be additive. Nevertheless, as with studies using traditional within-hemisphere analyses, the localization of signal to specific cortical areas will only improve as registration procedures become more robust (particular those procedures that account for variations in sulcal/gyral boundaries). 
 
 
 Generalizability of Findings to Other Paradigms and Stimuli 
 The emotional Stroop task is somewhat unique in that the emotional manipulation is implicit, insofar as it is orthogonal to the required response (i.e., naming the ink color). However, it appears likely that task completion nevertheless requires attentional selection and is therefore not distinctly preattentive ( Dalgleish, 2005 ;  Mohanty et al., 2007 ). Therefore, these findings are likely to generalize to other tasks (and stimuli) where attention to emotion is more explicit (such as judging the valence of a facial expression). This hypothesis can be addressed in future studies using explicit emotion paradigms, as well as in studies where competition between emotional and non-emotional responses are systematically varied. 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 This study indicates that, despite the conclusions of the  Murphy et al. (2003)  and  Wager et al. (2003)  meta-analyses of hemodynamic neuroimaging studies, specific brain areas within and outside prefrontal cortex function asymmetrically in emotion processing – including DLPFC. In addition, DLPFC may be critically involved in the emotional modulation of attention and cognition, with subregions of DLPFC displaying functional distinctions that mirror those that have been found for non-emotional, cognitive processes. These areas will likely be found only when using analytic approaches that explicitly address functional lateralization. 
 When interpreting the present findings, it is important to consider that depression is a broad construct with many manifestations. The varied aspects of depression touched upon by different researchers may lead to distinct conclusions, each potentially valid, none exhaustive. One perspective on depression that was not considered in the present study was that provided by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-Fourth Edition (DSM-IV-TR;  American Psychiatric Association, 2000 ) – specifically, the diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder. The present reliance on self-report measures of emotional function rather than diagnostic interview information reflects extensive research relating these measures to established models of depression (e.g.,  Nitschke, Heller, Imig, McDonald, & Miller, 2001 ) as well as their track record in isolating important aspects of brain function in depression using EEG. Furthermore, DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for depression, often used in isolation, lack the specificity required to distinguish depression and other diagnoses (primarily anxiety disorder diagnoses, which are often comorbid), as is often required to establish the specificity of relevant research findings ( Heller, 1993 ;  Heller, Etienne, & Miller, 1995 ;  Heller & Nitschke, 1998 ;  Heller, Nitschke, Etienne, & Miller, 1997 ;  Nitschke et al., 2001 ). However, a consideration of diagnostic status can be important in studies examining other aspects of depression. For example, although the dimensional measures used in this study would be quite appropriate for treatment studies examining asymmetries, a consideration of diagnostic status may facilitate the direct translation of results from these studies to clinical practice (for example, see  Davidson, Irwin, Anderle, & Kalin, 2003 ). 
 Present DLPFC findings have implications for understanding the clinical presentation of individuals with depression. Decades of human and non-human primate research have established DLPFC as a key constituent in attention, executive function, and working memory ( Rajkowska & Goldman-Rakic, 1995 ;  Davidson & Irwin, 1999 ). One need look no further than the DSM-IV criteria to realize that attentional processes are central to the conceptualization of mood disorders. A cardinal symptom of Major Depressive Disorder is an “inability to concentrate.” However, much more detail is needed regarding the nature and degree of executive dysfunction in depression (for review, see  Levin et al., 2007 ). Present findings underscore the importance of further research to understand the neural correlates of executive function deficits in depression. 
 Furthermore, such research has implications for the application of therapeutic techniques in the treatment of depression. Treatment approaches that target executive dysfunction may be particularly effective for at least certain types of depression. For example, Strauman and colleagues have developed a therapeutic approach called self-system therapy that targets individual differences in the ability to attain promotion goals, in other words, the ability to make good things happen. Individuals whose self-reported socialization history lacked an emphasis on pursuing promotion goals showed reduced left prefrontal activation as measured by fMRI when their promotion goals were activated (Merrill et al., 2006). Similarly, depressed patients displayed a deficit in left prefrontal cortical activation after priming of their individual promotion goals. 
 Other novel treatments for depression also appear to target prefrontal functions. Behavioral activation treatment ( Dimidjian et al., 2006 ) appears to be as effective as cognitive therapy and pharmacological therapy in more severely depressed individuals. This treatment approach emphasizes the use of behavioral strategies, such as goal-setting, self-monitoring, activity scheduling, and problem-solving, that promote the executive function and could plausibly address deficits in left prefrontal function. Furthermore, behavioral activation therapy explicitly addresses the avoidance or withdrawal component of depression, consistent with abnormal rightward lateralization of function. This treatment approach may therefore target dysfunctional prefrontal activity in depression directly through the modification of behavior relevant to both left and right hemispheres. It remains to be seen whether such interventions are reflected in normalization of brain activity. 
 In summary, key hypotheses regarding asymmetric emotion processes in DLPFC were strongly supported by present data. Furthermore, the analytic technique used here isolated asymmetries in other regions for which little valid or reliable data exist. These findings argue that distinguishable asymmetries exist across numerous nodes in the network of brain areas involved in emotion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abercrombie 
 H 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 S 
 
 
 Larson 
 C 
 
 
 Oakes 
 T 
 
 
 Lindgren 
 K 
 
 
 Holden 
 J 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Metabolic rate in the right amygdala predicts negative affect in depressed patients 
 Neuroreport 
 9 
 14 
 3301 
 3307 
 9831467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural systems for recognizing emotion 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 12 
 2 
 169 
 177 
 12015233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 D’esposito 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 The variability of human, BOLD hemodynamic responses 
 NeuroImage 
 8 
 4 
 360 
 369 
 9811554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aharon 
 I 
 
 
 Etcoff 
 N 
 
 
 Ariely 
 D 
 
 
 Chabris 
 C 
 
 
 O’Connor 
 E 
 
 
 Breiter 
 H 
 
 
 2001 
 Beautiful faces have variable reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence 
 Neuron 
 32 
 3 
 537 
 551 
 11709163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ahern 
 G 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 G 
 
 
 1985 
 Differential lateralization for positive and negative emotion in the human brain: EEG spectral analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 23 
 6 
 745 
 755 
 4080136 
 
 
 
 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 2000 
 Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, Fourth edition, Text revision 
 Washington, D.C 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Stappen 
 I 
 
 
 Panitz 
 D 
 
 
 Ghahremani 
 DG 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Dissociated neural representations of intensity and valence in human olfaction 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 2 
 196 
 202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baas 
 D 
 
 
 Aleman 
 A 
 
 
 Kahn 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Lateralization of amygdala activation: a systematic review of functional neuroimaging studies 
 Brain Research Reviews 
 45 
 2 
 96 
 103 
 15145620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beauregard 
 M 
 
 
 Levesque 
 J 
 
 
 Bourgouin 
 P 
 
 
 2001 
 Neural correlates of conscious self-regulation of emotion 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 21 
 18 
 RC165 
 11549754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bell 
 I 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 G 
 
 
 Hardin 
 E 
 
 
 Baldwin 
 C 
 
 
 Kline 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 Differential resting quantitative electroencephalographic alpha patterns in women with environmental chemical intolerance, depressives, and normals 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 43 
 5 
 376 
 388 
 9513754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bencherif 
 B 
 
 
 Stumpf 
 MJ 
 
 
 Links 
 JM 
 
 
 Frost 
 JJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Application of MRI-based partial-volume correction to the analysis of PET images of mu-opioid receptors using statistical parametric mapping 
 Journal of Nuclear Medicine 
 45 
 3 
 402 
 408 
 15001679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 M 
 
 
 Lang 
 P 
 
 
 1994 
 Measuring emotion: the Self-Assessment Manikin and the Semantic Differential 
 Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 
 25 
 1 
 49 
 59 
 7962581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 M 
 
 
 Lang 
 P 
 
 
 1998 
 Affective norms for English words (ANEW) 
 Gainesville, FL 
 The NIMH Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention, University of Florida 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruder 
 G 
 
 
 Stewart 
 J 
 
 
 Mercier 
 M 
 
 
 Agosti 
 V 
 
 
 Leite 
 P 
 
 
 Donovan 
 S 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Outcome of cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression: relation to hemispheric dominance for verbal processing 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 106 
 1 
 138 
 144 
 9103725 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 L 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 1991 
 Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: psychometric evidence and taxonomic implications 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 100 
 3 
 316 
 336 
 1918611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coan 
 J 
 
 
 Allen 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 Frontal EEG asymmetry as a moderator and mediator of emotion 
 Biological Psychology 
 67 
 7 
 49 
 15130524 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 R 
 
 
 1996 
 A computational approach to prefrontal cortex, cognitive control and schizophrenia: recent developments and current challenges 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Science 
 351 
 1346 
 1515 
 1527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Compton 
 R 
 
 
 Banich 
 M 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Milham 
 M 
 
 
 Herrington 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Paying attention to emotion: An fMRI investigation of cognitive an emotional stroop tasks 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 3 
 2 
 81 
 98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Compton 
 R 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Banich 
 M 
 
 
 Palmieri 
 P 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 2000 
 Responding to threat: Hemispheric asymmetries and interhemispheric division of input 
 Neuropsychology 
 14 
 2 
 254 
 264 
 10791865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dalgleish 
 T 
 
 
 1995 
 Performance on the emotional Stroop task in groups of anxious, expert, and control subjects: A comparison of computer and card presentation formats 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 9 
 4 
 341 
 362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dalgleish 
 T 
 
 
 2005 
 Putting some feeling into it--the conceptual and empirical relationships between the classic and emotional Stroop tasks: comment on Algom, Chajut, and Lev (2004) 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology - General 
 134 
 4 
 585 
 591 
 16316293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 
 
 Izard 
 C 
 
 
 Kagan 
 J 
 
 
 Zajonc 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Affect, cognition, and hemispheric specialization 
 Emotion, Cognition, and Behavior 
 New York, NY 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 1992 
 Prolegomenon to the structure of emotion: Gleanings from neuropsychology 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 6 
 245 
 268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 1998 
 Affective style and affective disorders: Perspectives from affective neuroscience 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 12 
 3 
 307 
 330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 What does the prefrontal cortex “do” in affect: perspectives on frontal EEG asymmetry research 
 Biological Psychology 
 67 
 1–2 
 219 
 233 
 15130532 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Ekman 
 P 
 
 
 Saron 
 C 
 
 
 Senulis 
 J 
 
 
 Friesen 
 W 
 
 
 1990 
 Approach-withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry: emotional expression and brain physiology. I 
 Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 
 58 
 2 
 330 
 341 
 2319445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Irwin 
 W 
 
 
 1999 
 The functional neuroanatomy of emotion and affective style 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 3 
 1 
 11 
 21 
 10234222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Irwin 
 W 
 
 
 Anderle 
 M 
 
 
 Kalin 
 N 
 
 
 2003 
 The neural substrates of affective processing in depressed patients treated with venlafaxine 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 160 
 1 
 64 
 75 
 12505803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Kabat-Zinn 
 J 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 J 
 
 
 Rosenkranz 
 M 
 
 
 Muller 
 D 
 
 
 Santorelli 
 S 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Alterations in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation 
 Psychosomatic Medicine 
 65 
 4 
 564 
 570 
 12883106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Lewis 
 D 
 
 
 Alloy 
 L 
 
 
 Amaral 
 D 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural and behavioral substrates of mood and mood regulation 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 52 
 478 
 502 
 12361665 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 D 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Putnam 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 Depression: Perspectives from affective neuroscience 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 53 
 1 
 545 
 574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dimidjian 
 S 
 
 
 Hollon 
 SD 
 
 
 Dobson 
 KS 
 
 
 Schmaling 
 KB 
 
 
 Kohlenberg 
 RJ 
 
 
 Addis 
 ME 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression 
 Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 
 74 
 4 
 658 
 70 
 16881773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Dissociable effects of arousal and valence on prefrontal activity indexing emotional evaluation and subsequent memory: an event-related fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 23 
 1 
 64 
 74 
 15325353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drevets 
 W 
 
 
 Raichle 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Reciprocal suppression of regional cerebral blood flow during emotional versus higher cognitive processes 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 12 
 3 
 353 
 358 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engels 
 AS 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Herrington 
 JD 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Webb 
 AG 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Specificity of regional brain activity in anxiety types during emotion processing 
 Psychophysiology 
 44 
 3 
 352 
 63 
 17433094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Peraza 
 DM 
 
 
 Kandel 
 ER 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Resolving emotional conflict: a role for the rostral anterior cingulate cortex in modulating activity in the amygdala 
 Neuron 
 51 
 6 
 871 
 82 
 16982430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuster 
 J 
 
 
 1989 
 The Prefrontal Cortex 
 New York, NY 
 Raven 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Pendergrass 
 J 
 
 
 Ross 
 T 
 
 
 Stein 
 E 
 
 
 Risinger 
 R 
 
 
 2001 
 Amygdala response to both positively and negatively valenced stimuli 
 Neuroreport 
 12 
 12 
 2779 
 2783 
 11522965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glascher 
 J 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 Processing of the arousal of subliminal and supraliminal emotional stimuli by the human amygdala 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 32 
 10274 
 10282 
 14614086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 I 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Rosenfeld 
 P 
 
 
 1998 
 Frontal EEG alpha asymmetry, depression, and cognitive functioning 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 12 
 449 
 478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 J 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 Raichle 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Integration of emotion and cognition in the lateral prefrontal cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 99 
 6 
 4115 
 4120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Green 
 D 
 
 
 Goldman 
 S 
 
 
 Salovey 
 P 
 
 
 1993 
 Measurement error masks bipolarity in affect ratings 
 Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 
 64 
 6 
 1029 
 1041 
 8326466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grimm 
 S 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 CF 
 
 
 Bermpohl 
 F 
 
 
 Heinzel 
 A 
 
 
 Dahlem 
 Y 
 
 
 Wyss 
 M 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Segregated neural representation of distinct emotion dimensions in the prefrontal cortex-an fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 30 
 1 
 325 
 340 
 16230029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 Mao 
 H 
 
 
 2002 
 Positive and negative emotional verbal stimuli elicit activity in the left amygdala 
 Neuroreport 
 13 
 1 
 15 
 19 
 11924878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 Ely 
 T 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 J 
 
 
 Kilts 
 C 
 
 
 2002 
 Ecstasy and agony: Activation of human amygdala in positive and negative emotion 
 Psychological Science 
 3 
 2 
 135 
 141 
 11933997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 
 
 Stein 
 NL 
 
 
 Leventhal 
 B 
 
 
 Trabasso 
 T 
 
 
 1990 
 The neurospychology of emotion: Developmental patterns and implications for psychopathology 
 Psychological and Biological Approaches to Emotion 
 Hillsdale, NJ 
 Lawrence Erlbaum & Associates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 1993 
 Neuropsychological mechanisms of individual differences in emotion, personality and arousal 
 Neuropsychology 
 7 
 476 
 489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Etienne 
 M 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 1995 
 Patterns of perceptual asymmetry in depression and anxiety: inplications for neuropsychological models of emotion and psychopathology 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 104 
 327 
 333 
 7790634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 1997 
 Regional brain activity in emotion: A framework for understanding cognition in depression 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 11 
 5–6 
 637 
 661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 The puzzle of regional brain activity in depression and anxiety: The importance of subtypes and comorbidity 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 12 
 3 
 421 
 447 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Etienne 
 M 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 1997 
 Patterns of regional brain activity differentiate types of anxiety 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 106 
 3 
 376 
 385 
 9241939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 1998 
 Lateralization in emotion and emotional disorders 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 7 
 1 
 26 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Koven 
 N 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Regional brain activity in anxiety and depression, cognition/emotion interaction, and emotion regulation 
 Brain Asymmetry 
 2 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herrington 
 J 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Koven 
 N 
 
 
 Fisher 
 J 
 
 
 Stewart 
 J 
 
 
 Banich 
 M 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Emotion-modulated performance and activity in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 Emotion 
 5 
 2 
 200 
 207 
 15982085 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holle 
 C 
 
 
 Neely 
 J 
 
 
 Heimberg 
 R 
 
 
 1997 
 The effects of blocked versus random presentation and semantic relatedness of stimulus words on response to a modified Stroop Task among social phobics 
 Cognitive Therapy & Research 
 21 
 6 
 681 
 697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hommer 
 D 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 G 
 
 
 Bennett 
 S 
 
 
 Adams 
 C 
 
 
 Varnera 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Amygdalar recruitment during anticipation of monetary rewards: an event-related fMRI study 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Science 
 985 
 476 
 478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irwin 
 W 
 
 
 Anderle 
 M 
 
 
 Abercrombie 
 H 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 S 
 
 
 Kalin 
 N 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Amygdalar interhemispheric functional connectivity differs between the non-depressed and depressed human brain 
 NeuroImage 
 21 
 2 
 674 
 686 
 14980569 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Bannister 
 P 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images 
 NeuroImage 
 17 
 825 
 841 
 12377157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain images 
 Medical Image Analysis 
 5 
 2 
 143 
 156 
 11516708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karama 
 S 
 
 
 Lecours 
 A 
 
 
 Leroux 
 J 
 
 
 Bourgouin 
 P 
 
 
 Beaudoin 
 G 
 
 
 Joubert 
 S 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Areas of brain activation in males and females during viewing of erotic film excerpts 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 16 
 1 
 1 
 13 
 11870922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Hicks 
 B 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 Caccioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Tassinary 
 LG 
 
 
 Berntson 
 GG 
 
 
 2000 
 Psychophysiology in the study of psychopathology 
 Handbook of psychophysiology 
 719 
 721 
 New York, NY 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirk 
 RE 
 
 
 1995 
 Experimental Design: Procedures for the Behavioral Sciences 
 Monterey, CA 
 Brooks/Cole Publishing Company 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 G 
 
 
 Adams 
 C 
 
 
 Varner 
 J 
 
 
 Hommer 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome with event-related fMRI 
 Neuroreport 
 12 
 17 
 3683 
 3687 
 11726774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koster 
 E 
 
 
 De Raedt 
 R 
 
 
 Goeleven 
 E 
 
 
 Franck 
 E 
 
 
 Crombez 
 G 
 
 
 2005 
 Mood-congruent attentional bias in dysphoria: maintained attention to and impaired disengagement from negative information 
 Emotion 
 5 
 4 
 446 
 455 
 16366748 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koven 
 NS 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2003 
 Relationships of distinct affective dimensions to performance on an emotional Stroop task 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 27 
 6 
 671 
 680 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kringelbach 
 ML 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 ET 
 
 
 Andrews 
 C 
 
 
 2003 
 Activation of the human orbitofrontal cortex to a liquid food stimulus is correlated with its subjective pleasantness 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 13 
 10 
 1064 
 1071 
 12967923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaBar 
 K 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 D 
 
 
 Parrish 
 T 
 
 
 Kim 
 Y 
 
 
 Nobre 
 A 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Hunger selectively modulates corticolimbic activation to food stimuli in humans 
 Behavioral Neuroscience 
 115 
 2 
 493 
 500 
 11345973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 R 
 
 
 Reiman 
 E 
 
 
 Ahern 
 G 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 G 
 
 
 Davidson 
 R 
 
 
 1997 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of happiness, sadness, and disgust 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 157 
 7 
 926 
 933 
 9210742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 
 
 Sidowski 
 J 
 
 
 Johnson 
 J 
 
 
 Williams 
 T 
 
 
 1980 
 Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: Computer applications 
 Technology in Mental Health Care Delivery Systems 
 Norwood, NJ 
 Ablex Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 P 
 
 
 1979 
 Presidential address, 1978. A bio-informational theory of emotional imagery 
 Psychophysiology 
 16 
 6 
 495 
 512 
 515293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 P 
 
 
 1994 
 The varieties of emotional experience: a meditation on James-Lange theory 
 Psychological Review 
 101 
 2 
 211 
 221 
 8022956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levin 
 R 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Herrington 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Cognitive deficits in depression and functional specificity of regional brain activity 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 31 
 211 
 233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Markowitsch 
 H 
 
 
 1998 
 Differential contribution of right and left amygdala to affective information processing 
 Behavioural Neurology 
 11 
 233 
 244 
 11568425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 T 
 
 
 Miller 
 M 
 
 
 Metzger 
 R 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 T 
 
 
 1990 
 Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire 
 Behaviour Research and Therapy 
 28 
 487 
 495 
 2076086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miezin 
 F 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 L 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 J 
 
 
 Petersen 
 S 
 
 
 Buckner 
 R 
 
 
 2000 
 Characterizing the hemodynamic response: Effects of presentation rate, sampling procedure, and the possibility of ordering brain activity based on relative thinking 
 NeuroImage 
 11 
 735 
 739 
 10860799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 Psychology and neuroscience: Making peace 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 9 
 212 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 Cohen 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Psychological interventions and the immune system: A meta-analytic review and critique 
 Health Psychology 
 20 
 1 
 47 
 63 
 11199066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mogg 
 K 
 
 
 Bradley 
 B 
 
 
 Williams 
 R 
 
 
 Mathews 
 A 
 
 
 1993 
 Subliminal processing of emotional information in anxiety and depression 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 102 
 2 
 304 
 311 
 8315143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Herrington 
 J 
 
 
 Koven 
 N 
 
 
 Fisher 
 J 
 
 
 Wenzel 
 E 
 
 
 Webb 
 A 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural mechanisms of affective interference in schizotypy 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 114 
 1 
 16 
 27 
 15709808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Engels 
 AS 
 
 
 Herrington 
 JD 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Ho 
 MR 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Differential engagement of anterior cingulate cortex subdivisions for cognitive and emotional function 
 Psychophysiology 
 44 
 3 
 343 
 51 
 17433093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molina 
 S 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 Davey 
 GCL 
 
 
 Tallis 
 F 
 
 
 1994 
 The Penn State Worry Questionnaire: Psychometric properties and associated characteristics 
 Worrying: Perspectives on theory, assessment and treatment 
 265 
 283 
 Chichester, UK 
 John Wiley and Sons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Ohman 
 A 
 
 
 Dolan 
 R 
 
 
 1998 
 Conscious and unconscious emotional learning in the human amygdala 
 Nature 
 393 
 6684 
 467 
 470 
 9624001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 F 
 
 
 Nimmo-Smith 
 I 
 
 
 Lawrence 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotions: a meta-analysis 
 Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 3 
 3 
 207 
 233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 S 
 
 
 1999 
 The medial extended amygdala in male reproductive behavior. A node in the mammalian social behavior network 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Science 
 877 
 242 
 257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 JB 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 
 
 D’Haenen 
 H 
 
 
 den Boer 
 JA 
 
 
 Willner 
 P 
 
 
 2002 
 The neuropsychology of anxiety disorders: Affect, cognition, and neural circuitry 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 975 
 988 
 Chichester, UK 
 John Wiley & Sons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Etienne 
 M 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Prefrontal cortex activity differentiates processes affecting memory in depression 
 Biological Psychology 
 67 
 125 
 143 
 15130528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Imig 
 J 
 
 
 McDonald 
 R 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 2001 
 Distinguishing dimensions of anxiety and depression 
 Cognitive Therapy & Research 
 25 
 1 
 1 
 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 Borod 
 Joan C 
 
 
 2000 
 The neuropsychology of emotion 
 Series in Affective Science 
 298 
 319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 J 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Palmieri 
 P 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 1999 
 Contrasting patterns of brain activity in anxious apprehension and anxious arousal 
 Psychophysiology 
 36 
 5 
 628 
 637 
 10442031 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Francis 
 S 
 
 
 Bowtell 
 R 
 
 
 McGlone 
 F 
 
 
 2001 
 Representation of pleasant and aversive taste in the human brain 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 85 
 3 
 1315 
 1321 
 11248000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2004 
 Reward representations and reward-related learning in the human brain: insights from neuroimaging 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 14 
 6 
 769 
 76 
 15582382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Critchley 
 H 
 
 
 Dolan 
 R 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural responses during anticipation of a primary taste reward 
 Neuron 
 33 
 5 
 815 
 826 
 11879657 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Osgood 
 C 
 
 
 1952 
 The nature and measurement of meaning 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 49 
 3 
 197 
 237 
 14930159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Owen 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 1996 
 Evidence for a two-stage model of spatial working memory processing within the lateral frontal cortex: a positron emission tomography study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 6 
 31 
 38 
 8670636 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perlstein 
 W 
 
 
 Elbert 
 T 
 
 
 Stenger 
 V 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociation in human prefrontal cortex of affective influences on working memory-related activity 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science U S A 
 99 
 3 
 1736 
 1741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 E 
 
 
 O’Connor 
 K 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 J 
 
 
 Gore 
 J 
 
 
 Grillon 
 C 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Activation of the left amygdala to a cognitive representation of fear 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 4 
 4 
 437 
 441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 DA 
 
 
 Sherwood 
 RJ 
 
 
 Henriques 
 JB 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Frontal brain asymmetry and reward responsiveness: a source-localization study 
 Psychological Science: A Journal of the American Psychological Society/APS 
 16 
 10 
 805 
 13 
 16181444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prochaska 
 J 
 
 
 Norcross 
 J 
 
 
 2001 
 Stages of change 
 Psychotherapy 
 38 
 4 
 443 
 448 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rajkowska 
 G 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 P 
 
 
 1995 
 Cytoarchitectonic definition of prefrontal areas in the normal human cortex: I. Remapping of areas 9 and 46 using quantitative criteria 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 5 
 4 
 323 
 37 
 7580125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 J 
 
 
 1980 
 A circumplex model of affect 
 Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 
 39 
 1161 
 1178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 Bullock 
 M 
 
 
 1986 
 Fuzzy concepts and the perception of emotion in facial expressions 
 Social Cognition 
 4 
 3 
 309 
 341 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Fitzsimmons 
 JR 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Parallel amygdala and inferotemporal activation reflect emotional intensity and fear relevance 
 NeuroImage 
 24 
 4 
 1265 
 1270 
 15670706 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seminowicz 
 DA 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Goldapple 
 K 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 S 
 
 
 Segal 
 Z 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Limbic-frontal circuitry in major depression: a path modeling metanalysis 
 NeuroImage 
 22 
 1 
 409 
 418 
 15110034 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shafritz 
 K 
 
 
 Collins 
 S 
 
 
 Blumberg 
 H 
 
 
 2006 
 The interaction of emotional and cognitive neural systems in emotionally guided response inhibition 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 1 
 468 
 475 
 16480897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stewart 
 JL 
 
 
 Levin-Silton 
 R 
 
 
 Sass 
 SM 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2008 
 Anger style, psychopathology, and regional brain activity 
 Emotion 
 8 
 5 
 701 
 713 
 18837620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stormack 
 K 
 
 
 Nordby 
 H 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 1995 
 Attentional shifts to emotionally charged cues: Behavioral and ERP data 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 9 
 5 
 507 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 D 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 2002 
 Adult clinical neuropsychology: Lessons from studies of the frontal lobes 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 53 
 1 
 401 
 433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tornoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar stereotactic atlas of the human brain 
 Stuttgart 
 Theime 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toglia 
 M 
 
 
 Battig 
 W 
 
 
 1983 
 Handbook of semantic word norms 
 New York, NY 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tucker 
 D 
 
 
 Stenslie 
 C 
 
 
 Roth 
 R 
 
 
 Shearer 
 S 
 
 
 1981 
 Right frontal lobe activation and right hemisphere performance. Decrement during a depressed mood 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 38 
 2 
 169 
 174 
 7212943 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wacker 
 J 
 
 
 Heldmann 
 M 
 
 
 Stemmler 
 G 
 
 
 2003 
 Separating emotion and motivational direction in fear and anger: effects on frontal asymmetry 
 Emotion 
 3 
 2 
 167 
 193 
 12899417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ward 
 DB 
 
 
 2006 
 Simultaneous inference for fMRI data 
 http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/manual/AlphaSim.pdf . Retrieved from  http://afni/nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/manual/AlphaSim.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 Clark 
 L 
 
 
 Weber 
 K 
 
 
 Assenheimer 
 J 
 
 
 Strauss 
 M 
 
 
 McCormick 
 R 
 
 
 1995 
 Testing a tripartite model: II. Exploring the symptom structure of anxiety and depression in student, adult, and patient samples 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 104 
 15 
 25 
 7897037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Phan 
 K 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Taylor 
 S 
 
 
 2003 
 Valence, gender, and lateralization of functional brain anatomy in emotion: a meta-analysis of findings from neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 3 
 513 
 31 
 12880784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 Tellegen 
 A 
 
 
 1985 
 Toward a consensual structure of mood 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 98 
 2 
 219 
 235 
 3901060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 J 
 
 
 Watts 
 F 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 C 
 
 
 Mathews 
 A 
 
 
 1997 
 Cognitive Psychology and Emotional Disorders 
 Chichester, UK 
 John Wiley and Sons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 J 
 
 
 Mathews 
 A 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 C 
 
 
 1996 
 The emotional stroop task and psychopathology 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 120 
 3 
 24 
 8711015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Ripley 
 BD 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2001 
 Temporal autocorrelation in univariate linear modeling of fMRI data 
 NeuroImage 
 14 
 1370 
 1386 
 11707093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 Pardo 
 JV 
 
 
 2000 
 Functional neuroimaging of the olfactory system in humans 
 International Journal of Psychophysiology: Official Journal of the International Organization of Psychophysiology 
 36 
 2 
 165 
 181 
 10742571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zald 
 D 
 
 
 2003 
 The human amygdala and the emotional evaluation of sensory stimuli 
 Brain Research Reviews 
 41 
 88 
 123 
 12505650 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zevon 
 MA 
 
 
 Tellegen 
 A 
 
 
 1982 
 The structure of mood change: An idiographic/nomothetic analysis 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 43 
 111 
 122 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 The present control sample was also used by  Engels et al. (2007) . None of the present depression sample was used in the Engels et al. study. None of present samples or the Engels samples overlapped with the  Herrington et al. (2005)  sample. 
 
 
 2 
 Although Brody et al. (2001) reported that they included hemisphere as a factor in some analyses involving DLPFC, they apparently did not report findings from such analyses. A few studies (e.g.,  Dolcos et al., 2004 ;  Grimm et al., 2006 ) have reported significant clusters in left and right prefrontal cortex during presentation of pleasant or unpleasant pictures, respectively. However, to our knowledge, none of these directly tested whether activation in these areas was asymmetric. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Response times for pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant words. Error bars represent 1 standard error above and below the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Areas yielding a Significant Valence × Hemisphere interactions in middle (top) and superior (bottom) frontal gyri, and peri-amygdala. The left-hand column displays the clusters. Activation is arbitrarily overlaid on left-hemisphere anatomy, as hemisphere was included as a factor in the analysis. The red crosshairs are placed over the center of effect size for each cluster. The right column plots mean parameter estimates (i.e., the average of all voxel values within the cluster) for each level of valence and hemisphere averaged across both groups. Although these regions did not show a three-way interaction involving Group, the middle column contains plots of the average parameter estimates for each level of Group separately. Coordinates are centers of effect size in the stereotactic space of  Talairach and Tournoux (1988) . Error bars represent 1 standard error above and below the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Group × Hemisphere interaction for unpleasant word activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The left-hand column displays the DLPFC cluster. Activation is arbitrarily overlaid on left-hemisphere anatomy, as hemisphere was included as a factor in the analysis. The red crosshairs are placed over the center of effect size for the cluster. The right-hand column contains plots of the average parameter estimates for each level of Group (Depression and Control) and Hemisphere (with L and R labeling left and right hemisphere, respectively). Hemisphere main effects for both clusters were significant at  p  < .01. Coordinates are centers of effect size in the stereotactic space of  Talairach and Tournoux (1988) . Error bars represent 1 standard error above and below the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Questionnaire scores (mean (SD)) for each group at mass testing (time 1) and lab session (time 2) 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 PSWQ 
 MASQ-AA 
 MASQ-AD 
 
 
 Time1 
 Time2 
 Time1 
 Time2 
 Time1 
 Time2 
 
 
 
 
 Depression 
 34.20 (10.21) 
 34.20 (10.21) 
 21.27 (3.13) 
 21.00 (2.93) 
 23.91 (2.47) 
 18.45 (3.36) 
 
 
 Control 
 36.11 (9.04) 
 34.39 (8.42) 
 19.56 (2.87) 
 20.17 (2.20) 
 12.50 (2.77) 
 12.67 (2.68) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  At Time 2 (immediately prior to psychophysiological data collection), the two groups did not differ on PSWQ scores,  t (27) = .813, ns, and MASQ Anxious Arousal scores,  t (26) = .050, ns, but did differ on MASQ-Anhedonic Depression scores,  t (27) = 4.851,  p  < .001. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Stimulus Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pleasant Words 
 Unpleasant Words 
 Neutral Words 
 
 
 
 
 Average Valence 
 7.83 
 2.47 
 5.21 
 
 
 Average Arousal 
 6.59 
 6.54 
 3.82 
 
 
 Average Frequency 
 52.39 
 60.03 
 60.00 
 
 
 Average Word Length 
 5.78 
 5.36 
 5.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Word stimuli were selected from the Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) set (Bradley & Lang, 1999). Valence and arousal data from the ANEW set are represented on a scale ranging from 1 to 9, with 9 representing the most pleasant and most arousing ratings, respectively. Frequency information was collected from Toglia & Battig (1978). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Summary of significant activation clusters 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 Talairach coordinates * 
 Cluster size (# voxels) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Valence X Hemisphere Predicting Pleasant and Unpleasant Word Activation 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus/DLPFC 
 46 
 ±36, 34, 16 
 31 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 8 
 ±41, 16, 49 
 41 
 
 
 Amygdala/Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 34 
 ±30, 1, −16 
 24 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 40 
 ±41, −38, 51 
 70 
 
 
 
 Group × Hemisphere Predicting Unpleasant Word Activation 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 44 
 ±44, 6, 30 
 242 
 
 
 Amygdala/Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 34 
 ±29, 4, −18 
 63 ^ 
 
 
 Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 20 
 ±37, −10, −32 
 69 
 
 
 Hippocampus/Heschl’s Gyrus 
 28 34 
 ±20, −38, −7 
 111 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 7 
 ±12, −55, 31 
 119 
 
 
 Precuneus/Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 ±29, −53, 46 
 233 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  The per-voxel threshold was  p  < .01 (corrected). 
 
 
 BA = Brodmann’s area 
 
 
 * 
 Because hemisphere is included as a factor in these analyses, x coordinates are both positive and negative. 
 
 
 ^As amygdala encompasses a small area, a higher threshold of  p  < .025 was used, allowing for broader activation while still controlling family-wise error. 
 
 
 
 
