
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 NeuroImage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 20728552 
 2962704 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.037 
 NIHMS231814 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Trait Approach and Avoidance Motivation: Lateralized Neural Activity Associated with Executive Function 
 
 
 
 
 Spielberg 
 Jeffrey M. 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 Gregory A. 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Engels 
 Anna S. 
 
 Pennsylvania State University and University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Herrington 
 John D. 
 
 Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 
 
 
 
 Sutton 
 Bradley P. 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 Marie T. 
 
 University of Colorado at Boulder 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 Wendy 
 
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 
 
 
 Address reprint requests to: Wendy Heller, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 603 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA,  w-heller@illinois.edu , or to Gregory A. Miller, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 603 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA,  gamiller@illinois.edu 
 
 Author designated to review proofs: Jeffrey M. Spielberg, 603 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820, Ph: (217) 781-4001, Fax: (217) 244-5876,  jspielb2@illinois.edu 
 
 
 
 10 
 9 
 2010 
 
 
 20 
 8 
 2010 
 
 
 1 
 1 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 1 
 2012 
 
 54 
 1 
 661 
 670 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Motivation and executive function are both necessary for the completion of goal-directed behavior. Research investigating the manner in which these processes interact is beginning to emerge and has implicated middle frontal gyrus (MFG) as a site of interaction for relevant neural mechanisms. However, this research has focused on state motivation, and it has not examined functional lateralization. The present study examined the impact of trait levels of approach and avoidance motivation on neural processes associated with executive function. Functional magnetic resonance imaging was conducted while participants performed a color-word Stroop task. Analyses identified brain regions in which trait approach and avoidance motivation (measured by questionnaires) moderated activation associated with executive control. Approach was hypothesized to be associated with left-lateralized MFG activation, whereas avoidance was hypothesized to be associated with right-lateralized MFG activation. Results supported both hypotheses. Present findings implicate areas of middle frontal gyrus in top-down control to guide behavior in accordance with motivational goals. 
 
 
 Approach 
 Avoidance 
 Motivation 
 Executive Function 
 Laterality 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 Motivation and executive function are both considered necessary for the completion of goal-directed activities ( Pochon et al., 2002 ), though the manner in which they combine to guide behavior remains a matter of debate ( Pessoa, 2009 ). Typically, theories of brain function relate orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) to motivation, especially with the representation of the value of rewards and punishments ( O'Doherty, 2004 ). Yet motivation is important for the maintenance of goal-directed behavior over time ( Dickinson & Balleine, 1994 ), which suggests the involvement of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, part of the middle frontal gyrus), a brain region more commonly associated with executive function and working memory. The manner in which regions typically associated with executive function might be influenced by motivational factors remains unclear. One aim of the present study was to identify interactive effects of motivation and executive function on goal-directed behavior. 
 
 Neural Correlates of Motivation and Executive Function 
 Motivation has been conceptualized as selecting goals based on their predicted value (e.g., reward or punishment), initiating behavior to achieve goals, and maintaining goal-directed action ( Campbell & Pritchard, 1976 ;  Jones, 1955 ;  Lindsley, 1957 ). One of the most basic distinctions made in the motivation literature is in regard to approach and avoidance, which research suggests are mediated by two separable systems ( Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ;  Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1998 ). Specifically, the approach motivational system mediates responses to potential positive outcomes (rewards), whereas the avoidance motivational system mediates responses to potential negative outcomes (punishments). Executive function, in contrast, comprises processes by which goal-directed action is carried out, such as maintaining salient information in working memory and inhibiting non-goal-related responses ( Miyake et al., 2000 ). Research on the interactive contributions of motivation and executive function is beginning to emerge, including studies that investigate the effects of state motivation on neural processes associated with tasks involving executive function (e.g.,  Pochon et al., 2002 ;  Taylor et al., 2004 ). This research has consistently implicated areas of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the integration of motivation and executive function processes ( Gilbert & Fiez, 2004 ;  Krawczyk, Gazzaley, & D'Esposito, 2007 ;  Locke & Braver, 2008 ;  Rowe, Eckstein, Braver, & Owen, 2008 ;  Szatkowska, Bogorodzki, Wolak, Marchewka, & Szeszkowski, 2008 ). For example,  Pochon et al. (2002)  examined the relation between reward processing, a facet of motivation, and performance on a working memory task. Results revealed that two areas of PFC, specifically left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), were activated by both working memory demands and increasing levels of reward.  Taylor et al. (2004)  conducted a similar study that examined the interaction between state motivation and working memory by manipulating motivation in terms of both reward and punishment. Consistent with the findings of Pochon et al., motivational processes interacted with working memory load, evidenced by changes in right MFG and IFG and left MFG, such that activation increased with both working memory load and reward magnitude. Hence, at least two studies provide some preliminary evidence that MFG and IFG are involved in the neural integration of executive function and motivational processes, when the degree of motivational state (e.g., potential for high reward) is manipulated. 
 Also relevant to understanding the neural mechanisms involved in integrating motivational and executive processes is the long line of research that suggests that PFC is lateralized with respect to emotional valence/motivational direction, with right PFC associated with unpleasant emotion and avoidance motivation and left PFC associated with pleasant emotion and approach motivation (for reviews see  Heller, 1993 ,  Davidson & Irwin, 1999 , and  Tomarken & Keener, 1998 ). Evidence for this distinction is provided by a variety of research findings using a number of different methodologies including neuropsychological testing (e.g.,  Flor-Henry, 1976 ), lesion patients (e.g.,  Gainotti, 1972 ), and electroencephalography (EEG, e.g.,  Davidson, Ekman, Saron, Senulis, & Friesen, 1990 ). This pattern of motivation-related lateralization in PFC is consistent with specialized functions of the two hemispheres. For example, the right hemisphere has been associated with spatial attention and other processes important for monitoring the environment for potential threat (for review see  Nitschke, Heller, & Miller, 2000 ), a key aspect of avoidance motivation ( Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ). Since neither  Pochon et al. (2002)  nor  Taylor et al. (2004)  directly tested lateralization of findings, which we have argued is essential for examining lateralized influences on motivational processes (e.g.,  Herrington et al., 2005 ,  2010 ), those studies cannot provide insight into this issue. 
 Complicating the issue, research on PFC asymmetry has often confounded emotional valence and motivational direction by using manipulations that are pleasantly valenced and approach-related (or unpleasantly valenced and avoidance-related). Harmon-Jones and colleagues (for review see  Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Peterson, 2010 ) have attempted to disentangle emotional valence and motivational direction using EEG. Their work suggests that lateralization of activity is driven by motivational direction, rather than emotional valence. However, this work has not identified specific regions of PFC involved in approach and avoidance motivation ( Tomarken & Zald, 2009 ;  Towers et al., 2008 ), as traditional low-density EEG provides only coarse spatial localization. Given that this coarse localization has the potential to average out important heterogeneity in PFC activity, it remains possible that both emotional valence and motivational direction are associated with asymmetry in PFC. Therefore, one goal of the present study is to provide better spatial localization within PFC of areas instantiating motivation-related processes by using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a method that provides better spatial resolution than traditional low-density EEG for locating specific areas of activity. 
 Although PFC asymmetries for motivational processes have regularly been observed in EEG and other methodologies, they have been elusive in studies employing fMRI.  Herrington et al. (2005)  were the first using fMRI to demonstrate leftward lateralization of activity in DLPFC in the context of pleasant emotional information. As discussed in  Herrington et al. (2010) , one reason that lateralization findings are uncommon in fMRI may be that asymmetries of activity are rarely tested directly in the fMRI literature. Relevant to the present study, a recent fMRI study ( Berkman & Lieberman, 2010 ) directly tested lateralization with regard to motivational processes and found leftward lateralization of activation for approach behavior and rightward lateralization for avoidance behavior in superior, lateral PFC. Additionally, leftward lateralization was found to correlate with a measure of the Behavioral Activation System, which has been associated with approach motivation ( Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ;  Spielberg et al., 2010 ). Although appropriate tests for lateralization were conducted in this study, activation was averaged across fairly large areas of the brain (all of Superior Frontal Gyrus, MFG, and IFG, at and above MNI z = 2), which did not allow for more precise localization. Thus, in addition to investigating the interactive effects of motivation and executive function on goal-directed behavior, the present study directly examined hemispheric lateralization in relation to these processes in a voxel-wise manner using an approach similar to  Herrington et al. (2005 ;  2010) . 
 
 
 Present Study 
 As described above, previous research has typically studied state motivation that is generated by experimental contingencies. The present study extends this research by examining the impact of trait, rather than state, motivation on neural processes associated with executive function. Trait motivation has been conceptualized as a longstanding dispositional tendency to be sensitive to the presence or absence of potential positive or negative outcomes and to energize behavior to approach positive outcomes or avoid negative outcomes ( Elliot, 2006 ). Such motivational tendencies have been hypothesized to influence problem-solving, coping styles, and personality (e.g.,  Elliot & McGregor, 2001 ;  Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ;  Gable, Reis, & Elliot, 2003 ). Understanding the neural instantiation of such tendencies and how they interact with executive function can therefore provide insights into individual differences in goal-directed behavior. 
 The present study tested the hypothesis that activity in regions of prefrontal cortex typically associated with maintaining goal-directed behavior is modulated by individual differences in trait motivation. To test this hypothesis, brain areas implicated in integrating neural processes associated with motivation and executive function were examined with fMRI. As reviewed above, both  Pochon et al. (2002)  and  Taylor et al. (2004)  examined motivational effects on working memory. The present study sought to extend that work by examining motivational influences on executive function through the use of a color-word  Stroop (1935)  task. This task is well established in the fMRI literature (for review see  Banich, 2009 ) and was utilized because it recruits executive control on a number of levels ( Liu, Banich, Jacobson, & Tanabe, 2006 ): (a) directing attention to a less automatic process (i.e., color identification over word reading), (b) selecting between distinct semantic concepts (e.g., choosing the concept of red over the concept of blue), and (c) selecting between different behavioral responses (e.g., choosing the response linked to red over the response linked to blue). Based on the findings of Pochon et al. and Taylor et al., trait motivation was hypothesized to moderate brain activation in MFG and IFG. Results were also expected to vary as a function of brain lateralization: approach temperament was hypothesized to moderate activation in left MFG and IFG, and avoidance temperament was hypothesized to moderate activation in right MFG and IFG. 
 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were recruited from a larger pool of undergraduates, who completed a series of questionnaires as partial fulfillment of enrollment in an introductory psychology course. The questionnaires included the Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ,  Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec, 1990 ;  Molina & Borkovec, 1994 ) as a measure of anxious apprehension, and portions of the Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ;  Watson, Clark, et al., 1995 ;  Watson, Weber, et al., 1995 ), which contains measures of anxious arousal and anhedonic depression. Participants were contacted if they scored above the 80th percentile on one of the three psychopathology dimensions and below the 50th percentile on the other two dimensions (creating three “pure” groups), if they scored above the 80th percentile on all three psychopathology dimensions (creating a “comorbid” group), or below the 50th percentile on all three psychopathology dimensions (creating a “control” group). Group membership was ignored in data analyses for the present study except when testing whether group membership was a confounding effect 1 . Participants were then screened for claustrophobia, left-handedness, history of serious brain injury, abnormal hearing or vision, metal in their body, pregnancy, or non-native English. 
 A total of 107 participants completed the laboratory protocol. Participants were not used if (a) they moved more than 3.3 mm relative to the volume used for registration (the middle volume of the time series) or more than 2 mm relative to the previous volume (one participant exceeded this criterion only during the last block of words; therefore, this block was not used), (b) if they committed errors on 15% or more of the trials, (c) if they exhibited reaction times greater than 3 standard deviations from the mean, or (d) if their scans exhibited apparent signal loss due to magnetic susceptibility in areas of interest. This left 87 participants (37 female, mean age = 19.07). One participant's scans exhibited scanner artifact throughout the time series. Independent components analysis, as implemented in MELODIC ( Beckmann & Smith, 2004 ), was used to isolate and remove this artifact. After removal, no artifact was apparent. 
 
 
 Questionnaires 
 To measure approach and avoidance temperament, three questionnaires were administered that have been previously associated with these constructs ( Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ; Spielberg et al., under review): the Behavioral Activation and Behavioral Inhibition Scales ( Carver & White, 1994 ), the Extraversion and Neuroticism sub-scales of the NEO-Five Factor Inventory ( Costa & McRae, 1992 ), and the Positive and Negative Temperament sub-scales of the General Temperament Survey ( Watson & Clark, 1993 ). These scales were used as indicators in confirmatory factor analysis using AMOS. Based on previous research ( Elliot & Thrash, 2002 ;  Spielberg et al., 2010 ), two latent factors were modeled, with Behavioral Activation, Extraversion, and Positive Temperament used as indicators for approach temperament and Behavioral Inhibition, Neuroticism, and Negative Temperament used as indicators for avoidance temperament. Maximum likelihood estimation was used, and the two latent factors were allowed to co-vary freely. Factor scores were extracted with the regression method to use as measures of approach and avoidance temperament. 
 
 
 Stimuli and Experimental Design 
 Participants completed two tasks, a color-word Stroop and an emotion-word Stroop (duration of each task = 12 min 20 sec) in fMRI and EEG sessions (findings from the emotion-word Stroop and EEG sessions are not presented here). The order of presentation of the two tasks and the two sessions was counterbalanced across participants. In the color-word Stroop task, blocks of color-congruent or color-incongruent words alternated with blocks of neutral words. Additional neutral trials were intermixed 50:50 in congruent and incongruent blocks to prevent the development of word-reading strategies. This type of blocked-design color-word Stroop task has been shown to effectively elicit Stroop interference ( Banich et al., 2000b ;  Milham & Banich, 2005 ;  Milham, Banich, Claus, & Cohen, 2003 ). The order of presentation of blocks in the present investigation was counterbalanced for each participant. In addition to the word blocks, there were four fixation blocks (one at the beginning, one at the end, and two in the middle of the session) and five rest blocks (one at the beginning, one at the end, and one between each word block). In the fixation condition a fixation cross intensified in place of word presentation, and in the rest condition the subject was instructed to rest and keep their eyes open while the screen was blank. 
 The task consisted of 256 trials presented in 16 blocks (four congruent, four incongruent, and eight neutral) of 16 trials each, with a variable ITI (2000 +/- 225 ms) between trial onsets. A trial began with presentation of a word for 1500 ms, followed by a fixation cross for an average of 500 ms. Each trial consisted of one word presented in one of four ink colors (red, yellow, green, blue), each color occurring equally often with each word type. The task consisted of congruent trials in which the word named the ink color in which it was printed (e.g., the word “RED” printed in red ink), incongruent trials in which the word named a color incongruent with the ink color in which it was printed (e.g., “GREEN” in red ink), and neutral trials in which the word was unrelated to color (e.g., “LOT” in red ink). Neutral words were matched with color words for word frequency and length. Each word (visual angle 6 – 16 degrees) was centered on a black background and projected. Participants responded to the color of the ink with their index and middle fingers using a four-button response box (James Long Company) under each hand. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Collection 
 The fMRI data were 370 three-dimensional (3D) images acquired using a Siemens gradient-echo echo-planar imaging sequence (TR 2000 ms, TE 25 ms, flip angle 80°, FOV = 220 cm) on a Siemens Allegra 3T scanner. Each image consisted of 38 oblique axial slices (slice thickness 3 mm, 0.3mm gap, in-plane resolution 3.4375 × 3.4375 mm) acquired parallel to the anterior and posterior commissures. After the fMRI acquisition, a 160-slice MPRAGE structural sequence was acquired (spatial resolution 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm) and used to warp the participant's functional data into standard space. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Reduction and Preprocessing 
 Image processing and statistical analysis was implemented primarily using FEAT v5.98 (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool, FMRIB's Software Library,  http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/analysis/research/feat/ ), part of the FSL analysis package ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl ). The first three time points (fMRI volumes) of the data set corresponding to each task for each subject were discarded to allow the MR signal to reach a steady state. Functional data for each participant were motion-corrected using FMRIB's linear registration tool, MCFLIRT (Jenkinson, Bannister, Brady, & Smith, 2003), intensity-normalized, temporally filtered with a nonlinear high-pass filter, and spatially smoothed using a 3D Gaussian kernel (FWHM = 5 mm). Temporal low-pass filtering was carried out using AFNI's 3dDespike tool ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/ ). 
 
 
 fMRI Data Processing 
 Regression analyses were performed on the processed functional time series of each participant using FILM, FMRIB's Improved Linear Model with autocorrelation correction ( Woolrich, Ripley, Brady, & Smith, 2001 ). Four explanatory variables, one for each word type block (congruent, incongruent, neutral) and one modeling the rest condition, were included in the regression model (fixation was left unmodeled). These explanatory variables modeled all trials in the blocks, irrespective of whether they were correct or incorrect (i.e., trials were still modeled if they were incorrect). For each explanatory variable, the vector of assigned weights corresponding to word type was convolved with a gamma function to better approximate the temporal course of the blood-oxygen-dependent (BOLD) hemodynamic response function. Each explanatory variable yielded a per-voxel effect-size parameter estimate (β) map representing the magnitude of activation associated with that explanatory variable. In order to create comparisons of interest, β values for the relevant parameters were contrasted. The comparison of interest was the incongruent vs. congruent block contrast (IvC). For each subject, these functional activation maps, as well as the corresponding structural MRI map, were warped into a common stereotaxic space (the MNI152 template, standard with FSL v4.1) using FMRIB's Non-Linear Image Registration Tool, FNIRT ( Andersson, Jenkinson, & Smith, 2007 ). 
 Group inferential statistical analyses were carried out using FLAME (FMRIB's Local Analysis of Mixed Effects). Brain activation captured in the IvC contrast was entered as a dependent variable into multiple regression analysis with approach and avoidance temperament scores as predictor variables. This regression analysis produced two beta maps, one corresponding to the unique variance associated with approach temperament (with the shared variance associated with avoidance removed) and one corresponding to the unique variance associated with avoidance temperament (with the shared variance associated with avoidance removed). T-tests were conducted on the βs for approach and avoidance temperament and then converted to z-scores to determine the significance of the βs. A frontal gray-matter mask was used to limit the number of voxels under consideration. A second mask was used for lateralization analyses that contained only left hemisphere frontal gray matter. 
 Monte Carlo simulations via AFNI's AlphaSim program were used to estimate the overall significance level (probability of a false detection) for thresholding the 3D functional z-map image ( Ward, 2000 ). These simulations were conducted for several individual voxel z-threshold values, providing the appropriate cluster size giving an overall two-tailed family-wise error rate of 0.05. A threshold z-value of 2.3263 and minimum cluster size of 83 voxels was used. For lateralization analyses, a threshold z-value of 2.3263 and a minimum cluster size of 49 voxels was used (this cluster size threshold is lower because only the left hemisphere was examined for lateralization analyses). 
 The within-subjects findings for the present study are in line with previous research (e.g.,  Liu et al., 2006 ). Specifically, activation was observed in several areas, including bilateral MFG, IFG, precuneus, parietal lobule, and anterior cingulate cortex. Therefore, findings for the main effect of IvC will not be discussed in detail. However, for regions associated with approach or avoidance temperament, the amount of overlap with areas in which there is a positive main effect for IvC (greater activity during incongruent than during congruent trials) will be listed. 
 Lateralization was tested using a locally written Matlab program. This program conducted a repeated-measures homogeneity of slopes ANCOVA, with hemisphere as the repeated measure, approach and avoidance temperament scores as continuous predictors, and fMRI activation for the IvC contrast as the dependent variable. This ANCOVA was conducted on a per-voxel basis, and the resultant β map was thresholded in the manner described above. 
 In order to foster comparability of areas between hemispheres, the functional and structural images for each participant were flipped along the x axis in native space (rather than MNI standard space) and registered to the MNI template. In lateralization analyses, the left-hemisphere functional data for the un-flipped images was compared to the right-hemisphere functional data for the flipped images 2 . 
 
 
 Reaction Time Analyses 
 Mean reaction time (RT) was calculated for the congruent and incongruent trials for each participant, and an interference score was calculated by subtracting the congruent RT from the incongruent RT and dividing this difference by the sum of the two RTs (to account for overall mean differences in RT). RT interference was entered as a dependent variable in a regression analysis with approach and avoidance temperament entered simultaneously as predictors. 
 To assess the potential effect of neural activity related to motivational temperaments on behavioral performance, a score for each ROI identified in the earlier analysis in which approach temperament and avoidance temperament predicted fMRI activation (i.e., not the lateralization analysis in which hemisphere was a factor) was created by averaging β values across voxels in each ROI, for each participant. ROI scores were then correlated with RT interference and error interference (created by subtracting errors for congruent trials from errors for incongruent trials). Spearman rank-order correlations were used for error analyses. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
 The two-factor model of scales contributing to approach and avoidance scores was successfully estimated and was associated with a χ 2  value of 13.46, with 8 degrees of freedom. The comparative fit index value ( Bentler, 1990 ) was 0.985, and the root mean square error of approximation value ( Brown & Cudeck, 1993 ) was 0.089, indicating that the model provided a good fit to the data. All measurement weights were significant at  p  < 0.001, and the standardized estimates are provided in  Table 1 . 
 
 
 Behavioral Analysis 
 In order to confirm the presence of a Stroop interference effect, a paired t-test comparing RT for incongruent trials (mean = 820ms, SD = 149ms) to RT for congruent trials (mean = 631ms, SD = 92ms) was conducted. Incongruent trials had longer RTs than congruent trials ( t (86) = 16.2,  p  < 0.001). Additionally, a paired t-test comparing number of errors for incongruent trials (mean = 2.9, SD = 2.7) to number of errors for congruent trials (mean = 0.7, SD = 1.0) was conducted. Incongruent trials produced more errors than did congruent trials ( t (86) = 7.9,  p  < 0.001). To examine effects of motivation on behavioral interference, a regression was conducted with RT interference score as the dependent variable and approach and avoidance temperament scores entered simultaneously as predictors. In combination, they controlled 7% of the variance in RT interference ( p  = .05). Approach and avoidance each contributed unique variance to Stroop interference, ΔR 2  = .06,  p  = 0.02, and ΔR 2  = .05,  p  = 0.03, respectively, indicating that trait motivation was positively related to the ability to inhibit dominant responses on the Stroop 3 . 
 
 
 Moderation of Neural Activation by Approach and Avoidance Temperament 
 Table 2  lists brain regions where activation related to IvC was moderated by trait approach or avoidance temperament. In line with present hypotheses, activation in two regions in left superior PFC increased as approach temperament increased, as illustrated in  Figure 1a and 1b  and  Figure 2a . The first region was located in Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG, BA 8) and MFG (BA 9), in what is considered anterior DLPFC. The second region was also located in MFG (BA 9) but more posterior to the first region, in mid DLPFC. Importantly, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that neural activity in the left hemisphere is associated with approach motivation. Unexpectedly, an area in medial-posterior Orbitofrontal Cortex (OFC, BA 11) exhibited the opposite relationship with approach temperament, with activation decreasing as approach temperament increased. This area is pictured in  Figure 1c . 
 Results for avoidance motivation were also consistent with hypotheses regarding brain activation and lateralization. Specifically, activation in a right MFG area (BA 9/8/6), located in posterior DLPFC, increased as avoidance temperament increased, suggesting that the right hemisphere is particularly relevant for avoidance motivation. Unexpectedly, activation in an area in left SFG and MFG (BA 8/9) also increased as avoidance temperament increased. This area had an overlap of 18 voxels with the left MFG/SFG area associated with approach temperament described (i.e., 18% of the ROI associated with avoidance, 19% of the ROI associated with approach) and, thus, may represent a brain region that tracks trait motivation more generally. The areas associated with avoidance motivation are presented in  Figure 1d and 1e  and  Figure 2a and 2b , and the overlap in approach and avoidance areas is presented in  Figure 1f  and  Figure 2a . 
 
 
 Correlations between Brain Activation and Behavior 
 In order to explore the potential influence of the brain areas associated with motivation on successful behavioral performance, an average β for each cluster, for each participant, was calculated and correlated with RT and error interference. These correlations are presented in  Table 3 . The left medial-posterior OFC cluster (associated with approach temperament) was positively correlated with RT interference, suggesting that activation in this area reflects processing that distracts from the current goal. Similarly, the more posterior left MFG cluster (associated with approach temperament) exhibited a positive correlation with error interference. This area may be associated with some aspect of approach-related processing (e.g., desire to perform the task quickly), which led to an increase in errors. No reliable associations emerged between avoidance-related regions and behavioral indices. 
 
 
 Lateralization Analyses 
 Given work indicating that motivation influences laterality of activation in frontal regions, analyses were carried out to examine whether the activity in regions associated with each temperament type (approach, avoidance) were asymmetric across the hemispheres. Five clusters emerged, listed in Table 4, in which moderation of brain activation by approach temperament was lateralized. Three of these clusters overlapped with the three clusters identified as being associated with approach temperament (see  Table 2 ), indicating that these effects are lateralized. Two additional clusters emerged, one located in SFG (BA 6) and one in medial OFC (BA 11). In order to explore the nature of the relationship between these areas and approach temperament, the average β for each cluster, for each hemisphere, for each participant, was calculated and correlated with approach temperament scores (holding avoidance temperament constant). These partial correlations are presented in  Table 4 . 
 One cluster emerged, listed in Table 4, in which moderation of brain activation by avoidance temperament was lateralized. This cluster overlapped with the right MFG cluster associated with avoidance temperament listed in Table 2, indicating that this effect was lateralized. In order to explore the nature of the relationship between these areas and avoidance temperament, an average β for each cluster, for each hemisphere, for each participant, was calculated and correlated with avoidance temperament scores (holding approach temperament constant). These partial correlations are presented in  Table 4 . In sum, the regions that are associated with temperament exhibited significantly lateralized activation. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study is one of the first to examine the moderation of neural activation related to executive function by trait motivation. The findings have important implications for understanding the interactive contributions of motivation and executive function for goal-directed behavior. As hypothesized, approach temperament moderated activation to the contrast of incongruent vs. congruent blocks (IvC) in two regions of left MFG (a relatively anterior region in BA 8 and 9 and a relatively posterior area in BA 9 only), and avoidance temperament moderated activation for the same contrast in one region of right MFG (BA 9/8/6), all of which were lateralized effects. 
 
 Trait Motivation and Left Anterior MFG 
 The moderation of neural activation related to the IvC contrast by both approach and avoidance temperament in the more anterior MFG area (BA 8/9) is consistent with research implicating this region in executive function, particularly processes associated with inhibiting a competing response. For example, using a Go-NoGo task, several studies found increased activation in this area when a response set changes and a relatively automatic behavior must be inhibited ( Horn, Dolan, Elliott, Deakin, & Woodruff, 2003 ;  Kaladjian et al., 2009 ;  Liddle, Kiehl, & Smith, 2001 ). Extending this research, a number of studies indicate that this area is recruited when conflicting information requires the inhibition of a competing response using tasks such as the flanker, color-word Stroop, and Wisconsin Card Sorting (WCST) tasks ( Fan, Flombaum, McCandliss, Thomas, & Posner, 2003 ;  Konishi, Jimura, Asari, & Miyashita, 2003 ). Two studies specifically implicate this area in responding to conflicting emotional information ( Ferstl, Rinck, & Von Cramon, 2005 ;  Schirmer, Zysset, Kotz, & von Cramon, 2004 ), raising the possibility that this area responds preferentially to affectively valenced information. 
 The more anterior area of left MFG has also been associated with the anticipation and receipt of motivationally salient stimuli. Abler, Walter, Erk, Kammerer, and Spitzer (2006) and  Ramnani and Miall (2003)  found that activation in this area tracked the perceived probability of a rewarding outcome, with higher activation associated with greater likelihood of reward.  Holsen et al. (2005)  found activation in this area in fasting participants who were viewing images of food. This activation decreased after participants had eaten, indicating that activation tracked the current motivational salience of stimuli. Four studies have also implicated this area of MFG in responding to the receipt of monetary rewards ( Bickel, Pitcock, Yi, & Angtuaco, 2009 ;  Cox, Andrade, & Johnsrude, 2005 ;  Goldstein et al, 2007 ;  Pochon et al., 2002 ). Importantly,  Pochon et al. (2002)  found that this area responded to both the receipt of rewards and working memory load, suggesting that this area is involved with the integration of motivational and executive function processes. In addition to the anticipation and receipt of reward, one study implicated this area of left MFG in punishment anticipation ( Knutson, Adams, Fong, & Hommer, 2001 ), and another study found activation in this area of MFG in response to receiving monetary punishments (Dillon et al., 2008), suggesting that this area is not specific to one type of potential outcome but rather responds to motivational salience in general. 
 Overall, these studies suggest that the more anterior area of left MFG identified in the present study is involved in both inhibiting a competing response and anticipating and responding to motivationally salient stimuli. It has been unclear why this region is involved in these apparently different processes. One hypothesis that resolves this confusion is that this region implements a motivational set that biases processing in other brain areas, in a top-down manner, to respond in a goal-congruent fashion. Theoretically, a region involved in implementing a motivational set should become engaged when goal-relevant information is received, in order to evaluate the success of current goal-attainment strategies and adjust behavior to increase the likelihood of goal attainment. Therefore, a region implementing a motivational set will become more active when goal-incongruent behavior must be inhibited and/or when encountering environmental cues that predict future outcomes. 
 Present results support the proposal developed above that the more anterior MFG region is involved in implementing a motivational set. Specifically, approach and avoidance temperament can be thought of as dispositions to engage motivational sets, approaching positive outcomes and avoiding negative outcomes, respectively. Therefore, increased levels of approach or avoidance temperament should be associated with increased activity in areas involved in implementing a motivational set. Given that both approach and avoidance were associated with the more anterior MFG area in the present study, it is possible that this area is involved in implementing a motivational set without being specific to certain types of goals (although independently, since they were entered into the regression simultaneously). The overlap between approach and avoidance is supported by research linking this MFG region to both reward (e.g., Abler et al., 2006) and punishment (e.g.,  Knutson et al., 2001 ). However, activation in this area was lateralized only for approach temperament, indicating that, even if this area is recruited by increased motivation generally, it is recruited in a different fashion or to a different degree by each temperament (specifically, more bilaterally for avoidance). Alternatively, the overlap may reflect a lack of spatial resolution to distinguish nearby areas. 
 
 
 Approach Motivation and Left MFG 
 Approach temperament was associated with another, more posterior, area of MFG, not moderated by avoidance temperament. This effect was lateralized. Similar to the more anterior MFG area discussed above, the more posterior area of MFG may be involved in imposing a motivational set, although one specific to reward outcomes. Specifically, this more posterior MFG region has been associated with the anticipation (Abler et al., 2006;  Dreher, Kohn, & Berman, 2006 ;  Ramnani & Miall, 2003 ) and receipt ( Cox et al., 2005 ;  Landmann et al., 2007 ) of monetary reward. This more posterior MFG area has also been associated with responding to pleasant stimuli, such as pleasant pictures ( Canli, Desmond, Zhao, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1998 ;  Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza 2004 ). Using a direct test of lateralization similar to that employed in the present study,  Herrington et al. (2005)  found left-lateralized activation in this area in response to pleasant words. Interestingly,  Knutson, Bhanji, Cooney, Atlas, and Gotlib (2008)  found that, relative to healthy controls, individuals with depression exhibited decreased activation in this area when anticipating monetary rewards. This finding is consistent with research suggesting that depression is associated with decreased levels of approach temperament (e.g.,  Spielberg et al., 2010 ). The results of the present study suggest that decreased activation in this more posterior MFG area contributes to depression by decreasing the ability to bias behavior towards potential rewarding goals. 
 Also consistent with present findings, the more posterior MFG area has been associated with inhibition of a competing response in studies using various paradigms, (e.g.,  Kaladjian et al., 2009 ;  Liddle et al., 2001 ; also observed in a meta-analysis of Go/NoGo,  Buchsbaum, Greer, Chang, & Berman, 2005 ;  Milham et al., 2003 ;  Nakao et al., 2005 ;  Konishi et al., 2003 ). Researchers have also observed activation in this area prior to successful performance in the Go/NoGo task ( Garavan, Ross, Murphy, Roche, & Stein, 2002 ) and during working memory processes involved in the organization of upcoming action ( Volle et al., 2005 ). Taken together with the results of the present study, research suggests that the more posterior MFG area is involved with implementing a motivational set in order to attain potential rewarding goals. 
 Although both MFG areas related to approach temperament appear to be involved in implementing a motivational set, there may be contributions to this process that are specific to each area. One potential area of specificity is suggested by the association between the more posterior MFG area and organization of upcoming goal-directed behavior ( Volle et al., 2005 ). The more anterior MFG area did not evidence a similar association in this study. One model of approach/avoidance motivation (Scholer & Higgins, 2008) distinguishes between approach/avoidance at the level of the goal (whether the goal is desirable and should be approached, or undesirable and should be avoided) and at the level of the strategy used to obtain a goal (whether approach- or avoidance-related means are used to obtain a goal). Since processes related to the organization of upcoming goal-directed behavior are at the level of the strategy, it may be that the more posterior MFG region is more strongly linked to the level of the strategy than the more anterior MFG region. 
 
 
 Avoidance Motivation and Right MFG 
 As hypothesized, avoidance temperament moderated activation to IvC in right MFG (BA 9/8/6), and this effect was lateralized. This area has been associated with functions similar to the more posterior MFG area associated with approach, except that it has been linked to anticipation of potential negative rather that positive outcomes. Specifically, two studies have linked activation in this area to the threat of shock ( Butler et al., 2007 ;  Dalton, Kalin, Grist, & Davidson, 2005 ).  Cooper and Knutson (2008)  suggested that this area responds not to threat specifically but rather to the uncertainty of the outcome. They found that activity in this area reflected the level of uncertainty of both pleasant and unpleasant potential outcomes. Therefore, this area may be involved in monitoring uncertainty about aspects of the environment that may be detrimental to achieving goals. This area has also been associated with the receipt of negative outcomes, including monetary punishments ( Bickel et al., 2009 ; Dillon et al., 2008) and painful thermal stimuli ( Derbyshire, Jones, Gyulai, Clark, & Townsend, 1997 ). Interestingly,  Keedwell, Andrew, Williams, Brammer, and Phillips (2005)  observed more activation in this area during a sad mood induction in depressed individuals than in healthy controls. This finding is consistent with an association between depression and greater levels of avoidance temperament ( Spielberg et al., 2010 ). 
 This right MFG area has also been implicated in inhibition of a dominant response in various paradigms (e.g.,  Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ;  Kaladjian et al., 2009 ;  Konishi et al., 2003 ;  Lee, Dolan, & Critchley, 2008 ;  Liddle et al., 2001 ;  Ullsperger & Von Cramon, 2001 ). In addition, it has been associated with working memory in a number of studies using variants of the n-back task ( Owen, McMillan, Laird, & Bullmore, 2005 ), including one employing emotional stimuli ( Rama et al., 2001 ). Similar to the study conducted by  Volle et al. (2005) , two studies ( Rowe, Toni, Josephs, Frackowiak, & Passingham, 2000 ;  Rowe & Passingham, 2001 ) attempted to tease apart activation during a working memory task. These studies suggest that this area is associated with organization of action using information maintained in working memory, rather than the maintenance of information itself. In summary, this right MFG area appears to be involved in implementing a motivational set. The association between this area and organization of upcoming goal-directed behavior ( Rowe et al., 2000 ;  Rowe & Passingham, 2001 ) suggests that, like the more posterior left MFG area associated with approach temperament, this area is linked to the level of the strategy used to obtain a goal (Scholer & Higgins, 2008). 
 
 
 Approach Motivation and Left OFC 
 Unexpectedly, approach temperament moderated activation in a region of left OFC such that greater approach temperament was associated with less recruitment of this OFC area. Upon first examination, this finding is inconsistent with the hypothesis that approach motivation/pleasant emotion should be associated with increased activation in left hemisphere. However, recent research suggests an opposite pattern of lateralization in OFC. In a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies examining the experience of emotion, pleasant emotion was associated with right OFC activation, whereas unpleasant emotion was associated with left OFC activation, in an area overlapping that found in the present study ( Wager et al., 2008 ). Thus, the finding of opposing patterns of lateralization in MFG and OFC for approach temperament is consistent with previous research. Generally, OFC is hypothesized to be involved in maintaining the current and expected motivational value of stimuli ( O'Doherty & Dolan, 2006 ). 
 In the context of the present study, one possible explanation for the opposing relationships with approach temperament observed in MFG and OFC is that, as part of implementing a motivational set, MFG inhibits activation in areas that provide competing information, in this case an area providing information about the expected unpleasant value associated with the harder task level, which could, for example, be due to the increased chance of making a mistake. This hypothesis is supported by the present finding that activation in this OFC area was positively correlated with reaction-time interference, indicating that suppression of activity in this area may lead to better task performance. Recent research has examined connections between DLPFC and OFC (e.g.,  Szatkowska et al., 2008 ), although the direction of influence is a matter of debate. Future research should examine connections between these areas under different task circumstances (e.g., different levels of reward or punishment) to determine whether top-down biasing from MFG is affecting activation in OFC. 
 
 
 Strengths and Limitations 
 The present study has several strengths, including the use of a relatively large sample size for the fMRI literature and direct tests for effects of laterality. Further, it extends the literature on motivation by examining trait approach and avoidance motivation, as opposed to manipulations of state motivation, and carefully measured approach and avoidance temperament by estimating latent factors from multiple indices. As with any study, however, there are several limitations that must be considered when interpreting the results. First, the present study used only self-report measures of approach and avoidance temperament. Future research should add behavioral measures, such as the level of reward and punishment responsiveness in monetary learning tasks (e.g.,  Moustafa, Cohen, Sherman, & Frank, 2008 ). Second, no explicit (e.g., monetary) rewards or punishments were given in the present task. Future research should examine how trait motivation drives or interacts with state motivation to influence executive function. Third, the present study employed a task that does not recruit all aspects of executive function. Future research should examine the interaction of trait motivation and other aspects of executive function, such as shifting and updating ( Miyake et al., 2000 ). 
 In spite of these limitations, the present study adds to the existing literature by identifying several areas in MFG that appear to be involved in implementing motivational sets to guide behavior in a goal-congruent manner. In accordance with hypotheses, approach and avoidance temperament were associated with lateralized activation in left and right MFG, respectively. Another area of MFG may be involved with both approach and avoidance temperament. Research reviewed indicates that these MFG areas have been associated with inhibiting goal-incongruent behavior, organizing upcoming behavior in accordance with goals, and anticipating and responding to motivationally salient stimuli. 
 
 Research Highlights 
 
 
 Interaction of motivation and executive function instantiated in MFG. 
 
 
 Trait approach motivation associated with left lateralized MFG activation. 
 
 
 Trait avoidance motivation associated with right lateralized MFG activation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 fMRI activation moderated by approach and avoidance temperament.  Notes.  A & B) Activation for Incongruent – Congruent contrast (IvC) correlating positively with approach temperament. C) Activation for IvC correlating negatively with approach temperament. D & E) Activation for IvC correlating positively with avoidance temperament. F) Overlap between activation correlating with approach and avoidance temperament; red = activation associated with approach; blue = activation associated with avoidance; green = overlap in activation. R = right. z = MNI 152 z coordinate. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 3-D rendering of fMRI activation moderated by approach and avoidance temperament (MRIcron,  www.cabiatl.com/mricro ).  Notes.  A) Activation for Incongruent – Congruent contrast (IvC) correlating positively with approach temperament or positively with avoidance temperament; green = activation associated with approach; red = activation associated with avoidance; yellow = overlap in activation. B) Activation for IvC correlating positively with avoidance temperament. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Self-Report Indicators for Approach and Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 Indicator Variable 
 Standardized Coefficient Value 
 
 
 
 
 
 Approach Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  BAS 
 0.705 
 
 
  NEO-FFI Extraversion 
 0.970 
 
 
  GTS Positive Temperament 
 0.773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  BIS 
 0.777 
 
 
  NEO-FFI Neuroticism 
 0.983 
 
 
  GTS Negative Temperament 
 0.886 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . BAS = Behavioral Activation Scale ( Carver & White, 1994 ). NEO-FFI = NEO-Five Factor Inventory ( Costa & McRae, 1992 ). GTS = General Temperament Survey ( Watson & Clark, 1993 ). BIS = Behavioral Inhibition Scale ( Carver & White, 1994 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain Areas Moderated by Approach and Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Location 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Cluster Size 
 Direction of Relationship 
 Mean z-value 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 % Overlap 
 
 
 
 
 
 Approach Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  L MFG/SFG (BA 8/9) 
 97 
 Positive 
 2.61 
 -18 
 46 
 36 
 36.08 
 
 
  L MFG (9) 
 92 
 Positive 
 2.64 
 -36 
 30 
 46 
 35.87 
 
 
  L OFC (BA 11) 
 107 
 Negative 
 -2.91 
 -18 
 10 
 -26 
 7.48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R MFG (BA 9/8/6) 
 100 
 Positive 
 2.65 
 36 
 12 
 44 
 12.00 
 
 
  L MFG/SFG (BA 8/9) 
 99 
 Positive 
 2.61 
 -8 
 42 
 36 
 53.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  L = left. R = right. SFG = Superior Frontal Gyrus. MFG = Middle Frontal Gyrus. OFC = Orbitofrontal Cortex. BA = Brodmann's Area. Location = coordinates are for the maximum z-value and are for MNI152 space, with the x axis moving from left to right. % Overlap = the percentage of overlap between that cluster and areas exhibiting a positive main effect of IvC. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Correlations between Regions of Interest and Behavior 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 RT 
 
 p-value 
 
 Errors 
 
 p-value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Approach Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  L MFG/SFG (BA 8/9) 
 0.026 
 0.814 
 0.081 
 0.455 
 
 
  L MFG (9) 
 -0.055 
 0.614 
 0.228 
 
 0.034 
 
 
 
  L OFC (BA 11) 
 0.236 
 
 0.028 
 
 -0.042 
 0.701 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R MFG (BA 9/8/6) 
 0.100 
 0.357 
 0.172 
 0.112 
 
 
  L MFG/SFG (BA 8/9) 
 0.089 
 0.411 
 0.059 
 0.588 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  L = left. R = right. SFG = Superior Frontal Gyrus. MFG = Middle Frontal Gyrus. OFC = Orbitofrontal Cortex. IFG = Inferior Frontal Gyrus. BA = Brodmann's Area. RT = incongruent vs. congruent reaction time interference. Errors = incongruent vs. congruent error interference. Correlations for RT are Pearson product-moment correlations. Correlations for Errors are Spearman rank-order correlations. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Brain Areas in Which Effects Are Lateralized 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Location 
 Left Hem 
 Right Hem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Cluster Size 
 Mean z-value 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Partial r 
 
 P 
 
 Partial r 
 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Approach Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  SFG (BA 8/9)* 
 61 
 2.64 
 -8 
 54 
 38 
 0.189 
 0.081 
 -0.206 
 0.057 
 
 
  MFG/IFG (9/45)* 
 299 
 2.65 
 -48 
 36 
 30 
 0.346 
 
 0.001 
 
 -0.230 
 
 0.033 
 
 
 
  OFC (BA 11)* 
 70 
 2.71 
 -20 
 10 
 -26 
 -0.252 
 
 0.019 
 
 0.281 
 
 0.009 
 
 
 
  SFG (BA 6) 
 116 
 2.87 
 -44 
 2 
 60 
 0.241 
 
 0.025 
 
 -0.186 
 0.086 
 
 
  OFC (BA 11) 
 56 
 2.63 
 -2 
 32 
 -24 
 0.204 
 0.060 
 -0.125 
 0.253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avoidance Temperament 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  MFG (BA 9/8/6)* 
 104 
 2.80 
 -36 
 8 
 50 
 -0.148 
 0.174 
 0.311 
 
 0.004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  * These clusters overlapped with clusters listed in  Table 2 . SFG = Superior Frontal Gyrus. MFG = Middle Frontal Gyrus. IFG = Inferior Frontal Gyrus. OFC = Orbitofrontal Cortex. BA = Brodmann's Area. Hem = Hemisphere. Location = coordinates are for the maximum z-value and are for MNI152 space, with the x axis moving from left to right 
 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Drug Abuse (R21 DA14111) and the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH61358, T32 MH19554, P50 MH079485). The authors wish to thank Naomi Sadeh for her helpful comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abler 
 B 
 
 
 Erk 
 S 
 
 
 Herwig 
 U 
 
 
 Walter 
 H 
 
 
 2007 
 Anticipation of aversive stimuli activates extended amygdala in unipolar depression 
 Journal of psychiatric research 
 41 
 511 
 522 
 17010993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andersson 
 JLR 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2007 
 Non-linear optimization (Tech Rep TR07JA1) 
 Oxford, United Kingdom 
 University of Oxford, FMRIB Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2009 
 Executive function: The search for an integrated account 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 18 
 89 
 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Atchley 
 R 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Webb 
 A 
 
 
 Wszalek 
 
 
 
 2000 
 fMRI studies of Stroop tasks reveal unique roles of anterior and posterior brain systems in attentional selection 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 12 
 988 
 1000 
 11177419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Probabilistic independent component analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 
 23 
 137 
 152 
 14964560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bentler 
 PM 
 
 
 1990 
 Comparative fit indexes in structural models 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 107 
 238 
 246 
 2320703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berkman 
 ET 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2010 
 Approaching the bad and avoiding the good: Lateral prefrontal cortical asymmetry distinguishes between action and valence 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 
 1970 
 1979 
 19642879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bickel 
 WK 
 
 
 Pitcock 
 JA 
 
 
 Yi 
 R 
 
 
 Angtuaco 
 EJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Congruence of BOLD response across intertemporal choice conditions: Fictive and real money gains and losses 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 8839 
 8846 
 19587291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 MW 
 
 
 Cudeck 
 R 
 
 
 1993 
 Alternative ways of assessing model fit 
 
 
 Bollen 
 KA 
 
 
 Long 
 JS 
 
 
 Testing structural equation models 
 136 
 162 
 Newbury Park, CA 
 Sage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 BR 
 
 
 Greer 
 S 
 
 
 Chang 
 W 
 
 
 Berman 
 KF 
 
 
 2005 
 Meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of the Wisconsin Card-Sorting task and component processes 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 25 
 35 
 45 
 15846821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Butler 
 T 
 
 
 Pan 
 H 
 
 
 Tuescher 
 O 
 
 
 Engelien 
 A 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 M 
 
 
 Epstein 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Human fear-related motor neurocircuitry 
 Neuroscience 
 150 
 1 
 7 
 17980493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JP 
 
 
 Pritchard 
 RD 
 
 
 1976 
 Motivation theory in industrial and organizational psychology 
 
 
 Dunnette 
 MD 
 
 
 Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology 
 Chicago 
 Rand McNally 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Z 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 1998 
 Hemispheric asymmetry for emotional stimuli detected with fMRI 
 NeuroReport 
 9 
 3233 
 3239 
 9831457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carver 
 CS 
 
 
 White 
 TL 
 
 
 1994 
 Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 67 
 319 
 333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 2008 
 Valence and salience contribute to nucleus accumbens activation 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 538 
 547 
 17904386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Costa 
 PT 
 
 
 McCrae 
 RR 
 
 
 1992 
 Revised NEO personality inventory (NEOPI-R and Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual 
 Odessa, FL 
 Psychological Assessment Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 SM 
 
 
 Andrade 
 A 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 2005 
 Learning to like: a role for human orbitofrontal cortex in conditioned reward 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 25 
 2733 
 2740 
 15758183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dalton 
 KM 
 
 
 Kalin 
 NH 
 
 
 Grist 
 TM 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural-cardiac coupling in threat-evoked anxiety 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 969 
 980 
 15969913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Ekman 
 P 
 
 
 Saron 
 CD 
 
 
 Senulis 
 JA 
 
 
 Friesen 
 WV 
 
 
 1990 
 Approach-withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry: Emotional expression and brain physiology 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 58 
 330 
 341 
 2319445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Irwin 
 W 
 
 
 1999 
 The functional neuroanatomy of emotion and affective style 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 3 
 11 
 21 
 10234222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Derbyshire 
 SW 
 
 
 Jones 
 AK 
 
 
 Gyulai 
 F 
 
 
 Clark 
 S 
 
 
 Townsend 
 D 
 
 
 Firestone 
 LL 
 
 
 1997 
 Pain processing during three levels of noxious stimulation produces differential patterns of central activity 
 Pain 
 73 
 431 
 445 
 9469535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 Balleine 
 B 
 
 
 1994 
 Motivational control of goal-directed action 
 Animal Learning and Behavior 
 22 
 1 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dillon 
 DG 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AJ 
 
 
 Jahn 
 AL 
 
 
 Bogdan 
 R 
 
 
 Wald 
 LL 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 DA 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociation of neural regions associated with anticipatory versus consummatory phases of incentive processing 
 Psychophysiology 
 45 
 36 
 49 
 17850241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Dissociable effects of arousal and valence on prefrontal activity indexing emotional evaluation and subsequent memory: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 64 
 74 
 15325353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dreher 
 JC 
 
 
 Kohn 
 P 
 
 
 Berman 
 KF 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural coding of distinct statistical properties of reward information in humans 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 16 
 561 
 573 
 16033924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elliot 
 AJ 
 
 
 2006 
 The hierarchical model of approach-avoidance motivation 
 Motivation and Emotion 
 30 
 111 
 116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elliot 
 AJ 
 
 
 McGregor 
 HA 
 
 
 2001 
 A 2 × 2 achievement goal framework 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 80 
 501 
 519 
 11300582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elliot 
 AJ 
 
 
 Thrash 
 TM 
 
 
 2002 
 Approach-avoidance motivation in personality: Approach and avoidance temperaments and goals 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 82 
 804 
 818 
 12003479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fan 
 J 
 
 
 Flombaum 
 JI 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 2003 
 Cognitive and brain consequences of conflict 
 NeuroImage 
 18 
 42 
 57 
 12507442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferstl 
 EC 
 
 
 Rinck 
 M 
 
 
 Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2005 
 Emotional and temporal aspects of situation model processing during text comprehension: An event-related fMRI study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 724 
 739 
 15904540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flor-Henry 
 P 
 
 
 1976 
 Lateralized temporal-limbic dysfunction and psychopathology 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 280 
 777 
 795 
 797292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fonov 
 VS 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 McKinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 2009 
 Unbiased nonlinear average age-appropriate brain templates from birth to adulthood 
 NeuroImage 
 47 
 S102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gable 
 SL 
 
 
 Reis 
 HT 
 
 
 Elliot 
 AJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Evidence for bivariate systems: An empirical test of appetition and aversion across domains 
 Journal of Research in Personality 
 37 
 349 
 372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Roche 
 RAP 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociableexecutive functions in the dynamic control of behavior: Inhibition, error detection, and correction 
 NeuroImage 
 17 
 1820 
 1829 
 12498755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gainotti 
 G 
 
 
 1972 
 Emotional behavior and hemispheric side of the lesion 
 Cortex 
 8 
 41 
 55 
 5031258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 AM 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 2004 
 Integrating rewards and cognition in the frontal cortex 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 4 
 540 
 552 
 15849896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 RZ 
 
 
 Alia-Klein 
 N 
 
 
 Tomasi 
 D 
 
 
 Zhang 
 L 
 
 
 Cottone 
 LA 
 
 
 Maloney 
 T 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Is decreased prefrontal cortical sensitivity to monetary reward associated with impaired motivation and self-control in cocaine addiction? 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 164 
 43 
 51 
 17202543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harmon-Jones 
 E 
 
 
 Gable 
 PA 
 
 
 Peterson 
 CK 
 
 
 2010 
 The role of asymmetric frontal cortical activity in emotion-related phenomena: A review and update 
 Biological Psychology 
 84 
 451 
 462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 1993 
 Neuropsychological mechanisms of individual differences in emotion, personality, and arousal 
 Neuropsychology 
 7 
 476 
 489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herrington 
 JD 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Koven 
 NS 
 
 
 Fisher 
 JE 
 
 
 Stewart 
 JL 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Emotion-modulated performance and activity in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 Emotion 
 5 
 200 
 207 
 15982085 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herrington 
 JD 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Engels 
 AS 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Webb 
 AG 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Localization of asymmetric brain function in emotion and depression 
 Psychophysiology 
 47 
 442 
 454 
 20070577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holsen 
 LM 
 
 
 Zarcone 
 JR 
 
 
 Thompson 
 TI 
 
 
 Brooks 
 WM 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MF 
 
 
 Ahluwalia 
 JS 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural mechanisms underlying food motivation in children and adolescents 
 Neuroimage 
 27 
 669 
 676 
 15993629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horn 
 NR 
 
 
 Dolan 
 M 
 
 
 Elliott 
 R 
 
 
 Deakin 
 JFW 
 
 
 Woodruff 
 PWR 
 
 
 2003 
 Response inhibition and impulsivity: an fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 1959 
 1966 
 14572528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Bannister 
 P 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 825 
 841 
 12377157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 MR 
 
 
 1955 
 Nebraska symposium on motivation 
 3 
 Lincoln, Nebraska 
 University of Nebraska Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaladjian 
 A 
 
 
 Jeanningros 
 R 
 
 
 Azorin 
 JM 
 
 
 Nazarian 
 B 
 
 
 Roth 
 M 
 
 
 Anton 
 JL 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Remission from mania is associated with a decrease in amygdala activation during motor response inhibition 
 Bipolar Disorders 
 11 
 530 
 538 
 19624392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keedwell 
 PA 
 
 
 Andrew 
 C 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 2005 
 A double dissociation of ventromedial prefrontal cortical responses to sad and happy stimuli in depressed and healthy individuals 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 58 
 495 
 503 
 15993859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Adams 
 CM 
 
 
 Fong 
 GW 
 
 
 Hommer 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 Anticipation of increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 21 
 159 
 163 
 11150332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Bhanji 
 JP 
 
 
 Cooney 
 RE 
 
 
 Atlas 
 LY 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural responses to monetary incentives in major depression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 63 
 686 
 692 
 17916330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Konishi 
 S 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Asari 
 T 
 
 
 Miyashita 
 Y 
 
 
 2003 
 Transient activation of superior prefrontal cortex during inhibition of cognitive set 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 7776 
 7782 
 12944506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krawczyk 
 DC 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Reward modulation of prefrontal and visual association cortex during an incentive working memory task 
 Brain Research 
 1141 
 168 
 177 
 17320835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landmann 
 C 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Pappata 
 S 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Bottlaender 
 M 
 
 
 Roumenov 
 D 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Dynamics of prefrontal and cingulate activity during a reward-based logical deduction task 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 17 
 749 
 759 
 16707739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 1998 
 Emotion, motivation, and anxiety: Brain mechanisms and psychophysiology 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 44 
 1248 
 1263 
 9861468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 TW 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 2008 
 Controlling emotional expression: Behavioral and neural correlates of nonimitative emotional responses 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 104 
 113 
 17483530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liddle 
 PF 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 KA 
 
 
 Smith 
 AM 
 
 
 2001 
 Event-related fMRI study of response inhibition 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 12 
 100 
 109 
 11169874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lindsley 
 DB 
 
 
 1957 
 Psychophysiology and motivation 
 
 
 Jones 
 MR 
 
 
 Nebraska symposium on motivation 
 5 
 Lincoln, Nebraska 
 University of Nebraska Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Jacobson 
 BL 
 
 
 Tanabe 
 JL 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional dissociation of attentional selection within PFC: Response and non-response related aspects of attentional selection as ascertained by fMRI 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 16 
 827 
 834 
 16135781 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Locke 
 HS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 2008 
 Motivational influences on cognitive control: Behavior, brain activation, and individual differences 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 8 
 99 
 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 TJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 ML 
 
 
 Metzger 
 RL 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 TD 
 
 
 1990 
 Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire 
 Behavior Research and Therapy 
 28 
 487 
 495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Claus 
 ED 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Practice-related effects demonstrate complementary roles of anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortices in attentional control 
 NeuroImage 
 18 
 483 
 493 
 12595201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2005 
 Anterior cingulate cortex: An fMRI analysis of conflict specificity and functional differentiation 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 25 
 328 
 335 
 15834861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miyake 
 A 
 
 
 Friedman 
 NP 
 
 
 Emerson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Witzki 
 AH 
 
 
 Howerter 
 A 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 2000 
 The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 41 
 49 
 100 
 10945922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molina 
 S 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 TD 
 
 
 1994 
 The Penn State Worry Questionnaire: Psychometric properties and associated characteristics 
 
 
 Davey 
 GCL 
 
 
 Tallis 
 F 
 
 
 Worrying: Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment 
 265 
 283 
 Chichester, England 
 Wiley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moustafa 
 AA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Sherman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 2008 
 A role for dopamine in temporal decision making and reward maximization in parkinsonism 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 28 
 12294 
 12304 
 19020023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nakao 
 T 
 
 
 Nakagawa 
 A 
 
 
 Yoshiura 
 T 
 
 
 Nakatani 
 E 
 
 
 Nabeyama 
 M 
 
 
 Yoshizato 
 
 
 
 2005 
 A functional MRI comparison of patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder and normal controls during a Chinese character Stroop task 
 Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 
 139 
 101 
 114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 JB 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2000 
 Anxiety, stress, and cortical brain function 
 
 
 Borod 
 JC 
 
 
 The Neuropsychology of Emotion 
 298 
 319 
 Oxford, United Kingdom 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2004 
 Reward representations and reward-related learning in the human brain: Insights from neuroimaging 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 14 
 769 
 776 
 15582382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2006 
 The role of human orbitofrontal cortex in reward prediction and behavioral choice: Insights from neuroimaging 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 Rauch 
 SL 
 
 
 The orbitofrontal cortex 
 265 
 284 
 Oxford, United Kingdom 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 McMillan 
 KM 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 2005 
 N-back working memory paradigm: A meta-analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 25 
 46 
 59 
 15846822 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 How do emotion and motivation direct executive control? 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 13 
 160 
 166 
 19285913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pochon 
 JB 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 Fossati 
 P 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Pillon 
 B 
 
 
 
 2002 
 The neural system that bridges reward and cognition in humans: An fMRI study 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 99 
 5669 
 5674 
 11960021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rama 
 P 
 
 
 Martinkauppi 
 S 
 
 
 Linnankoski 
 I 
 
 
 Koivisto 
 J 
 
 
 Aronen 
 HJ 
 
 
 Carlson 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Working memory of identification of emotional vocal expressions: An fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 13 
 1090 
 1101 
 11352614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 2003 
 Instructed delay activity in the human prefrontal cortex is modulated by monetary reward expectation 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 13 
 318 
 327 
 12571121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 1996 
 Dissociating executive functions of the prefrontal cortex 
 Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences 
 351 
 1463 
 1471 
 8941958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Eckstein 
 D 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 How does reward expectation influence cognition in the human brain? 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 1980 
 1992 
 18416677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2001 
 Working memory for location and time: Activity in prefrontal area 46 relates to selection rather than maintenance in memory 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 77 
 86 
 11525340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2000 
 The prefrontal cortex: Response selection or maintenance within working memory? 
 Science 
 288 
 1656 
 1660 
 10834847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schirmer 
 A 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Yves von Cramon 
 D 
 
 
 2004 
 Gender differences in the activation of inferior frontal cortex during emotional speech perception 
 NeuroImage 
 21 
 1114 
 1123 
 15006679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spielberg 
 JM 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Silton 
 RL 
 
 
 Stewart 
 JL 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2010 
 Approach and avoidance profiles distinguish dimensions of anxiety and depression 
 Manuscript submitted for publication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stroop 
 JR 
 
 
 1935 
 Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 18 
 643 
 662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szatkowska 
 I 
 
 
 Bogorodzki 
 P 
 
 
 Wolak 
 T 
 
 
 Marchewka 
 A 
 
 
 Szeszkowski 
 W 
 
 
 2008 
 The effect of motivation on working memory: An fMRI and SEM study 
 Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 
 90 
 475 
 478 
 18620069 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Luan Phan 
 K 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 KD 
 
 
 Gehring 
 WJ 
 
 
 2004 
 A functional neuroimaging study of motivation and executive function 
 NeuroImage 
 21 
 1045 
 1054 
 15006672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomarken 
 AJ 
 
 
 Keener 
 AD 
 
 
 1998 
 Frontal brain asymmetry and depression: A self-regulatory perspective 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 12 
 387 
 420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomarken 
 AJ 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 2009 
 Conceptual, methodological, and empirical ambiguities in the linkage between anger and approach: Comment of Carver and Harmon-Jones (2009) 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 135 
 209 
 214 
 19254077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Towers 
 DN 
 
 
 Engels 
 AS 
 
 
 Stewart 
 JL 
 
 
 Spielberg 
 JM 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 2008 
 October 
 Choosing sides: Happily approaching left frontal cortex in psychopathology and emotion 
 Paper presented in symposium, Patients are a virtue: What studies of clinical and neurological patients reveal about physiological mechanisms of emotion, presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Psychophysiological Research 
 Austin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2001 
 Subprocesses of performance monitoring: A dissociation of error processing and response competition revealed by event-related fMRI and ERPs 
 NeuroImage 
 14 
 1387 
 1401 
 11707094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volle 
 E 
 
 
 Pochon 
 JB 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Pillon 
 B 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 Specific cerebral networks for maintenance and response organization within working memory as evidenced by the double delay/double response paradigm 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 15 
 1064 
 1074 
 15563726 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Feldman Barrett 
 L 
 
 
 Bliss-Moreau 
 E 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 KA 
 
 
 Duncan 
 S 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 
 2008 
 The neuroimaging of emotion 
 
 
 Lewis 
 M 
 
 
 Haviland-Jones 
 JM 
 
 
 Feldman Barrett 
 L 
 
 
 Handbook of emotions 
 third 
 272 
 290 
 New York 
 Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ward 
 DB 
 
 
 2000 
 Simultaneous inference for FMRI data 
 
 http://afni.nimh.nih.gov./pub/dist/doc/manual/AlphaSim.pdf 
 
 July 27, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 Clark 
 LA 
 
 
 1993 
 Behavioral disinhibition versus constraint: A dispositional perspective 
 
 
 Wegner 
 DM 
 
 
 Pennebaker 
 JW 
 
 
 Handbook of mental control 
 506 
 527 
 New York, NY 
 Prentice Hall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 Clark 
 LA 
 
 
 Weber 
 K 
 
 
 Assenheimer 
 JS 
 
 
 Strauss 
 ME 
 
 
 McCormick 
 RA 
 
 
 1995 
 Testing a tripartite model: II. Exploring the symptom structure of anxiety and depression in student, adult, and patient samples 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 104 
 15 
 25 
 7897037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watson 
 D 
 
 
 Weber 
 K 
 
 
 Assenheimer 
 JS 
 
 
 Clark 
 LA 
 
 
 Strauss 
 ME 
 
 
 McCormick 
 RA 
 
 
 1995 
 Testing a tripartite model: I. Evaluating the convergent and discriminant validity of anxiety and depression symptom scales 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 104 
 3 
 14 
 7897050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Ripley 
 BD 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2001 
 Temporal autocorrelation in univariate linear modeling of fMRI data 
 NeuroImage 
 14 
 1370 
 1386 
 11707093 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 For all fMRI analyses performed, a second analysis was conducted with psychopathology group entered as a between-subject factor. These analyses tested whether the relationship between temperament score and brain activation (and hemisphere in the laterality analysis) differed by psychopathology group. No findings differed by psychopathology group, indicating that the results of the present study are not driven by sample selection. As well, correlations between temperament and brain activation from clusters associated with approach or avoidance (i.e., those in  Table 2 ) remained significant even when the variance associated with depression and anxiety was partialled out. Additionally, psychopathology group did not significantly predict brain activation from these clusters, even without partialling out the variance associated with approach and avoidance temperament. Thus, present findings are not confounded with depression and anxiety. 
 
 
 2 
 The reverse comparison was also used, with unflipped right hemisphere data and flipped left hemisphere data, which produced extremely similar results. As well, all lateralization comparisons were reanalyzed using a symmetrical template (ICBM 152 2009a Nonlinear Symmetric T1 Atlas,  Fonov, Evans, McKinstry, Almli, & Collins, 2009 ), which also produced extremely similar results. In addition, fMRI analyses conducted using FEAT were rerun using FSL's outlier de-weighting (Woolrich, 2008) procedure to test whether findings were driven by outliers. Findings were virtually identical, indicating that findings were not due to outliers. 
 
 
 3 
 Additional analyses were conducted to rule out the possibility that associations between trait motivation and brain activation were driven by a mutual association with overt behavior. Specifically, reaction time and error interference were entered as covariates of no interest into the general linear model with approach and avoidance predicting brain activation. All results remained significant, indicating that the association between trait motivation and brain activation is not due to a shared relationship with performance. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
