
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8102140 
 5035 
 J Neurosci 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 0270-6474 
 1529-2401 
 
 
 20980597 
 3006446 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1547-10.2010 
 NIHMS248434 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Expectation-driven changes in cortical functional connectivity influence working memory and long-term memory performance 
 
 
 
 
 Bollinger 
 Jacob 
 
 jbolling@phy.ucsf.edu 
 
 
 
 Rubens 
 Michael T. 
 
 michael.rubens@ucsf.edu 
 
 
 
 Zanto 
 Theodore P. 
 
 theodore.zanto@ucsf.edu 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 Adam 
 
 adam.gazzaley@ucsf.edu 
 
 W.M. Keck Center For Integrative Neurosciences, Departments of Neurology, Physiology and Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco 
 
 
 Corresponding Author: Adam Gazzaley, UCSF – Mission Bay, Genentech Hall, Room N472J, 600 16 th  Street, San Francisco, CA 94158-2240,  adam.gazzaley@.ucsf.edu 
 
 
 2 
 12 
 2010 
 
 
 27 
 10 
 2010 
 
 
 27 
 4 
 2011 
 
 30 
 43 
 14399 
 14410 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Expectations generated by predictive cues increase the efficiency of perceptual processing for complex stimuli (e.g. faces, scenes), however the impact this has on working memory (WM) and long-term memory (LTM) has not yet been investigated. Here, healthy young adults performed delayed-recognition tasks that differed only in stimulus-category expectations, while behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were collected. Univariate and functional-connectivity analyses were utilized to examine expectation-driven, pre-stimulus neural modulation, networks that regulate this modulation and subsequent memory performance. Results revealed that predictive category cueing was associated with both enhanced WM and LTM for faces, as well as baseline activity shifts in a face-selective region of the visual association cortex (i.e., fusiform face area (FFA)). In addition, the degree of functional connectivity between FFA and right inferior frontal junction (IFJ), middle frontal gyrus (MFG), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), and intraparietal sulcus (IPS) correlated with the magnitude of pre-stimulus activity modulation in the FFA. Moreover, while FFA connectivity with IFJ and the precuneus predicted enhanced expectation-related WM performance, FFA connectivity with MFG predicted LTM improvements. In an opposing manner, pre-stimulus connectivity between FFA and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), a region of the default network, negatively correlated with FFA activity modulation, while FFA-PCC functional disconnection occurred under conditions of both predictive and neutral expectation. These findings suggest a model of expectancy-mediated neural biasing, in which a single node (e.g., FFA) can be dynamically linked or disconnected from different brain regions depending on pre-stimulus expectations, and the strength of distinct connections is associated with WM or LTM benefits. 
 
 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 fMRI 
 Attention 
 Vision 
 Frontal 
 Parietal 
 Working Memory 
 Memory 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Efficient cortical processing of complex visual stimuli (e.g. faces, scenes) is aided by expectations of their appearance ( Puri and Wojciulik, 2008 ). Thus, optimal performance requires that we interact with our environment in a flexible and forward-looking manner, using cues to prepare neural systems before an event occurs. For example, valid category cueing enhances the speed and accuracy by which stimuli are detected and discriminated ( Puri and Wojciulik, 2008 ;  Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Puri et al., 2009 ). Given that perception influences subsequent memory ( Rutman et al., 2009 ;  Berry et al.,  In press ) and that these two processes involve overlapping neural resources ( Rees et al., 2002 ;  Naghavi and Nyberg, 2005 ), we hypothesized that expectations of the appearance of stimuli from a known category would result in memory benefits. Predictive cues have been demonstrated to enhance spatial working memory (WM) ( Schmidt et al., 2002 ), but the effects of category expectation on memory (WM or long-term memory (LTM)) of complex stimuli have not yet been evaluated. In the current study, we explored if stimulus-category expectation enhances WM and LTM of complex stimuli. 
 Studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), and single-unit recordings offer converging evidence that a fundamental mechanism by which expectation influences performance is via activity modulation in sensory cortical areas prior to stimulus presentation (i.e., baseline shifting). Pre-stimulus activity modulation in visual cortex has been shown to occur following many types of predictive cues, including spatial ( Kastner et al., 1999 ), feature ( Chawla et al., 1999 ;  Shulman et al., 1999 ;  Giesbrecht et al., 2006 ), and object category ( Puri et al., 2009 ) cues. It is believed that this process biases activity in brain regions that represent goal-relevant information, such that attended stimuli are afforded a processing advantage ( Luck et al., 1997 ;  Chelazzi et al., 1998 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ). Indeed, pre-stimulus activity enhancement has been shown to correlate with perceptual performance in humans ( Ress et al., 2000 ;  Sapir et al., 2005 ;  Giesbrecht et al., 2006 ), although a single-unit study in visual cortex of macaques that examined the correlation between trial-by-trial signal variations preceding a stimulus and performance accuracy did not reveal the same relationship ( Cook and Maunsell, 2002 ). Thus, the impact of pre-stimulus activity modulation on behavior is still a matter of debate, however it is possible that univariate measures are not ideal to examine this complex relationship. 
 According to the prevailing model, sensory cortical activity biasing during periods of pre-stimulus expectation is mediated via top-down control from a fronto-parietal attention network, which includes the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), superior parietal lobule (SPL), dorsal supramarginal gyrus (SMG), frontal eye fields (FEF), and middle frontal gyrus (MFG) ( Moran and Desimone, 1985 ;  Desimone and Duncan, 1995 ;  Ungerleider et al., 1998 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ;  Shulman et al., 1999 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Bressler et al., 2008 ;  Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Summerfield and Egner, 2009 ). However, the vast majority of evidence for this view is indirect, based on univariate analysis of neuroimaging data in humans and single-unit recordings in animals, in which activity in brain regions are evaluated independently. Functional connectivity analysis (McIntosh, 1998; e.g. beta-series correlation:  Gazzaley et al., 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2004 ;  Clapp et al., 2009 ;  Zanto et al., 2010 ), which capitalizes on trial-to-trial variability to examine the relationship between brain regions during a given task and task stage, provides a powerful approach for evaluating functional networks that contribute to activity biasing in sensory cortices and may serve as a more robust correlate of performance benefits. 
 In the current study, fMRI data was collected while young adults performed delayed-recognition tasks that differed only in instructions informing them of the category of complex stimuli to be remembered (Predictive tasks - participants knew whether the stimulus would be a face or a scene; Neutral tasks - they did not know whether it would be a face or a scene). To examine the neural and behavioral consequences of predictive category expectancy, we utilized functional connectivity analysis to assess the role of fronto-parietal networks on pre-stimulus visual cortical activity modulation, as well as subsequent WM and LTM performance. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty healthy young adults (mean age 23.4±3.06 years, range 18–28 years, 8 males) gave written informed consent to participate in and completed this study, which was approved by the University of California, San Francisco Committee for Human Research. Two participants’ data were removed from the group analysis due to excessive motion artifacts. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were screened to ensure they had no history of neurological, psychiatric or vascular disease, were not depressed, and were not taking any psychotropic medications. All participants had a minimum of 12 years education. 
 
 
 Task Design 
 Stimuli consisted of grayscale images of faces and natural scenes presented on a black background ( Fig. 1 ). The face stimuli consisted of a variety of neutral-expression male and female faces across a wide age range. Hair and ears were digitally removed from the images and a blur was applied along the contours of the face in order to remove any non-face specific features. Each stimulus was used in only one trial per experimental session. Individual face and scene stimuli were randomized to different conditions across participants to assure that potentially distinctive stimuli did not confound a particular condition. Images were 225 pixels wide and 300 pixels tall (14×18 cm), subtended 3 degrees of visual angle from fixation, and were presented foveally. 
 The experiment utilized three delayed-recognition conditions: Stimulus-Known Faces (SKf trials, predictive), Stimulus-Known Scenes (SKs trials, predictive), and Stimulus-Unknown (SUf and SUs trials, neutral), and a Passive-View (PVf and PVs trials, passive) no-expectation baseline task. The SUf and SUs conditions are considered ‘neutral’ in that the participants were expecting to perform a WM task on the forthcoming stimuli, but were not biased towards either of the two categories. This is comparable to the use of the term ‘neutral’ in the Posner spatial cueing paradigm (Posner, 1980), and does not signify ‘non-predictive’. Equal numbers of predictive, neutral, and passive-view trials for each object category (faces and scenes) were presented. Participants were given detailed instructions and underwent several practice trials immediately prior to the scanning session. 
 At the initiation of each WM block, participants were presented with the 100% predictive instruction of “Remember the Face" or “Remember the Scene” (SKf or SKs) or the neutral instruction of “Remember the Face or the Scene” (SU). A 6-second expectation period was signaled by a grey-to-green color change of a fixation cross. This was followed by a brief 300ms target stimulus and a subsequent 5.7-second delay period during which a red fixation cross was presented. Target stimuli were brief to encourage expectation of the stimulus by the participant. The trial concluded with a probe stimulus that was always consistent in stimulus category with the target stimulus. Participants were instructed to indicate whether or not the probe was exactly the same stimulus as the target by responding with a button press (right for match, left for non-match) as quickly as possible without sacrificing accuracy. The probe stimulus was followed by a 9.7-second inter-trial interval during which a grey fixation cross was present. Trials with shorter expectation periods were inserted at random to encourage early stimulus expectation. Four of these trials were included in each WM block, two trials with 2-second expectation periods and two trials with 4-second expectation periods, all of which were excluded from the final analysis by modeling these trials with a unique regressor in the GLM. For the passive-view trials, delay and probe periods were removed in order to assure that all target stimuli (predictive, neutral, and passive view) were preceded by an equivalent period of fixation. Thus, passive-view trials began with a six-second period of “no expectation,” followed by a “target” stimulus (300ms) and a 9.7-second inter-trial interval (grey cross). Trials were presented in a pseudo-randomized block design (10 blocks total; 2 SKf, 2 SKs, 4 SU (SUf and SUs), 2 PV (PVf and PVs)) with 19 trials per WM block (15 of which were included in the final analysis) and 15 trials per passive-view block. During all delay periods, participants were explicitly instructed to “maintain a mental image” of the memoranda, and to avoid verbal mnemonic strategies. In post-experiment questionnaires, all subjects reported using visual imagery during delay periods as well as being awake and alert during the experiment and that faces were generally more difficult to recognize at probe than scenes. 
 Incidental LTM was assessed with a surprise post-experiment recognition test that took place approximately 30 minutes after the main experiment. Participants were presented images of faces and scenes from each condition in the experiment. Stimuli were presented at a self-paced rate. 60% of tested stimuli were the memoranda from non-match trials and thus were viewed only once prior to the post-experiment test. As lures, the remaining 40% of stimuli were novel face or scene images. Participants were instructed to respond with a confidence score using a four-point forced choice Likert scale for each stimulus (4 = confident the stimulus did appear in the experiment, 3 = less confident the stimulus did appear in the experiment, 2 = less confident the stimulus did not appear in the experiment, 1 = confident the stimulus did not appear in the experiment). In order to normalize confidence scores to each participant’s response bias, indices for each condition were calculated as the confidence score for stimuli of a particular condition minus the confidence score for category-specific novel images. 
 
 
 Region-of-Interest Localization 
 An independent functional localizer task was used to identify the face-selective fusiform face area (FFA) ( Kanwisher et al., 1997 ) and the scene-selective parahippocampal place area (PPA) ( Epstein and Kanwisher, 1998 ) regions in the visual association cortex of each participant. Participants performed 10 blocks of a 1-back task. Each block was 16 seconds in length and included face stimuli, scene stimuli, or fixation (rest). Blocked face and scene stimuli regressors were used to generate SPM[T] images, from which regions-of-interest (ROIs) were identified. For the contrast of faces > scenes, a face-selective ROI, the right FFA, was identified as the cluster of 35 contiguous voxels with the highest  t  value within the right fusiform gyrus of each participant; the right FFA has been shown to be more strongly activated by faces ( Bentin et al., 1996 ;  Kanwisher et al., 1997 ). For the contrast of scenes > faces, a scene-selective ROI, the left PPA, was also identified as the cluster of 35 contiguous voxels with the highest  t  value within the left parahippocampal gyrus of each participant. The left PPA has been shown to be more selective for scenes ( Kanwisher et al., 1997 ) and the strongest region of attentional modulation for scenes ( Gazzaley et al., 2005 ). The ROI voxel extent was based on methodology from similar studies ( Gazzaley et al., 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2004 ;  Clapp et al., 2009 ) and was used in order to achieve a reasonable balance between regional specificity (diminished by the use of a larger cluster) and susceptibility to noise (a problem with smaller clusters). The contrast of rest > n-back was used to identify ROIs from the default network; ROIs were chosen as the cluster of 100 contiguous voxels with the highest  t  value within anatomical regions of the default network ( Gusnard et al., 2001 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). These ROIs were expected to be larger based on previous accounts of these functional regions ( Fox et al., 2005 ;  Bar, 2007 ;  Buckner and Vincent, 2007 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Mayer et al., 2010 ); therefore, a larger cluster extent was applied. 
 
 
 Data Acquisition and Analysis 
 All images were acquired on a Siemens 3T Magnetom Trio with stimuli presented on an LCD monitor positioned behind the head of participants and viewed using a mirror rigidly attached to a 12-channel receive-only head coil. Echo planar imaging (EPI) data was acquired (FA = 80°, TE = 30 ms, TR = 2000 ms) with twenty-nine interleaved 3.0 mm axial T2*-weighted slices (0.5 mm inter-slice gap) and a 1.8 × 1.8 × 3.0 mm voxel size (FOV = 230 mm; 128 × 128 matrix). In addition, high-resolution (T1-MPRAGE) anatomical volumes were acquired (1 × 1 × 1 mm voxel size; FOV = 160 × 240 × 256 mm, TR = 2300 ms, TE = 3 ms, FA = 9°). Raw blood oxygen level dependant (BOLD) data was corrected offline for slice-timing acquisition and motion artifacts. A 5 mm isotropic Gaussian smoothing kernel was applied prior to modeling the data. All trial stages were modeled as stick functions (events) convolved with the canonical synthetic hemodynamic response function HRF (SPM5, Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, England) in a general linear model (GLM), similar to a recent report on pre-stimulus periods ( Puri et al., 2009 ). The utilization of events and the canonical HRF regressors for each trial stage achieved minimal covariance between the expectation regressors and encode and probe regressors. The onset of the expectation regressor was time-locked with the grey-to-green fixation-cross color change, the onset of the encode regressor was time-locked with target-stimulus onset, and the onset of the probe regressor was time-locked with probe-stimulus onset. In addition, three translational (X, Y, Z) and three rotational (pitch, roll, yaw) motion parameters were included in the GLM. The resulting regression vector yielded scalar beta weights corresponding to the relative changes in signal strength associated with a particular trial stage. Incorrect trials were modeled with a separate regressor and excluded from the final analysis. Group whole-brain maps were calculated from Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) normalized data and all figures appear in neurological convention. For all analyses, a single-voxel statistical threshold of  p  < 0.01 was used. Where applicable, we performed Monte Carlo simulations using the AlphaSim function in the AFNI toolbox ( Cox, 1996 ) to determine a cluster extent of 35 nearest-neighbor voxels to achieve a corrected  p  < 0.05. All values are presented as the mean ± SEM. Statistical significance of behavioral changes was assessed using repeated measures ANOVAs and paired two-tailed  t  tests. Statistical significance of univariate effects were assessed using paired two-tailed  t  tests. 
 A major aim of this study was to examine top-down control networks associated with expectation-driven baseline shifts that are largest in magnitude under predictive conditions ( Puri et al., 2009 ). For this reason, SUf and SUs (non-specific expectation) were the primary baseline conditions contrasted against the associated predictive conditions (SKf and SKs). The contrast SKf > SUf (or SKs > SUs) permits a comparison of identical WM tasks, with only the added certainty that a face (or a scene) stimulus will appear for the predictive condition, thus revealing networks specifically involved in predictive expectation. 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity 
 Functional connectivity network maps were created for each subject as described previously using a beta series correlation analysis approach ( Gazzaley et al., 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2004 ). For this analysis, a new GLM design matrix was constructed to model each trial stage (expectation, encode, probe) with a unique covariate, resulting in 516 covariates of interest ((19 trials × 8 WM blocks × 3 covariates per WM trial) + (15 trials × 2 PV blocks × 2 covariates per PV trial)). ROI (FFA and PPA) beta values were then correlated across trials with every brain voxel resulting in 516 per-voxel measures of covariate activity with each ROI for each participant. In order to minimize the impact of noise introduced by smoothing and normalization on the correlation procedure, the beta series correlation analysis was first conducted in each participant’s native space. Using normalization parameters derived from each participant’s mean echo-planar image (EPI), single-participant statistical maps were subsequently normalized to the MNI template (2 × 2 × 2 mm voxel size) and Gaussian smoothed (5 mm FWHM) for group analysis. Beta series connectivity main effect analysis derived  t  maps for each condition. Although multiple trial stages were modeled, only the expectation period was subject to analysis. Images depict regions that survived Bonferroni correction for all non-cerebellar brain voxels (~1.6e 5 ;  t  = 7.69;  Fig. 4 ). Nonparametric permutation tests were used to calculate whole-brain contrast maps between conditions ( Nichols and Holmes, 2002 ) ( Fig. 5 ). Functional-connectivity maps were corrected for multiple comparisons in a manner identical to univariate maps. Statistical significance of functional connectivity changes were assessed using paired two-tailed  t  tests. 
 
 
 Regression Analysis 
 To further explore potential sources of pre-stimulus FFA activity modulation, functional connectivity measures were extracted from significant fronto-parietal regions (SKf > SUf) and default network regions (PVf > (SKf + SUf)), as well as default network ROIs selected based on the functional localizer contrast rest > n-back. Across-participant connectivity values from each ROI were regressed against across-participant pre-stimulus FFA activity modulation measures for each condition, as well as indices for differences between conditions. Resultant Pearson’s  r  coefficients and corresponding  p  values for regions that survived FDR correction for multiple comparisons are reported ( Fig. 6 ). Note: The statistical relevance of any ROI was not driven by the data from any individual participant. 
 In addition, across-participant regression analyses were performed between connectivity indices (SKf-SUf) from each ROI and memory performance indices (SKf-SUf) for both WM recognition accuracy and LTM recognition scores. Resultant Pearson’s  r  coefficients and corresponding  p  values for regions that survived FDR correction for multiple comparisons are reported ( Fig. 7 ). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Performance 
 To examine the impact of predictive stimulus-category information on WM performance, a 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA for WM accuracy with stimulus-category (face, scene) and instruction (predictive, neutral) as factors was performed. This revealed a significant effect of both stimulus-category ( F (1,17)  = 30.12,  p  < 0.0001) and instruction ( F (1,17)  = 7.18,  p  < 0.05), as well as a stimulus-category × instruction interaction ( F (1,17)  = 4.45,  p  < 0.05). Pair-wise comparisons indicated participants performed significantly better on scene stimuli compared to faces (94.1±1.3%; 88.1±1.7%;  t (17)  = 5.57,  p  < 0.0001) and importantly, when predictive instructions were given versus neutral instructions (92.5±1.7%; 89.6±1.3%;  t (17)  = 2.74,  p  < 0.05) ( Fig. 2A ). Post-hoc t-tests indicated the accuracy-enhancing effect of predictive information was driven by face performance, such that SKf > SUf (90.8±2.1%; 85.4±1.7%;  t (17)  = 3.01,  p  < 0.01), while no difference in accuracy was observed for scene stimuli (SKs = 94.3±1.4%; SUs = 93.9±1.5%;  t (17)  = 0.329,  p  > 0.7). 
 For reaction times, a 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with stimulus-category (face, scene) and instruction (predictive, neutral) as factors, revealed no main effect of stimulus-category or instruction ( p  > 0.1), but an interaction ( F (1,17)  = 5.07,  p  < 0.05). Post-hoc t-tests revealed a difference between predictive and neutral conditions for scene stimuli only, such that SKs > SUs (724.16±57.4ms, 665.66±49.33ms;  t (17)  = 3.27,  p  < 0.01). 
 For the LTM recognition test, a 2 × 3 repeated measures ANOVA of recognition indices with factors of stimulus-category (face, scene) and instruction (predictive, neutral, passive (not in figure)) revealed a main effect of instruction ( F (1,17)  = 15.72,  p  < 0.001), but not stimulus-category ( F (1,17)  = 0.04,  p  > 0.8) and an instruction × stimulus-category interaction ( F (1,17)  = 8.79,  p  < 0.01) ( Fig. 2B ). Post-hoc  t  tests indicated that, after the main experiment, participants remembered stimuli better when they were from the predictive condition (0.64±0.10) than the neutral condition (0.47±0.098;  t (17)  = 2.84,  p  < 0.05) or the passively viewed condition (0.19±0.68;  t (17)  = 4.76,  p  < 0.001), and stimuli from the neutral condition better than the passively viewed condition ( t (17)  = 4.60,  p  < 0.01). Further analysis revealed that participants remembered faces from the predictive condition (0.54±0.083) better than from the neutral condition (0.40±0.075;  t (17)  = 2.50,  p  < 0.05), while predictive and neutral condition scenes were equivalently recalled (0.74±0.16, 0.54±0.098;  t (17)  = 2.10,  p  > 0.05). Neutral-condition stimuli were remembered better than passive-view stimuli for scenes (−0.025 ± 0.11;  t (17)  = 4.92,  p  < 0.01), but not for faces (0.39 ± 0.076;  t (17)  = 0.039,  p  > 0.9). 
 
 
 Univariate Results 
 
 Functionally-defined visual cortical ROIs 
 Expectation-driven baseline activity shifts in stimulus-selective visual regions have recently been observed during object-based, perceptual tasks ( Giesbrecht et al., 2006 ;  Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Puri et al., 2009 ). We hypothesized that similar biasing effects would be observed in the context of a WM task. To evaluate this, we examined pre-stimulus univariate activity in stimulus-selective visual regions from each participant (i.e., FFA and PPA). Pre-stimulus univariate FFA activity was increased in the predictive condition for remembering faces versus the corresponding neutral and passive conditions (SKf > SUf & PVf; 3.36±0.690, 1.87±0.711, 1.24±0.609;  t (17)  = 2.49,  p  < 0.05;  t (17)  = 3.13,  p  < 0.001), as well as versus the predictive condition for remembering scenes (i.e., faces were ‘uncued’) (SKf > SKs; 1.07±0.656,  t (17)  = 2.73,  p  < 0.05) ( Fig. 3 ). Of note, SUf = PVf = SKs (all comparisons,  p  > 0.3). These results indicate specificity for WM expectation-driven baseline shifts in category-specific visual regions, comparable to the shifts observed in the setting of perceptual tasks. 
 Analysis of pre-stimulus activity in the PPA revealed no analogous baseline-shift for scenes, such that SKs = SUs = SKf = PVs (0.93±0.571, 1.39±0.545, 1.33±0.362, 0.83±0.505;  Fig. 3 ; all comparisons,  p  > 0.5). The absence of a significant baseline increase in this scene-specific region mirrors the absence of benefits from predictive information on WM and LTM performance for scenes. It is possible that the lack of predictive-cue effects for scene memory and PPA modulation were the result of a performance ceiling effect. Evidence against this, however, was found by evaluating the subgroup of participants whose WM performance measures for scene stimuli were lowest. Of the nine lowest performing participants for scene stimuli, whose scene accuracy was statistically equivalent to the group performance for faces (89.8±1.4%, 88.1±1.7%;  t (25)  = 0.64,  p  = 0.45, unpaired  t  test), only four participants performed better in the predictive condition. Additionally, this subgroup’s WM performance (90.4±1.9%, 89.2±1.9%;  t (8)  = 0.46,  p  = 0.66, paired  t  test) and pre-stimulus PPA activity (0.65±0.78, 1.21±0.88;  t (8)  = 1.11,  p  = 0.30, paired  t  test) were not statistically different for predictive vs. neutral conditions. This implies that the effect of selectivity for faces observed in the current study was genuine. Perhaps, as others have suggested, the diversity of scene features makes it difficult to generate a robust template during the expectation period, unlike faces, which are more stereotyped ( Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ). This is not to say that the PPA cannot be activated prior to stimuli by predictive cues ( Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Puri et al., 2009 ), however this may be a reflection of task differences. Specifically, previous reports utilized house stimuli rather than natural scenes as in the current paradigm. Although houses and natural scenes both activate the PPA, the stereotyped format of houses may facilitate anticipatory modulation. Consistent with this interpretation, recent data revealed that more specific cues (e.g., “Penn bookstore” vs. “classroom”) generate greater anticipatory activity in PPA ( Epstein and Higgins, 2007 ). The hippocampus/PHG system has also been implicated in predictions and the imagining of future events ( Schacter et al., 2007 ,  2008 ). However, the PPA has been shown to be anatomically and functionally distinct from object-category insensitive memory regions ( Prince et al., 2009 ). 
 
 
 Whole-brain Analysis 
 A central aim of the current study was to examine neural mechanisms of top-down control involved in expectation-driven baseline shifts and memory benefits; therefore the remainder of the analysis focuses on face-present trials only, where these effects were observed. Furthermore, given our goal of characterizing the processes that bias sensory processing during “specific” expectation (i.e., an ensuing stimulus category can be predicted with 100% certainty - SKf), SUf served as a “non-specific” (neutral) expectation control. Examination of whole-brain univariate data using the primary contrast of interest, SKf > SUf, revealed significant activation in fronto-parietal regions comparable to those previously reported during expectation periods for perceptual tasks ( Kastner et al., 1999 ;  LaBar et al., 1999 ;  Shulman et al., 1999 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Todd and Marois, 2005 ;  Vossel et al., 2006 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Capotosto et al., 2009 ;  Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Puri et al., 2009 ). This included the right IPS, right FEF, right MFG, right precentral gyrus, and right dorsal SMG. To assess if these effects were also greater than the passive condition (“null” expectation), an examination of the SKf > (PVf + SUf) contrast was conducted and revealed a nearly identical set of fronto-parietal regions, including right IPS, right FEF, right MFG, right precentral gyrus, and right dorsal SMG. These data support the hypothesis that the dorsal attention network is associated with top-down modulation of task-relevant sensory-cortical target areas during a period of  specific  expectation, even when goals are directed at memory encoding rather than perceptual objectives. 
 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity Results: Expectation Networks 
 It has been proposed that frontal and parietal regions that comprise the dorsal attention network generate top-down signals that bias processing of expected stimuli in sensory cortices ( Kastner et al., 1999 ;  Shulman et al., 1999 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Serences et al., 2004 ;  Giesbrecht et al., 2006 ;  Silver et al., 2007 ;  Sylvester et al., 2007 ;  Bressler et al., 2008 ;  Esterman and Yantis, 2009 ;  Summerfield and Egner, 2009 ). Although univariate findings that report coincident expectation-driven fronto-parietal and visual-cortical activity baseline shifts support such a claim (including the univariate results presented in the current study), this evidence is indirect. The beta-series correlation method is a functional connectivity analysis approach that utilizes trial-by-trial variability to measure covariance in activity between spatially disparate regions, and thus offers a more powerful tool for assessing network interactions ( Gazzaley et al., 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2004 ). FFA-connectivity main-effect maps obtained during the expectation period of the SKf condition revealed a set of regions similar to, but not directly overlapping, those described in the univariate analysis as being nodes of the dorsal attention network: bilateral MFG (1&2), right inferior frontal junction (IFJ; 3), right IPS (4), and right precuneus (5) (red arrows) ( Fig. 4A ). FFA connectivity with these regions was not significant in the main effect maps for the SUf and PVf conditions ( Fig. 4B & C ). A non-parametric analysis was used to contrast FFA-connectivity maps during the expectation periods of different conditions ( Nichols and Holmes, 2002 ). The main contrast-of-interest, SKf > SUf, revealed that FFA connectivity with fronto-parietal network cortical regions, including bilateral MFG (1&2), right IFJ (3), right IPS (4), right precuneus (5), and right precentral gyrus as well as right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; 6), were associated with specific expectation of the stimulus category (red arrows) ( Fig. 5A ,  Table 1 ). In an additional analysis, a contrast of SKf > (PVf + SUf) was conducted and revealed a nearly identical profile of fronto-parietal FFA-connectivity, including bilateral MFG, right IFJ, right IPS, right precuneus, right IFG, and right precentral gyrus. In addition, to examine FFA connectivity when there were WM goals, but no ability to predict a face stimulus with certainty, the contrast SUf > PVf was performed, and revealed no significant clusters. We thus conclude that these frontal and parietal regions are engaged in functional networks with the FFA only for  specific  stimulus-category expectation. 
 To further examine the relationship between fronto-parietal - FFA connectivity and FFA baseline shifts, we conducted an across-participant regression analysis of FFA connectivity with fronto-parietal ROIs (identified by the SKf > SUf connectivity contrast) and the magnitude of pre-stimulus FFA activity in the SKf condition (corrected for multiple ROI comparisons). FFA-connectivity magnitude positively correlated with FFA activity for the right IFJ ( r  = 0.67,  p  < 0.005,  Fig. 6A ), right MFG ( r  = 0.81,  p  < 0.0001,  Fig. 6B ), right IFG ( r  = 0.69,  p  < 0.005,  Fig. 6C ) and right IPS ( r  = 0.73,  p  < 0.0005,  Fig. 6D ). This same analysis was also conducted on similar ROIs derived from the SKf > (PVf+SUf) contrast, and revealed significant correlations between FFA-connectivity measures and FFA activity modulation: right IFJ ( r  = 0.59,  p  < 0.01), right MFG ( r  = 0.66,  p  < 0.005), and right IPS ( r  = 0.68,  p  < 0.005). Although not causal, these data provide stronger evidence than univariate results, and even functional connectivity results alone, that these fronto-parietal regions generate endogenous signals based on specific expectations of the nature of ensuing stimuli, which mediate top-down modulation of sensory cortical activity prior to stimulus presentation. 
 Interestingly, it was observed that several regions associated with the default network, a collection of regions that are more active at rest than during a task ( Gusnard et al., 2001 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ), displayed significant FFA connectivity during the pre-stimulus period that preceded face stimuli in the passive-view condition, but not SKf or SUf conditions (e.g., posterior cingulate cortex (PCC; 7), and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC; 8) (yellow arrows)) ( Fig. 4C ). To further investigate if there were regions that displayed FFA-connectivity  decreases  during the expectation period of the predictive face condition, we performed a functional connectivity contrast of SKf < (PVf + SUf). A pattern emerged of reduced default-network - FFA connectivity, which included retrosplenial cortex, bilateral PCC, bilateral regions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL), as well as regions of the lateral temporal cortex ( Table 1 ). To explore the possibility that functional connectivity decreases during expectation may be invariant of specific expectation goals (i.e., occurs for both predictive and neutral conditions), we evaluated the contrast PVf > (SKf + SUf). This contrast revealed task-related decreases in pre-stimulus FFA connectivity with a similar set of default network regions, also including the PCC (7), mPFC (8), and lateral parietal cortex (yellow arrows) ( Fig. 5B ,  Table 1 ). These expectation-driven decreases in connectivity suggest that  functional disconnection  of the FFA from several default network regions are an aspect of preparing to encode an ensuing relevant stimulus, independent of specific stimulus-category foreknowledge. 
 To examine the relationship between these functional connectivity reductions and FFA pre-stimulus activity shifts, across-participant regression analyses of FFA connectivity with these default-network regions and pre-stimulus FFA baseline shifts were performed for the SKf condition. This revealed a significant negative correlation only for the PCC region ( r  = −0.59,  p  < 0.01), using passive view as a baseline for both connectivity and FFA activity shifts;  Fig. 6E ). These results suggest that for the default network, notably the PCC, functional disconnection from sensory cortices, which occurs under conditions of both predictive and neutral expectation, is permissive but not sufficient for the expectation-related baseline shifts, which also requires increased connectivity with fronto-parietal regions that occurs only during predictive conditions. 
 To explore these findings more formally, default network ROIs were identified using the independent localizer task (contrast fixation (rest) > n-back) in the mPFC, PCC, and lateral parietal cortices. Results indicated that the PCC (Region 7,  Fig. 4 ) displayed significant differential preparatory connectivity with the FFA, such that SKf < PVf (0.27±0.05, 0.40±0.03;  t (17)  = 4.41,  p  < 0.001) and SUf < PVf (0.27±0.05;  t (17)  = 5.91,  p  < 0.0001), while SKf = SUf ( t (17)  = 0.71,  p  > 0.4). Interestingly, pre-stimulus PPA-PCC connectivity measures were statistically equivalent across all scene conditions (all  p  values > 0.23)). This may offer a mechanistic account of the null PPA univariate effect. FFA-PCC connectivity was then subjected to the same regression analysis with FFA activity as described previously, which once again revealed a significant negative correlation between FFA-PCC connectivity and FFA baseline shift ( r  = −0.58,  p  < 0.05). 
 
 
 Neurobehavioral Correlations 
 Predictive instructions resulted in a benefit on both WM and LTM performance for faces (i.e., SKf > SUf). In order to investigate if expectation-driven network changes were associated with this benefit, we conducted an across-participant, neurobehavioral regression analysis using FFA-connectivity values with fronto-parietal ROIs, identified by the SKf > SUf connectivity contrast ( Fig. 5A ), and performance measures. The regression of FFA-connectivity (SKf-SUf) vs. WM recognition accuracy (SKf-SUf) and LTM recognition scores (SKf-SUf) revealed significant correlations with the right IFJ ( r  = 0.72,  p  < 0.001) and right precuneus ( r  = 0.66,  p  < 0.005)) for the WM comparisons, and with the left MFG ( r  = 0.74,  p  < 0.0005) for LTM comparisons ( Fig. 7 ). The same regressions utilizing ROIs derived from the SKf > (PVf + SUf) contrast revealed similar positive correlations for the WM comparisons with the right IFJ ( r  = 0.65,  p  < 0.005) and right precuneus ( r  = 0.73,  p  < 0.001)), and for LTM comparisons with the left MFG ( r  = 0.62,  p  < 0.005). Thus, in the current study distinct neural networks were associated with predictive, expectation-mediated WM or LTM performance benefits. No significant neurobehavioral correlations were obtained using the default network regions in regression analyses. 
 These results add to the accumulating evidence that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), which includes the MFG, is involved in LTM processes ( Rossi et al., 2001 ;  Sandrini et al., 2003 ;  Blumenfeld and Ranganath, 2006 ,  2007 ;  Manenti et al., 2010b ;  Manenti et al., 2010a ). To evaluate the mechanism further, we employed beta-series functional connectivity analysis using the left MFG region as a seed. This analysis revealed increased expectation period connectivity of left MFG with bilateral hippocampi in the predictive condition (i.e., SKf > SUf and SKf > PVf). This suggests that the dorsolateral PFC may contribute to the long-term retention of task-relevant information via pre-stimulus increases in functional connectivity with the hippocampus, a structure well known for its involvement in LTM ( Eichenbaum et al., 2007 ). In contrast, connectivity analysis using right IFJ and right precuneus as seeds (the regions found to correlate with WM accuracy) did not reveal task-differential connectivity with the hippocampus. Although recent results revealed that pre-stimulus hippocampal activity is beneficial for LTM performance ( Park and Rugg, 2010 ), the current results advance this notion by suggesting that it may be mediated via top-down influences from the dorsolateral PFC. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The current study provides evidence that expectations regarding the specific category of ensuing complex stimuli (i.e., faces) enhance both WM and LTM of those stimuli. fMRI connectivity analysis, utilized to explore the neural networks underlying memory benefits, revealed a fronto-parietal network of regions functionally connected with stimulus-selective visual association cortex (i.e., right FFA) prior to stimulus presentation, only when specific predictive information was supplied. Furthermore, the magnitude of FFA-connectivity measures from a subset of these regions (right IFJ, right MFG, right IFG, and right IPS) correlated with pre-stimulus activity modulation in the FFA (baseline shifts). It was also revealed that connectivity between the FFA and the PCC, a region of the default network, decreased during periods of both predictive and neutral WM expectation, and that the magnitude of this decrease correlated with FFA baseline shifts in the predictive condition. Lastly, non-overlapping neural networks were shown to correlate with expectation-driven benefits in WM and LTM performance. 
 This study first addressed the important cognitive question: Does pre-stimulus expectation benefit the short- and long-term memory of complex stimuli, or alternatively, does expectation have no effect on these measures? To our knowledge, only one other study investigated a related aspect of this question and revealed that pre-stimulus, predictive attentional capture (i.e., sudden-onset spatial cues) positively influenced visual spatial WM ( Schmidt et al., 2002 ). We extend this finding by revealing that the benefit on WM can occur with purely top-down goals and that it can occur for category cueing. Furthermore, enhanced LTM of these stimuli is also engendered by predictive foreknowledge. Note that the current results do not distinguish the influence of predictions on WM and LTM from influences of attention on these cognitive operations, which has been studied extensively (for a review, see  Naghavi and Nyberg, 2005 ). A non-mutually exclusive interpretation of the current findings is that predictions help to guide attention, which then results in memory performance enhancements. Thus, attention may be governed by the predictive signal, but not identical to it. Also note that we differentiate the current experimental manipulation from those used in the extensive literature on the influence of motivation on memory ( LaBar et al., 1999 ;  Engelmann et al., 2009 ;  Pessoa et al., 2009 ). Our view is that expectations based on foreknowledge of the reward value of ensuing stimuli (e.g., monetary or emotional valence) are distinct from expectations driven by prior information of the nature of ensuing stimuli (as in the current study), although there are likely overlapping neural processes that warrant further investigation. 
 An important aspect of the current study design is that in the neutral conditions participants knew that either faces or scenes would be presented, and thus this task may be viewed as a “predictive” condition as well (e.g., they know the stimulus would not be a house). However, clearly the neutral condition supplied less predictive information than conditions in which a face or a scene could be anticipated with 100% certainty. Our results revealed that the only the SKf condition resulted in pre-stimulus modulation and engaged the fronto-parietal network, and it also exhibited more successful memory performance than the SUf condition. The data do not allow us to distinguish between two alternative explanations for this finding: under neutral cueing, participants do not engage anticipatory mechanisms at all, or they attempt to engage these mechanisms in anticipation of both stimulus categories, but are ineffective in doing so. 
 Several previous studies have reported univariate fMRI evidence that expectation-related activity in dorsal-attention network regions is associated with baseline shifts in sensory regions. In the current study, functional connectivity analysis was used to more directly explore the role of putative control regions on baseline activity shifts in visual cortex. Only a few studies have taken this analytical approach. Most related,  Bressler et al. (2008)  used Granger causality to reveal that pre-stimulus activity in FEF and IPS predicted visual cortex activity baseline shifts in a spatial-cueing, perceptual discrimination task. In another recent study, functional connectivity of laLteral parietal cortex with ventral visual cortices was reported to occur pre-stimulus in a perceptual recognition task, although the experiment did not reveal selective activity baseline shifts in visual cortex ( Eger et al., 2007 ). The results presented here revealed that baseline shifts in the FFA occurred during the predictive condition for face stimuli, not in the neutral or passive viewing conditions, and that a network of regions in the frontal and parietal cortices were functionally connected with the FFA during the expectation period. The set of regions identified were representative of several key regions previously characterized as the dorsal attention network, notably the MFG, IFJ and IPS, as well as the right IFG, associated with the ventral attention network ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Shulman et al., 2009 ). Further evidence that the degree of connectivity predicts the magnitude of the FFA baseline shifts provides a stronger indication that these areas mediate pre-stimulus, visual cortex modulation. Of note, caution in interpreting these results is warranted, as they are correlational in nature and do not permit causal inference. However, consistent with these results, recent studies reporting disruption of visual target detection and posterior alpha-band topography ( Capotosto et al., 2009 ), as well as visual cortical BOLD measures ( Ruff et al., 2008 ) by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation to right IPS, support a causal role of these fronto-parietal regions in modulation of sensory cortical activity. 
 Key regions identified in the current study were located in the parietal cortex (IPS, precuneus) and were functionally connected with the FFA only during the expectation period of the predictive condition. The magnitude of IPS - FFA functional connectivity correlated with the baseline activity shifts in the FFA. These regions have been primarily identified in studies of expectation for locations ( Kastner et al., 1999 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Bressler et al., 2008 ;  Sylvester et al., 2008 ), although  Shulman et al. (1999)  provided evidence for IPS involvement in feature-based attention. The data presented here suggest that parietal regions are also involved in non-spatial, object-category attention and may mediate the pre-stimulus biasing of task-relevant ensembles in ventral visual cortices to more efficiently encode relevant information into WM stores. 
 Several frontal regions were also identified in the network analysis, notably the right IFJ, IFG, and MFG, which were most functionally connected with the FFA during the expectation period of the predictive condition, the degree of which correlated with baseline activity shifts in the FFA. Previous studies have shown, and the current results suggest, a role for the right IFG in expectation-driven attention based upon behavioral goals ( Shulman et al., 2009 ). The IFJ, defined by  Brass and Von Cramon (2004) , is located at the intersection of the inferior frontal sulcus and precentral sulcus, and has been shown to exhibit increased activity in pre-stimulus periods of discrimination tasks. The ambiguous locale of this region at the intersection of two major gyri has led to substantial variability in the terminology used to describe it. For example, the right posterior MFG region identified by previous studies as being active in the expectation period of spatial attention tasks ( He et al., 2007 ;  Szczepanski et al., 2010 ), and also as a key node that bridges the dorsal and the ventral attention networks ( Fox et al., 2005 ;  He et al., 2007 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ), overlaps with the region designated in the current study as the IFJ. Accumulating evidence suggests that the IFJ is a functionally discrete region ( Brass and von Cramon, 2004 ;  He et al., 2007 ;  Szczepanski et al., 2010 ), and a recent report has implicated the IFJ in attentional modulation of V4 color processing ( Zanto et al., 2010 ). The current study supports this assertion by revealing a dissociation in the influence of the IFJ and MFG connectivity on memory performance. The data revealed that expectation-driven increases in IFJ - FFA connectivity was associated with improved WM, but not LTM performance, and that MFG - FFA connectivity was associated with improved LTM, but not WM performance. This suggests that the IFJ may control expectation-driven biasing of task-relevant sensory cortical regions in a similar manner to the precuneus, which benefits the active retention of face representations. Further analysis directed at elucidating the mechanism of this dissociation revealed that left MFG - Hippocampal functional connectivity was greater for the predictive than neutral condition, while this was not evident for IFJ - Hippocampal connectivity. The role of the left MFG in LTM is well documented ( Rossi et al., 2001 ;  Sandrini et al., 2003 ;  Blumenfeld and Ranganath, 2006 ,  2007 ;  Manenti et al., 2010b ;  Manenti et al., 2010a ), and the data presented here supports assertions that the PFC and the hippocampus functionally interact in the service of recognition memory ( Bunge et al., 2004 ;  Karlsgodt et al., 2005 ;  Staresina and Davachi, 2006 ;  Israel et al., 2010 ). 
 The default network is a set of regions that have been shown to exhibit greater activity during periods of rest and passive fixation than during goal-directed tasks ( Gusnard et al., 2001 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). Since its initial description, interest in the role the default network plays in goal-directed activities has steadily grown. Regions of the default network consistently display task-induced deactivations across a wide variety of cognitive tasks (e.g. attention, memory, language processing, and motor) ( Shulman et al., 1997 ;  Binder et al., 1999 ;  Mazoyer et al., 2001 ). In addition, increasing WM load and demands on visual attention for target detection lead to greater deactivation ( McKiernan et al., 2003 ;  Todd and Marois, 2005 ;  McKiernan et al., 2006 ;  Tomasi et al., 2007 ). However, the functional role of the default network in periods of pre-stimulus expectation has not yet been investigated, although it’s involvement has been speculated ( Bar, 2007 ). The current study reveals that functional connectivity between the PCC, a region of the default network, and the FFA, decreases during expectation of a WM task, relative to passive view. This occurs independent of the predictive nature of the instructional information, i.e., for both predictive and neutral conditions. 
 The results presented here advance our understanding of the beneficial role that pre-stimulus expectation has on behavioral performance by revealing a positive impact on subsequent WM and LTM performance. Consistent with previous studies using perceptual tasks, performance improvements were associated with baseline shifts of visual cortical activity. Functional connectivity analysis further revealed that the neural mechanisms involved in such baseline shifts depend upon two expectation-driven, pre-stimulus network changes: 1) A functional disconnection of visual areas from integration with default network regions based upon general expectations of a WM task, and 2) An increase in functional connectivity between visual areas and the dorsal and ventral attention networks that is dependent upon the predictability of stimulus category. Our findings suggest that attention and default networks engage with sensory cortices in a dynamic and flexible manner to modulate attentional orienting on the basis of expectations about ensuing stimuli, and that an individual’s ability to achieve such engagement predicts their memory benefits. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Health Grant 5R01AG030395(AG). We would like to thank Edrick Masangkay and Chips McSteeley Jr. for their assistance. 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental Paradigm 
 All participants performed 4 tasks (Stimulus-Known Faces (SKf trials), Stimulus-Known Scenes (SKs trials), Stimulus Unknown (SUf and SUs trials), and Passive View (PVf and PVs trials)), which were blocked and counterbalanced and for which stimuli were randomized. For Passive View trials, delay and probe periods were removed (see methods). Note that fixation crosses were green, red, and grey for expectation, delay, and inter-trial interval (ITI) periods, respectively (not shown in figure). SKf, stimulus-known face trials; SKs, stimulus-known scene trials; SUf, stimulus-unknown face trials; SUs, stimulus-unknown scene trials; PVf, passive-view face trials; PVs, passive-view scene trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Behavioral Performance 
 (A) WM accuracy. Compared with the neutral conditions, specific predictive foreknowledge resulted in increased WM accuracy for face trials (* p  < 0.05), but not scene trials ( p  > 0.05). 
 (B) LTM Indices. Compared with the neutral conditions, specific predictive foreknowledge was associated with higher LTM recognition scores for face trials (* p  < 0.05), but not scene trials ( p  > 0.05). WM, working memory; LTM, long-term memory. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 FFA/PPA univariate activity: Expectation-related baseline shifts 
 For the FFA, expectation-related activity modulation (i.e., baseline shift) was greater for the predictive condition than for neutral and passive-view face trials, as well as for remember scene trials (faces were ‘uncued’) (all comparisons, * p  < 0.05). The PPA did not display significant expectation-related activity (all comparisons,  p  > 0.05). FFA, fusiform face area; PPA, parahippocampal place area. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 FFA Functional Connectivity: Main Effects 
 (A) Axial and sagital slices illustrate FFA-seed functional connectivity main effects. This analysis revealed that regions in the left MFG (1), right MFG (2), right IFJ (3), right IPS (4), and precuneus (5) (red arrows) were functionally connected with the FFA during the expectation period in the face-predictive condition (SKf). 
 (B) Neutral condition (SUf) trials did not reveal FFA-connectivity with the regions in (A). 
 (C) For passive-view face trials (PVf), regions belonging to the default network, including PCC (7) and mPFC (8) (yellow arrows) were significantly functionally connected with the FFA during the expectation period. FFA, fusiform face area; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; IFJ, inferior frontal junction; IPS, intraparietal sulcus; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; mPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; SKf, stimulus-known face trials; SUf, stimulus-unknown face trials; PVf, passive-view face trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 FFA Functional Connectivity: Contrasts 
 Expectation-related FFA connectivity contrasts of A) SKf > SUf, B) PVf > (SKf + SUf). Numbers correspond to regions identified in the main effects analysis ( Fig. 4 ), which remained significant in the contrast, as well as right IFG (6). Stereotaxic MNI coordinates and mean  p  values for significant regions are shown in  Table 1 . FFA, fusiform face area; IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; SKf, stimulus-known face trials; SUf, stimulus-unknown face trials; PVf, passive-view face trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Regression Analysis: Functional Connectivity/FFA activity 
 The right IFJ (A), right MFG (B), right IFG (C), and right IPS (D) display significant positive correlations between FFA connectivity and univariate FFA activity modulation during face-specific expectation periods in an across-participant regression analysis. In contrast, the PCC (E) displays a negative correlation between task-differential FFA connectivity (SKf-PVf) and univariate FFA activity modulation (SKf-PVf) during the expectation periods. ROIs localized on 3D brain images and task-specific FFA connectivity measures are displayed in the insets above the scatterplots (* p  < 0.05). FFA, fusiform face area; IFJ, inferior frontal junction; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; IPS, intraparietal sulcus; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; SKf, stimulus-known face trials; PVf, passive-view face trials; ROI, region-of-interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Regression Analysis: Neurobehavioral correlations 
 WM and LTM performance measures were correlated with connectivity between FFA and distinct fronto-parietal regions during the stimulus expectation period. Brain figures illustrate the ROIs from the FFA-connectivity contrast SKf > SUf whose task-differential connectivity measures (SKf-SUf) were positively correlated with task-differential behavior (WM or LTM) (see methods). Shown in red are regions displaying expectation-related, functional connectivity with the FFA that correlates with WM performance (right IFJ, right precuneus). Shown in blue are regions displaying expectation-related functional connectivity with the FFA that correlates with LTM measures (left MFG). Corresponding scatter plots are shown below each region. FFA, fusiform face area; IFJ, inferior frontal junction; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; SKf, stimulus-known face trials; SUf, stimulus-unknown face trials; ROI, region-of-interest; WM, working memory; LTM, long-term memory. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Functional Connectivity Contrasts (FFA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brain region 
 BA 
 # voxels 
 Mean  p  val 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 Stimulus Known > Stimulus Unknown 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 81 
 0.004 
 −30 
 30 
 28 
 
 
   L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 10/46 
 225 
 0.005 
 −31 
 56 
 3 
 
 
   R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 37 
 0.005 
 35 
 41 
 20 
 
 
   L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 52 
 0.005 
 −41 
 46 
 3 
 
 
   L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 248 
 0.004 
 43 
 23 
 16 
 
 
   R Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 161 
 0.003 
 51 
 31 
 0 
 
 
   R Inferior Frontal Junction 
 6 
 259 
 0.004 
 24 
 1 
 44 
 
 
   R Intraparietal Sulcus 
 40 
 93 
 0.004 
 47 
 −41 
 46 
 
 
   R Superior Parietal Lobule 
 5 
 41 
 0.004 
 16 
 −45 
 76 
 
 
   R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 19 
 49 
 0.006 
 31 
 −84 
 −1 
 
 
   R Supramarginal Gyrus 
 40 
 38 
 0.007 
 57 
 −41 
 27 
 
 
   R Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 62 
 0.005 
 8 
 −13 
 70 
 
 
   Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 26 
 75 
 0.005 
 8 
 −38 
 30 
 
 
   R Precuneus 
 7 
 64 
 0.004 
 12 
 −48 
 53 
 
 
   R Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 41 
 0.006 
 49 
 7 
 −17 
 
 
   R Thalamus 
 -- 
 118 
 0.004 
 6 
 0 
 1 
 
 
   R Putamen 
 -- 
 367 
 0.005 
 18 
 14 
 −7 
 
 
   L Putamen 
 -- 
 172 
 0.004 
 −23 
 13 
 1 
 
 
 Stimulus Known > (Passive View + Stimulus Unknown) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 144 
 0.005 
 −34 
 35 
 32 
 
 
   L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 263 
 0.005 
 −32 
 55 
 5 
 
 
   R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 9/46 
 35 
 0.006 
 40 
 40 
 36 
 
 
   R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 55 
 0.004 
 35 
 43 
 20 
 
 
   R Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 47 
 0.006 
 45 
 25 
 16 
 
 
   R Inferior Frontal Junction 
 6 
 133 
 0.005 
 49 
 7 
 38 
 
 
   R Intraparietal Sulcus 
 40 
 141 
 0.006 
 37 
 −40 
 49 
 
 
   R Intraparietal Sulcus 
 40 
 35 
 0.007 
 46 
 −30 
 48 
 
 
   R Intraparietal Sulcus 
 7 
 61 
 0.007 
 22 
 −5 
 58 
 
 
   R Superior Parietal Lobule 
 40 
 58 
 0.005 
 38 
 −45 
 67 
 
 
   R Superior Parietal Lobule 
 5 
 63 
 0.005 
 15 
 −46 
 76 
 
 
   R Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 63 
 0.004 
 32 
 −11 
 70 
 
 
   L Juxtapositional Lobule Cortex 
 6 
 95 
 0.005 
 16 
 2 
 63 
 
 
   R Fronal Eye Fields 
 6 
 40 
 0.005 
 15 
 6 
 68 
 
 
   R precuneus 
 7 
 36 
 0.005 
 14 
 −52 
 52 
 
 
   L Calcarine Cortex 
 18 
 52 
 0.006 
 −18 
 −98 
 −8 
 
 
   L Calcarine Cortex 
 17 
 39 
 0.005 
 −9 
 −100 
 7 
 
 
 Stimulus Known < (Passive View + Stimulus Unknown) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   L Fusiform Cortex 
 20 
 272 
 0.004 
 −38 
 −11 
 −34 
 
 
   L Fusiform Cortex 
 20 
 57 
 0.006 
 −46 
 13 
 −40 
 
 
   L Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 36 
 82 
 0.004 
 −28 
 11 
 −34 
 
 
   R Fusiform Cortex 
 36 
 60 
 0.005 
 30 
 −2 
 −28 
 
 
   R Hippocampus 
 -- 
 95 
 0.006 
 23 
 −30 
 −11 
 
 
   L Hippocampus 
 -- 
 136 
 0.005 
 −21 
 −25 
 −5 
 
 
   L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 53 
 0.005 
 −58 
 −12 
 −9 
 
 
   L Lingual Gyrus 
 19 
 69 
 0.006 
 −28 
 −51 
 1 
 
 
   Retrosplenial Cortex 
 29 
 57 
 0.004 
 5 
 −48 
 8 
 
 
   R Posterior Cingulate
 
 23 
 177 
 0.005 
 19 
 −17 
 41 
 
 
   L Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 51 
 0.005 
 −17 
 −25 
 39 
 
 
 Passive View > (Stimulus Known + Stimulus Unknown) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   R Temporal Fusiform Cortex 
 20 
 210 
 0.004 
 33 
 −3 
 −43 
 
 
   L Temporal Fusiform Cortex 
 20 
 158 
 0.004 
 −31 
 4 
 −43 
 
 
   R Retrosplenial Cortex 
 29 
 158 
 0.004 
 7 
 −45 
 8 
 
 
   R Hippocampus 
 -- 
 154 
 0.004 
 26 
 −36 
 −6 
 
 
   L Hippocampus 
 -- 
 191 
 0.005 
 −24 
 −34 
 −6 
 
 
   L Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 129 
 0.006 
 −11 
 −43 
 41 
 
 
   R Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 259 
 0.005 
 9 
 −41 
 41 
 
 
   Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 724 
 0.004 
 0 
 −12 
 41 
 
 
   R Lateral Parietal Cortex 
 22 
 69 
 0.006 
 57 
 −34 
 7 
 
 
   Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 10 
 38 
 0.005 
 1 
 64 
 20 
 
 
   L Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 37 
 129 
 0.006 
 −47 
 −64 
 −7 
 
 
   L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 74 
 0.006 
 −57 
 −29 
 −2 
 
 
   L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 64 
 0.006 
 −53 
 −46 
 3 
 
 
   R Pallidum 
 -- 
 235 
 0.004 
 22 
 −5 
 −2 
 
 
   L Putamen 
 -- 
 77 
 0.004 
 −27 
 −8 
 6 
 
 
   R Angular Gyrus 
 21 
 371 
 0.005 
 54 
 −57 
 24 
 
 
   L Angular Gyrus 
 39 
 85 
 0.004 
 −45 
 −50 
 27 
 
 
   L Frontal Operculum Cortex 
 48 
 111 
 0.005 
 −31 
 7 
 18 
 
 
   R Central Operculum Cortex 
 48 
 67 
 0.006 
 53 
 −2 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 The proactive brain: using analogies and associations to generate predictions 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2007 
 11 
 280 
 289 
 17548232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bentin 
 S 
 
 
 Allison 
 T 
 
 
 Puce 
 A 
 
 
 Perez 
 E 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Electrophysiological studies of face perception in humans 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1996 
 8 
 551 
 565 
 20740065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berry 
 AS 
 
 
 Zanto 
 TP 
 
 
 Clapp 
 WC 
 
 
 Hardy 
 JL 
 
 
 Delahunt 
 PB 
 
 
 Mahncke 
 HW 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 The influence of perceptual training on working memory in older adult 
 PLoS One 
 ( In press ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PS 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state. A functional MRI study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1999 
 11 
 80 
 95 
 9950716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blumenfeld 
 RS 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex promotes long-term memory formation through its role in working memory organization 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 916 
 925 
 16421311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blumenfeld 
 RS 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex and long-term memory encoding: an integrative review of findings from neuropsychology and neuroimaging 
 Neuroscientist 
 2007 
 13 
 280 
 291 
 17519370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Decomposing components of task preparation with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2004 
 16 
 609 
 620 
 15165351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bressler 
 SL 
 
 
 Tang 
 W 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Top-down control of human visual cortex by frontal and parietal cortex in anticipatory visual spatial attention 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 10056 
 10061 
 18829963 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Unrest at rest: default activity and spontaneous network correlations 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 1091 
 1096 
 17368915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Burrows 
 B 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prefrontal and hippocampal contributions to visual associative recognition: interactions between cognitive control and episodic retrieval 
 Brain Cogn 
 2004 
 56 
 141 
 152 
 15518931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Capotosto 
 P 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Romani 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Frontoparietal cortex controls spatial attention through modulation of anticipatory alpha rhythms 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 5863 
 5872 
 19420253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chawla 
 D 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 The physiological basis of attentional modulation in extrastriate visual areas 
 Nat Neurosci 
 1999 
 2 
 671 
 676 
 10404202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chelazzi 
 L 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Responses of neurons in inferior temporal cortex during memory-guided visual search 
 J Neurophysiol 
 1998 
 80 
 2918 
 2940 
 9862896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clapp 
 WC 
 
 
 Rubens 
 MT 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Mechanisms of working memory disruption by external interference 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 20 
 859 
 872 
 19648173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cook 
 EP 
 
 
 Maunsell 
 JHR 
 
 
 Attentional modulation of behavioral performance and neuronal responses in middle temporal and ventral intraparietal areas of macaque monkey 
 J Neurosci 
 2002 
 22 
 1994 
 2004 
 11880530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2002 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1995 
 18 
 193 
 222 
 7605061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eger 
 E 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Mechanisms of top-down facilitation in perception of visual objects studied by FMRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 2123 
 2133 
 17101690 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 30 
 123 
 152 
 17417939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engelmann 
 JB 
 
 
 Damaraju 
 E 
 
 
 Padmala 
 S 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Combined effects of attention and motivation on visual task performance: transient and sustained motivational effects 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 2009 
 3 
 4 
 19434242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 R 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 A cortical representation of the local visual environment 
 Nature 
 1998 
 392 
 598 
 601 
 9560155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 RA 
 
 
 Higgins 
 JS 
 
 
 Differential parahippocampal and retrosplenial involvement in three types of visual scene recognition 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 1680 
 1693 
 16997905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esterman 
 M 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Perceptual Expectation Evokes Category-Selective Cortical Activity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 20 
 1245 
 1253 
 19759124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 2005 
 102 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Functional connectivity during working memory maintenance 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2004 
 4 
 580 
 599 
 15849899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Cooney 
 J 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 K 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Top-down enhancement and suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2005 
 17 
 507 
 517 
 15814009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giesbrecht 
 B 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 Pre-target activity in visual cortex predicts behavioral performance on spatial and feature attention tasks 
 Brain Res 
 2006 
 1080 
 63 
 72 
 16412994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2001 
 2 
 685 
 694 
 11584306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 BJ 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Epstein 
 A 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Breakdown of functional connectivity in frontoparietal networks underlies behavioral deficits in spatial neglect 
 Neuron 
 2007 
 53 
 905 
 918 
 17359924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2000 
 3 
 284 
 291 
 10700262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Israel 
 SL 
 
 
 Seibert 
 TM 
 
 
 Black 
 ML 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Going their separate ways: dissociation of hippocampal and dorsolateral prefrontal activation during episodic retrieval and post-retrieval processing 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2010 
 22 
 513 
 525 
 19301994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 McDermott 
 J 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 The fusiform face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception 
 J Neurosci 
 1997 
 17 
 4302 
 4311 
 9151747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karlsgodt 
 KH 
 
 
 Shirinyan 
 D 
 
 
 van Erp 
 TGM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 Cannon 
 TD 
 
 
 Hippocampal activations during encoding and retrieval in a verbal working memory paradigm 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 1224 
 1231 
 15850740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Pinsk 
 MA 
 
 
 De Weerd 
 P 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Increased activity in human visual cortex during directed attention in the absence of visual stimulation 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 22 
 751 
 761 
 10230795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 Neuroanatomic overlap of working memory and spatial attention networks: a functional MRI comparison within subjects 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 10 
 695 
 704 
 10600415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luck 
 SJ 
 
 
 Chelazzi 
 L 
 
 
 Hillyard 
 SA 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of spatial selective attention in areas V1, V2, and V4 of macaque visual cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 1997 
 77 
 24 
 42 
 9120566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manenti 
 R 
 
 
 Tettamanti 
 M 
 
 
 Cotelli 
 M 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 The neural bases of word encoding and retrieval: A fMRI-guided transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Brain Topogr 
 2010a 
 22 
 318 
 332 
 20012682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manenti 
 R 
 
 
 Cotelli 
 M 
 
 
 Calabria 
 M 
 
 
 Maioli 
 C 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 The role of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in retrieval from long-term memory depends on strategies: a repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Neurosci 
 2010b 
 166 
 501 
 507 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayer 
 JS 
 
 
 Roebroeck 
 A 
 
 
 Maurer 
 K 
 
 
 Linden 
 DEJ 
 
 
 Specialization in the default mode: Task-induced brain deactivations dissociate between visual working memory and attention 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2010 
 31 
 126 
 139 
 19639552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Zago 
 L 
 
 
 Mellet 
 E 
 
 
 Bricogne 
 S 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Houdé 
 O 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Joliot 
 M 
 
 
 Petit 
 L 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Cortical networks for working memory and executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man 
 Brain Research Bulletin 
 2001 
 54 
 287 
 298 
 11287133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKiernan 
 KA 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 JN 
 
 
 Kucera-Thompson 
 J 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2003 
 15 
 394 
 408 
 12729491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKiernan 
 KA 
 
 
 D'Angelo 
 BR 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 JN 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Interrupting the "stream of consciousness": an fMRI investigation 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 29 
 1185 
 1191 
 16269249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moran 
 J 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Selective attention gates visual processing in the extrastriate cortex 
 Science 
 1985 
 229 
 782 
 784 
 4023713 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Naghavi 
 H 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Common fronto-parietal activity in attention, memory, and consciousness: shared demands on integration? 
 Conscious Cogn 
 2005 
 14 
 390 
 425 
 15950889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Nonparametric permutation tests for functional neuroimaging: a primer with examples 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2002 
 15 
 1 
 25 
 11747097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Prestimulus hippocampal activity predicts later recollection 
 Hippocampus 
 2010 
 20 
 24 
 28 
 19499585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Rossi 
 A 
 
 
 Japee 
 S 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Attentional control during the transient updating of cue information 
 Brain Res 
 2009 
 1247 
 149 
 158 
 18992228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Encoding and retrieving faces and places: distinguishing process- and stimulus-specific differences in brain activity 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 2282 
 2289 
 19524092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Puri 
 AM 
 
 
 Wojciulik 
 E 
 
 
 Expectation both helps and hinders object perception 
 Vis Res 
 2008 
 48 
 589 
 597 
 18177913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Puri 
 AM 
 
 
 Wojciulik 
 E 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Category expectation modulates baseline and stimulus-evoked activity in human inferotemporal cortex 
 Brain Res 
 2009 
 1301 
 89 
 99 
 19747463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 2001 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Kreiman 
 G 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 Neural correlates of consciousness in humans 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2002 
 3 
 261 
 270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ress 
 D 
 
 
 Backus 
 BT 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Activity in primary visual cortex predicts performance in a visual detection task 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2000 
 3 
 940 
 945 
 10966626 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a cognitive task 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 23 
 752 
 763 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossi 
 S 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Pasqualetti 
 P 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Carducci 
 F 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 F 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex in long-term memory: an "interference" approach using magnetic stimulation 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2001 
 4 
 948 
 952 
 11528428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruff 
 CC 
 
 
 Bestmann 
 S 
 
 
 Blankenburg 
 F 
 
 
 Bjoertomt 
 O 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Weiskopf 
 N 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Distinct causal influences of parietal versus frontal areas on human visual cortex: evidence from concurrent TMS-fMRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 817 
 827 
 17652468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rutman 
 A 
 
 
 Clapp 
 W 
 
 
 Chadick 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Early Top-Down Control of Visual Processing Predicts Working Memory Performance 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2009 
 22 
 1224 
 1234 
 19413473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandrini 
 M 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Rossi 
 S 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 The role of prefrontal cortex in verbal episodic memory: rTMS evidence 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2003 
 15 
 855 
 861 
 14511538 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sapir 
 A 
 
 
 d'Avossa 
 G 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Brain signals for spatial attention predict performance in a motion discrimination task 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 2005 
 102 
 17810 
 17815 
 16306268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 D 
 
 
 Adis 
 D 
 
 
 Buckner 
 R 
 
 
 Rembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 8 
 657 
 651 
 17700624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 D 
 
 
 Adis 
 D 
 
 
 Buckner 
 R 
 
 
 Episodic simulation of future events: concepts, data, and applications 
 Ann NY Acad Sci 
 2008 
 1124 
 657 
 661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 B 
 
 
 Vogel 
 E 
 
 
 Woodman 
 G 
 
 
 Luck 
 S 
 
 
 Voluntary and automatic attentional control of visual working memory 
 Perception & psychophysics 
 2002 
 64 
 754 
 763 
 12201334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Culberson 
 A 
 
 
 Awh 
 E 
 
 
 Preparatory activity in visual cortex indexes distractor suppression during covert spatial orienting 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2004 
 92 
 3538 
 3545 
 15254075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Top-down modulation of early sensory cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1997 
 7 
 193 
 206 
 9143441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Areas involved in encoding and applying directional expectations to moving objects 
 J Neurosci 
 1999 
 19 
 9480 
 9496 
 10531451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Franke 
 D 
 
 
 Pope 
 DLW 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 4392 
 4407 
 19357267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silver 
 MA 
 
 
 Ress 
 D 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Neural correlates of sustained spatial attention in human early visual cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2007 
 97 
 229 
 237 
 16971677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staresina 
 BP 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Differential encoding mechanisms for subsequent associative recognition and free recall 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 9162 
 9172 
 16957073 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 C 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Expectation (and attention) in visual cognition 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2009 
 13 
 403 
 409 
 19716752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Jack 
 AI 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Asymmetry of anticipatory activity in visual cortex predicts the locus of attention and perception 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 14424 
 14433 
 18160650 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CM 
 
 
 Jack 
 AI 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Anticipatory suppression of nonattended locations in visual cortex marks target location and predicts perception 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 6549 
 6556 
 18579728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szczepanski 
 SM 
 
 
 Konen 
 CS 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Mechanisms of Spatial Attention Control in Frontal and Parietal Cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 148 
 160 
 20053897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Todd 
 JJ 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Posterior parietal cortex activity predicts individual differences in visual short-term memory capacity 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2005 
 5 
 144 
 155 
 16180621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomasi 
 D 
 
 
 Chang 
 L 
 
 
 Caparelli 
 EC 
 
 
 Ernst 
 T 
 
 
 Different activation patterns for working memory load and visual attention load 
 Brain Res 
 2007 
 1132 
 158 
 165 
 17169343 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 A neural system for human visual working memory 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 1998 
 95 
 883 
 890 
 9448255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vossel 
 S 
 
 
 Thiel 
 CM 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Cue validity modulates the neural correlates of covert endogenous orienting of attention in parietal and frontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 32 
 1257 
 1264 
 16846742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zanto 
 TP 
 
 
 Rubens 
 MT 
 
 
 Bollinger 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Top-down modulation of visual feature processing: The role of the inferior frontal junction 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.012 
 
 
 
 
