
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8102140 
 5035 
 J Neurosci 
 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 
 0270-6474 
 1529-2401 
 
 
 20980588 
 3307052 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4248-09.2010 
 NIHMS248466 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Control of Spatial and Feature-Based Attention in Frontoparietal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 Adam S. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Esterman 
 Michael 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 Daryl 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 John T. 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Yantis 
 Steven 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
 
 2 Department of Psychology, Queens University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
 
 3 Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093
 
 
 Address correspondence to: Adam S. Greenberg Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences The Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21218 (410) 516-3961  agreenb@jhu.edu 
 
 
 9 
 3 
 2012 
 
 
 27 
 10 
 2010 
 
 
 19 
 3 
 2012 
 
 30 
 43 
 14330 
 14339 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Visual attention selects task-relevant information from scenes to help achieve behavioral goals. Attention can be deployed within multiple domains to select specific spatial locations, features, or objects. Recent evidence has shown that voluntary shifts of attention in multiple domains are consistently associated with transient increases in cortical activity in medial superior parietal lobule (mSPL), suggesting that this may be the source of a domain-independent control signal that initiates the reconfiguration of attention. To investigate this hypothesis, we used fMRI to measure changes in cortical activation while human subjects shifted attention between spatial locations or between colors at a location. Univariate multiple regression analysis revealed a common, domain-independent transient signal (in PPC and prefrontal cortex) time-locked to shifts of attention in both domains. However, multivariate pattern classification conducted on the cortical surface revealed that the spatiotemporal pattern of activity within PPC differed reliably for spatial and feature-based attention shifts. These results suggest that the posterior parietal cortex is a common hub for the control of attention shifts but contains subpopulations of neurons with domain-specific tuning for cognitive control. 
 
 
 attention shift 
 fMRI 
 pattern classification 
 cortical surface 
 PPC 
 SPL 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse : NIDA 
 R01 DA013165-10 || DA 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Natural scenes contain a multitude of objects competing for perceptual representation in cortex. Cortical neurons tuned for visual attributes (e.g., location, color, object category, etc.) often contain multiple objects within their receptive fields. The competition for representation among items is resolved by selecting objects that are behaviorally relevant and filtering out those that are irrelevant through deliberate acts of selective attention ( Desimone and Duncan, 1995 ). 
 A network of prefrontal and parietal cortical regions is thought to be the source of control signals that resolve the visual competition through voluntary deployments of attention ( Kastner and Ungerleider, 2000 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ). Sustained intervals of focused spatial attention evoke sustained cortical activity in topographically organized regions of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS;  Sereno et al., 2001 ;  Bisley and Goldberg, 2003 ;  Silver et al., 2005 ;  Serences and Yantis, 2007 ;  Saygin and Sereno, 2008 ) and prefrontal cortex (PFC;  Sereno et al., 2001 ;  Serences and Yantis, 2007 ;  Saygin and Sereno, 2008 ). These regions are thought to comprise attentional priority maps that specify the highest priority location(s) in the scene from moment to moment. 
 Shifts of attention evoke transient activation in medial superior parietal lobule (mSPL) that is time-locked to the initiation of shifts between spatial locations ( Vandenberghe et al., 2001 ;  Yantis et al., 2002 ;  Kelley et al., 2008 ;  Shulman et al., 2009 ), spatially superimposed objects ( Serences et al., 2004 ), sensory modalities ( Shomstein and Yantis, 2004 ), and visual features ( Liu et al., 2003 ). The consistency of this pattern suggests that mSPL may be the source of a domain-independent control signal that initiates the reconfiguration of attention. 
 Other studies, however, have suggested that different domains of attention may rely on domain-specific cortical sources (e.g.,  Shulman et al., 2002 ;  Giesbrecht et al., 2003 ;  Slagter et al., 2007 ).  Rushworth et al. (2001)  reported that distinct subregions within PPC were associated with shifts of visual attention versus shifts of response preparation. Based on a meta-analysis,  Wager et al. (2004)  concluded that although certain gross regions of the brain are consistently associated with attention shifts (e.g., PFC, PPC), there remain subregions of cortex specific to shifting within each possible domain. 
 Each of the cited studies that provide evidence for a domain-independent attention shift signal was conducted with different tasks and different groups of subjects, which limits the generality of any conclusion concerning the degree to which acts of attentional control are mediated by common mechanisms. To determine whether shifts of visual attention in different perceptual domains are associated with a domain-independent reconfiguration signal, we devised a single task that permitted us to directly compare cortical activation (using BOLD fMRI) associated with attention shifts in two different domains: spatial location and color. We used conventional univariate statistical procedures to determine whether attention shifts in these two domains evoked activity in the same cortical regions. Futhermore, we used multivariate pattern classification ( Norman et al., 2006 ;  Esterman et al., 2009 ) within these activated regions to determine whether distinct spatiotemporal activation patterns were associated with acts of attentional control in the two domains. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Subjects 
 Eight neurologically healthy adult volunteers (5 female; 19-45 years of age; mean 26) with normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity were recruited from the Johns Hopkins University community to participate in the experiment. Each participant provided written informed consent approved by the Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Board and passed an MRI safety medical screening approved by the Kennedy Krieger Institute, F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging (where MRI scanning was performed). Subjects were trained on the task in a separate session prior to scanning and performed the task during two fMRI sessions of two hours each. 
 
 
 Stimuli 
 Stimuli were back-projected (Epson PowerLite 7600p, Epson America, Inc., Long Beach, CA; with custom zoom lens, Navitar, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA) onto a screen (Da-plex substrate with Video Vision optical coating, Da-Lite, Inc., Warsaw, IN) mounted to the top of the magnet bore behind the subject’s head. All visual stimuli described below were generated and displayed via MATLAB scripts (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA) created with Psychophysics Toolbox extensions ( Brainard, 1997 ;  Pelli, 1997 ). Subjects viewed the screen (via a mirror mounted to the head coil) at an optical distance of 68 cm. The subject responded via a pair of custom-built MR-compatible fiber optic push button response boxes (MRA, Inc., Washington, PA). 
 The visual display in the experimental task consisted of two circular apertures (2.6 degrees in diameter) containing coherently moving dot fields each centered 4.5 degrees to the left or right of a white central fixation disk (0.36 degrees diameter) superimposed on a black background ( Figure 1a ). Individual dots subtended 0.09 degrees of visual angle. In each of the two apertures, half of the dots were rendered in red and the other half in green (30 dots/color), forming two sets of dot fields in each aperture. At any moment throughout the experiment, one set of dots in each aperture was moving at a rate of 3 degrees/second, and the other set of dots was stationary. Dots moved in one of 8 directions (up, down, left, right, upper-left, upper-right, lower-left, and lower-right) at 100% coherence and each dot had a limited lifetime of random duration (mean approx. 1200 ms) to discourage subjects from attending to a single dot (or small set of dots) throughout the experiment. The moving dots changed direction (or stopped moving) exactly once per second and all changes to stimulus motion occurred simultaneously in both the left and right apertures. When the moving dot field in one of the apertures stopped moving, the previously stationary dots of the other color would begin to move. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Subjects were instructed to begin each run of the experiment by attending to the green dot field on the left side of the display. Subjects monitored the attended dot field for four specified directions of motion that provided cues to either switch or maintain attention. Upward motion indicated shift location (but hold color) and downward motion indicated shift color (but hold location). These instructions were reversed for half of the subjects. Leftward and rightward motion always indicated that subjects should hold attention on the current dot field (same color and location). For example, if the currently-attended green dots on the left side of the display began to drift downward, subjects were to shift attention to the red dots on the left. However, if the attended green dots began to drift upward, subjects were to shift attention to the green dots on the opposite (right) side of the display. Subjects were instructed to press two buttons (one in each hand) each time one of the four cues appeared. The four oblique directions of motion served as “filler” motion between cues and could be ignored. In rare instances, subjects would fail to detect the presence of a cue. In this case, subjects were instructed to simply maintain attention on the current location/color dot field until a new cue appeared. The task was designed such that cues cycled back to the same dot field at intervals no longer than approximately every 30 seconds. 
 Cues occurred every 3, 6, or 9 seconds, jittered with respect to the MRI acquisition time (2000 ms) to allow for better detection of event-related impulse response functions ( Birn et al., 2002 ). Cues appeared only in the currently-attended dot field; all other motion was in the oblique directions. This encouraged subjects to adopt a highly concentrated focus of spatial and feature-based attention in which the three unattended dot fields were ignored. Subjects completed approximately four practice runs (8 minutes each) outside of the scanner prior to fMRI data collection. In the scanner, each run began with a fixation-only display (triggered by the onset of the first image volume acquisition). The dot fields appeared and began moving 8 seconds later (triggered by the onset of the fifth image volume acquisition). The four cue directions were apportioned approximately equally throughout each run (one-half of all trials for hold, one-quarter for shift color, and one-quarter for shift location). Each subject performed 10 runs of the experiment. 
 
 
 MRI data acquisition 
 Imaging data were acquired with a 3T Philips Gyroscan MRI scanner (Philips Medical Imaging Systems, Latham, NY) using an eight-channel transmit/receive sensitivity-encoding (SENSE) head coil (Invivo, Inc., Orlando, FL) at the F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging in the Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. Each subject was scanned in two 2-hour sessions on different days. Whole-brain anatomical image volumes were acquired using a 1 mm isotropic T1-weighted magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) pulse sequence (TR = 8.23 ms; TE = 3.9 ms; flip angle = 8 deg.; acquisition matrix = 256×256; 200 slices; SENSE factor = 2). Whole-brain functional image volumes (3 mm isotropic resolution) were acquired using a T2*-weighted echoplanar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence (TR = 2000 ms; TE = 30 ms; flip angle = 70 deg.; acquisition matrix = 64×64; 38 transverse slices; SENSE factor = 2). Main experimental runs were acquired with 244 volumes and lasted 8.13 minutes each. The initial four volumes (8 seconds) were discarded from each EPI run to allow magnetization to reach steady-state. One-half of the EPI data were acquired during each of the 2 scanning sessions. The anatomical data were collected in the first scanning session and an additional fast (higher SENSE factor) T1 volume was acquired on the second day of scanning for inter-session alignment. During all scans, each subject wore foam earplugs to reduce effects of scanner noise and used a custom dental bite-bar (Stevenson Industries, Pacific Palisades, CA) that was attached to the head coil to reduce head motion. 
 
 
 fMRI data analysis: GLM 
 All fMRI data analyses were conducted with the AFNI/SUMA software package ( Cox, 1996 ;  Saad et al., 2004 ), except where noted, along with custom MATLAB scripts. Prior to any statistical testing, all EPI runs from individual subjects were slice-time corrected, realigned to the average EPI image volume from the run acquired nearest in time to the anatomical dataset, and converted to percent signal change values normalized to the mean of each run. Individual anatomical data from the two scanning sessions were then co-registered with each session’s functional volumes, aligned with each other, and, finally, transformed into Talairach coordinates ( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ). This alignment and transformation was then applied to all functional volumes across both sessions. 
 The EPI volumes from each run were then concatenated in time and mapped to a cortical surface representation using a method similar to that outlined in  Jo et al. (2007) . Specifically, EPI timeseries data were mapped from voxels to nodes on the smoothed gray/white matter boundary surface of the Talairached N27 anatomical dataset obtained from the Montreal Neurological Institute. For each node on the gray/white boundary surface, a related node was identified on the pial (gray matter/csf boundary) surface. For each node pair, a connecting line segment between the nodes was computed. The voxels through which this line segment passed were used to compute an average timeseries that was then assigned to the given node on the gray/white boundary surface. Once completed for each node on the two surfaces (both left and right hemispheres), the data were then spatially smoothed with a heat kernel ( Chung et al., 2005 ) as implemented in AFNI program SurfSmooth ( Saad, 2005b ). Smoothing was performed iteratively such that the final FWHM of the smoothed data was 4 mm. All further data analyses were performed entirely on these surface-mapped data. 
 A canonical hemodynamic response function ( Cohen, 1997 ) was convolved with a model of the timing of the stimulation epochs during the experiment, yielding six regressors corresponding to the three types of cues (shift location, shift color, hold) for the left and right apertures, respectively. Additional regressors accounting for variance due to linear, quadratic, and cubic drifting as well as constant offset (separately for each run) were included in the GLM as nuisance regressors. Together, these were submitted to a multiple regression, general linear model analysis (GLM;  Friston et al., 1995 ). The following contrasts between the resulting beta-weights yielded statistical maps that are described in the Results section below: shift left to right>hold left; shift color on the left side>hold left; shift right to left>hold right; shift color on the right side>hold right. The intersection of nodes reaching threshold (after individual subject multiple comparisons correction, as detailed below) for these four contrasts formed a conjunction map that identified regions activated by both kinds of shift cues. Nodes were classified into three categories: (1) those that were significantly active for both types of spatial shifts (colored red), (2) those that were significantly active for both types of color shifts (colored green), & (3) those that were significantly active for at least one color shift and at least one spatial shift (colored yellow). In a second GLM, we modeled blocks of time when subjects were attending to the right aperture and left aperture, separately. Using the same method described above, functional maps yielding regions responsive to the contralateral maintenance of attention were generated by contrasting attend-right and attend-left regressors. Finally, in a third GLM, we modeled blocks of time when subjects were attending to green dot fields and red dots fields, separately. Again, using the same method, functional maps were generated by contrasting these two regressors. In each case, we also performed a mixed effects group analysis across all subjects by submitting individual subject beta weight estimates for each condition (fixed effects) to an ANOVA and generating contrasts across the individuals (random effect). 
 All statistical maps were corrected for multiple comparisons on the surface by using a novel permutation method we developed to arrive at appropriate cluster correction values in the application of Gausian Random Field theory ( Nichols and Hayasaka, 2003 ). Although more complex and computationally demanding than standard methods, this procedure was necessary because no tools currently exist for conducting Monte Carlo simulations on surfaces. For eight (of 16) hemispheres (4 left hemisphere and 4 right), 500 alternative versions of the 2 color shift regressors were generated by randomly shuffling the labels that marked the onset of the events. Each shuffled pair was then submitted to a GLM (identical to the one described above, save these two regressors) and a contrast between the beta-weights associated with the 2 shuffled regressors was generated. For each of these 500 contrasts, we measured the surface area of the largest cluster obtained (rounded to the nearest integer value) at several nominal p-values. The 500 cluster size values were then rank-ordered from 0 to the largest area measured in order to construct a table of alpha probabilities from which a cluster correction value could be obtained for a desired corrected p-value. These cluster thresholds were then averaged across the eight hemispheres to provide a set of cluster correction values for the group maps. Clustering was then performed for each functional map on the surface via AFNI program SurfClust ( Saad, 2005a ). 
 Each of the functional maps described above served as the basis for a set of ROIs from which timecourses were extracted and displayed. For each statistical map, all contiguous values within a given brain region that were above threshold were used to examine event-related averages. Select timecourses are presented as illustrations of the underlying neural changes corresponding to the regions surviving threshold in the various statistical maps. Because these timeseries data were normalized in preprocessing (see above), the event-related timecourses are in units of percent signal change. 
 
 
 fMRI data analysis: multivariate pattern classification 
 To examine the patterns of activity within certain ROIs that resulted from the GLM analyses described above, we conducted a multivariate pattern classification analysis on individual subject surfaces (exactly analogous to multivoxel pattern classification, but performed on data mapped to surface nodes; see  Norman et al., 2006 ;  Esterman et al., 2009 ). For each ROI to be tested, we selected features (surface nodes to be included in the classification) by employing a “leave-one-run-out” (LORO) approach in order to maximize the use of our data while ensuring that the measures were derived independently. Specifically, for each subject we ran 10 GLM analyses with the 6 regressors of interest (as described above). For each GLM, one of the 10 runs was left out of the analysis such that, in each case, functional maps of the conjunction described above were generated from 9 runs of data. Each functional map was then used to create a set of frontoparietal ROIs that defined the features (nodes) from which timecourses were extracted. For each of the 20 maps (10 per hemisphere), timecourses were extracted from all 10 runs. However, data from the 9 runs used to generate each map were labeled as training data while data from the run left out were sequestered as testing data. This ensured that the ROI selection was independent of the test data. Following this feature selection process, we extracted 15 timepoints (from −2 to +12 seconds, at a resolution of 1 second) around the time that each cue to shift attention was presented. This procedure was conducted for both hemispheres for each of our 8 subjects. When completed, we had 10 sets (one for each LORO GLM) of 9 training runs and associated testing run for each hemisphere per subject. The training data were submitted to a support vector machine (SVM) learning algorithm ( Vapnik, 1995 ) that was implemented in MATLAB (LIBSVM;  Chang and Lin, 2001 ). It is important to note that we preserved the temporal information from each trial. The SVM was trained on the matrix of nodes, timepoint-by-timepoint; thus, our testing results provide information about how effective the classification of shift type (color or location) was over time. 
 We used a linear SVM and performed a grid search to find the optimal values of cost (C). The results generalized to a wide range of C values. The classifier evaluated the data for each hemisphere a total of 10 times, once for each set of data independently generated by the LORO GLM procedure described above. In each SVM run, the classifier was trained on the 9 training runs and tested on the single run-left-out for that GLM. In each instance, once the classifier training was completed, the SVM was tested on our testing data and we recorded the classifier’s accuracy in determining whether each timepoint was from a shift color trial or a shift location trial. Classifier accuracy across all 10 testing runs was pooled to create a classification rate across the entire experiment while maintaining independence between training and test data. We also ran a permutation test in which the testing labels were shuffled 1000 times to determine the 95% confidence interval around classifier chance performance. This entire process was repeated for each region (in each of 16 hemispheres) that was significantly active (after cluster correction) in our conjunction analysis of shift color and shift location cues (greater than hold cues) on at least 7 of the 10 LORO GLMs per hemisphere. Finally, the event-related classification timecourses were averaged within lobe (frontal or parietal) and hemisphere and t-tests were used to assess significance of our group classification results for each timepoint. Because two of our subjects (4 hemispheres) did not yield at least one frontal and one parietal ROI in the LORO analysis, these two individuals were excluded from the group data (leaving 12 hemispheres tested). 
 To our knowledge, this is the first report of event-related multivariate pattern classification conducted entirely on the surface. We believe this approach provides marked advantages over classification in the volume with respect to spatial smoothing (superior preservation of SNR and localization of activation) and statistical power ( Jo et al., 2007 ;  Anticevic et al., 2008 ). It has become commonplace in fMRI data analysis to apply a spatial Gaussian smoothing kernel to acquired data in order to (1) increase the inherently low signal-to-noise ratio of BOLD fMRI data, (2) increase activation detectability via the matched filter theorem, and (3) satisfy the requirement of Gaussian Random Field (GRF) theory (for multiple comparisons corrections) that smoothness of the data is large compared to the sampling resolution. However, when performed in a standard 3-dimensional volume, spatial smoothing can cause nearby (in Euclidean distance) voxels to contribute to voxels that are actually quite far (in Geodesic distance); this comes about because of the highly folded structure of cortex. 
 This issue can be ameliorated if smoothing is applied to a surface representation of cortex to which the volume data are mapped. Mapping data from volume to surface (as implemented in this study) is a form of smoothing, though if done carefully, one is simply smoothing in the direction normal to the surface (not across gyri/sulci). Furthermore, once data are mapped to the surface and analyzed to produce areas of activation, defining ROIs is much simpler and more properly restricted to gray matter compared to defining 3D ROIs in the volume. Finally, the requirements of spatial smoothing noted above may seem to be at odds with the approach taken in this study; that is, the use of multivariate pattern classification to exploit underlying biases in the neuronal populations underlying specific data samples. However, it has recently been demonstrated ( Op de Beeck, 2009 ) and further noted ( Kamitani and Sawahata, 2009 ;  Kriegeskorte et al., in press ) that spatial smoothing does not necessarily degrade the information leveraged during multivariate pattern classification procedures. 
 We performed two additional analyses to address two methodological issues. First, the surface-based SVM method we used could yield a different outcome than conventional volume-based SVM because the mapping of volume data to surface nodes might have artificially increased statistical power for univariate analyses by pooling information across neighboring voxels while not necessarily preserving the spatial patterns for pattern classification. To quantify the difference between pattern classification of volume-based versus surface-based data, we performed an SVM analysis in the volume for the surface ROIs discussed above. We first projected the independently-defined (via LORO procedure) surface-based ROIs into the volume using the reverse of the mapping procedure explained above, and then carried out the SVM on the volume data. This provides a direct comparison between ROIs on the surface and in the volume. The results are shown in  Supplemental Figure S1 , created to parallel  Figure 5 . Comparing these figures shows that the volume-based pattern classification performed similarly to the surface-based classification. Specifically, the pattern shows group mean classification above chance in parietal ROIs between 6 – 10 seconds and 7 - 12 seconds post-cue for left and right, respectively. The frontal ROIs exhibited chance performance throughout the timecourse. As expected, the quantitative values have changed between the surface-based and volume-based analysis, however the qualitative results are the same. These results provide evidence that the surface-based classification performance was not artificially inflated by the mapping method we used and provide additional confidence that the activation pattern differences detected by SVM on the surface reflect a true underlying multivariate signal present in the data. 
 Second, it is possible that mean differences between conditions within an ROI (that may not be differentiable via GLM contrast) might provide a basis for above-chance classification accuracy. We therefore performed a mean-centering procedure (modeled after  Kamitani and Tong, 2005 ;  Esterman et al., 2009 ) on the same set of volume-based ROIs used in generating  Figure S1 . For each of these ROIs, we performed the SVM classification after subtracting condition-mean activity within the ROI from each feature (voxel), for that condition. The results for each individual subject and the group mean are shown in  Figure S2  and provide an important check of our data and analyses: comparing the classification rate timecourses in  Figure S2  (classification rate after mean-centering) with the plots in  Figure S1  (raw classification rate) yields only minor quantitative differences in classification in each of the four sets of averaged ROIs. Specifically, as in  Figure S1 , classification was reliably above chance in the parietal ROIs during a similar (or slightly expanded, for left parietal) range of timepoints to that of  Figure S1 , when data were not mean-centered. Furthermore, both left and right frontal ROIs yielded chance classification performance throughout the timecourse. These findings suggest that mean differences were not responsible for classification results and provide additional evidence that specifically tuned sub-populations of neurons may be differentially active between the two attention shifts. 
 Because group data can sometimes conceal irregular patterns in individual subjects, in  Figure S3  we plot comparisons both with and without mean-centering in two ROIs (FEF and mSPL) from each of the two hemispheres of one representative subject using ROIs in both surface nodes and volumetric voxels. These detailed results show a remarkable consistency before and after mean-centering, again suggesting (as in  Figure S2 ) that mean differences within each ROI for each attention shift condition played little role in driving classification performance in either frontal ROIs (where classification was near chance) or parietal ROIs (where classification was consistently above chance several seconds post shift cue). In addition, comparing across coordinate systems (volume- vs. surface-based ROIs) also yielded a high degree of similarity in classification rate timecourse, further validating our approach to pattern classification on the surface. 
 In order to directly test whether mean differences within each ROI provided any information to the SVM about attention shift condition, we also performed a direct SVM classification on the mean timecourse per condition in each surface-based ROI. As in previous analyses, we used the LORO procedure to sequester training trials from test trials. For each subject, the mean of all voxels in each ROI used in the surface-based analyses discussed above was calculated separately for shift location and shift color trials and submitted to the linear classifier. The results for each individual subject and the group mean are shown in  Figure S4 : the classification rate did not exceed chance at any time from just before to long after cue onset. This indicates that the mean timecourse in each ROI provided no information to the classifier about the type of attention shift performed. Note that the classification accuracy is near chance (50%) at all time points for the group mean, however individual subject classification is centered at values slightly away from theoretical chance. This is due to the slight imbalance between trial types for individuals leading to chance performance that is not exactly 50%. Nevertheless, each individual has near flat classification performance in each ROI throughout all timepoints. Independent one-sample t-tests for the group confirmed that no timepoints in any of the ROIs are significantly different from chance performance (all t-values << 1). Taken together, the results of these control analyses (mean-centering and ROI mean classification) show that MVPC does not rely on differences in mean activity across conditions for successful classification. 
 Finally, we also performed a full-brain searchlight pattern classification analysis ( Kriegeskorte et al., 2007 ) in the Talairach-transformed volume for each of our subjects included in previous SVM analyses. We used a cubic searchlight of 27 voxels centered on each voxel in the brain, in succession. To simplify the computation, we performed the classification on a single value: the mean of 6, 7, & 8 seconds after each attention shift cue. As in previous analyses throughout the paper, the classifier was asked to discriminate between shift color and shift location trials, using the LORO procedure to sequester training versus test trials. This yielded a value for classification accuracy at each voxel in each subject of our group. We then compiled the group data by performing an independent one-sample t-test versus chance performance which yielded a group functional map of significant classifier performance (corrected for multiple comparisons using Gaussian Random Field theory cluster correction to yield a corrected p<0.05). Representative slices from this map are shown in  Supplemental Figure S5 , and  Supplemental Table S1  lists the locations of voxel clusters in which the classifier performed significantly above chance. We note the similarity between this result and the result of our full-brain univariate conjunction analysis (see  Figure 3 ). Specifically, the only regions in the searchlight map that do not appear in our group univariate map are right Insula and right Extrastriate cortex; both of which appear in a subset of our individual subject conjunction maps. With respect to our primary hypothesis, the results of our searchlight analysis complement our finding that portions of posterior parietal cortex (particularly mSPL) are domain-specific in nature. In addition, the left FEF, left MFG/IFG, and bilateral SEF also showed smaller clusters of voxels with significant above-chance classification accuracy. This suggests that some portions of the frontal ROIs we submitted to ROI-based MVPC may contain reliable spatiotemporal information about the domain of attention shift performed. 
 
 
 Eye Position Monitoring 
 Subjects were instructed to attend covertly to the left and right dot apertures while continuously maintaining fixation at the central fixation cross. To ensure continuous fixation, we monitored the right eye position of a subset (n=3) of the participants while they performed the main experimental task in the scanner using a custom-made MR-compatible video camera system (MRA, Inc., Washington, PA). Camera output was recorded by a computer in the scanner control room using ViewPoint eye-tracking software (Arrington Research, Inc., Scottsdale, AZ) and analyzed later with custom MATLAB scripts. Our analysis showed that subjects held fixation throughout the experiment on approximately 95% of cue trials (defined by less than 1 degree of horizontal eye-movement in the 500 ms following each cue). These data—together with the highly consistent contralateral attentional modulations observed in extrastraite cortex—show that subjects successfully used covert attention to complete this task, as instructed. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 Subjects were asked to press buttons held in both hands each time they saw one of the four cues (shifts and holds); speed was not stressed. In the imaging analyses, we excluded data from trials in which cues were not detected. Subjects’ behavioral data are shown in  Table 1 ; mean (±SEM) overall detection accuracy was 0.84 ± 0.06. There was no significant difference in detection accuracy for shift cues versus hold cues (paired t(7) = 0.78; p = 0.46). A two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with cue location (left and right) and shift domain (color and location) included as within-subject factors. This yielded no significant main effect of either cue location (F(1,7) = 2.14; p = 0.19) or domain (F(1,7) = 0.62; p = 0.46). The interaction was also not significant (F(1,7) = 0.07; p = 0.80). 
 
 
 Effects of Sustained Attention 
 The expected contralateral visual field effects of sustained spatial attention are shown in  Figure 2  for our group of eight subjects. This map is the result of a contrast between epochs of time during which the subject was attending to the left aperture versus the right aperture. As detailed in  Table 2 , cortical activity was greater contralateral to the attended visual field in the occipital and posterior temporal lobes including extrastriate visual cortex and the ventral visual processing stream. This pattern was evident in all subjects. The event-related BOLD timecourses in  Figure 2b-2e  demonstrate the effects of attention in extrastriate cortex. These regions were selected on the criteria that attend left periods evoked greater activity than attend right, and vice-versa; therefore, the timecourses for Hold left and Hold right must necessarily be different (tonically low and high levels of activity for ipsilateral and contralateral cues, respectively, persist throughout the entire period shown: beginning prior to cue onset, through the cued period, and beyond). This reflects the sustained state of spatial attention to a single location before, during, and after the Hold cues. Furthermore, signals evoked by shift location cues exhibited the previously documented crossover pattern in which extrastriate cortical activity is modulated via shifts to and from the preferred visual hemifield (e.g.,  Yantis et al., 2002 ;  Kelley et al., 2008 ). Shift-to-Contralateral cues in  Figures 2b and 2d  evoked signals that begin at the low level of the Hold-Ipsilateral activity and rise to the high level of the Hold-Contralateral activity. In contrast, Shift-to-Ipsilateral signals begin at the high level of the Hold-Contralateral activity and fall to the low Hold-Ipsilateral level. 
 Unlike the effects of attending to spatial locations, we are aware of no reports that attention to one of two spatially superimposed colors modulates cortical activity measured with fMRI. Accordingly, contrasts between epochs of attention to red and attention to green yielded no statistically significant activations. Shift-Color cues evoked a small, transient increase in extrastriate cortical activity relative to the more sustained activity evoked by Hold cues, both when attention was directed to the contralateral and to the ipsilateral visual field ( Figures 2c and 2e ), possibly due to arousal from target detection. 
 A subset of attentional control regions (listed in  Table 2 ) in the parietal lobe also exhibited sustained increases in activation during epochs of spatial attention maintenance.  Figure 2a  shows significant sustained activity in the superior and inferior parietal lobules (SPL/IPL). Individual subjects also exhibited activity in precentral gyrus (probably the frontal eye fields, FEF;  Paus, 1996 ) and paracentral gyrus on the medial wall (probably the supplementary eye fields, SEF;  Grosbras et al., 1999 ). As in the occipito-temporal regions, these loci were active during epochs of sustained attention to the contralateral visual hemifield (not shown). 
 
 
 Attention-Shift Related Activity 
 To test for a domain-independent control network, we generated a statistical parametric conjunction map of location shift and color shift activity. As outlined in the methods section, the following four contrasts were examined (Shift left-to-right > Hold left; Shift right-to-left > Hold right; Shift color on left > Hold left; Shift color on right > Hold right).  Figure 3  shows the resulting group functional map. Nodes that were significantly active for both types of Shift-Location cues versus Hold cues are colored red and nodes that were significantly active for both Shift-Color cues versus Hold cues are colored green. The yellow nodes represent the conjunction, the voxels significantly activated by Shift-Color and Shift-Location cues versus Hold cues. This common shift activation (listed in  Table 3 ) was present in bilateral medial SPL/precuneus, left ventral PPC, left middle/inferior frontal gyri, and portions of bilateral medial/superior frontal gyri. 
 To better illustrate the domain-independent role of these regions, we generated group-averaged event-related timecourses from ROIs defined by the leave-one-run-out (LORO) statistical maps produced as part of the multivariate pattern classification analysis described below.  Figure 4a  shows example ROIs in left and right medial SPL/Precuneus, left and right Medial/Superior Frontal Gyri, and left Middle/Inferior Frontal Gyri. These ROIs delineated the general regions over which timecourses were averaged in  Figure 4b - 4f  (the specific nodes for each ROI varied slightly for each LORO GLM). In each plot, the response to hold cues remains low throughout the trial, however, the response to both the Shift-Color and Shift-Location cues were elevated and reached nearly identical levels of activation. Because these timecourses were extracted from an analysis (our LORO procedure) that was independent of the GLM used to generate the group functional maps in  Figure 3 , the timecourses need not exhibit such a pattern. 
 These results, which corroborate previous findings, suggest that mSPL, FEF/SEF and MFG/IFG comprise a network of regions that exhibit transient increases in activity that is time-locked to shifts of attention between locations and between colors. One interpretation of this outcome is that these regions perform a truly domain-independent function, perhaps providing a generic go-signal to initiate a shift of attention that is specified by domain-specific cortical activity elsewhere in the brain. 
 An alternative possibility is that there may exist distinct but spatially intermixed populations of neurons that are recruited selectively for shifts of attention between locations and colors, respectively. A conventional univariate GLM analysis (as outlined above) cannot discriminate between these possibilities. We therefore used a multivariate approach to further investigate this possibility. 
 
 
 Multivariate Pattern Classification 
 We trained a linear support vector machine (SVM), using a subset of our data (see Materials and Methods for details), to classify patterns of activity associated with shifts of attention between locations and colors in frontoparietal cortical ROIs. We then tested this classifier on a limited portion of independent data (using a leave-one-run-out cross-validation approach) to determine whether classification was reliable. We executed the training and testing on each individual timepoint during each trial (yielding an event-related classification rate) so that we could observe the temporal profile of the classifier performance. 
 Figure 5  shows the event-related classification timecourses. Panels (a-d) show the mean classification performance at each time point relative to the onset of a switch cue (thick black line) and the individual subject classification timecourses (thin colored lines) for frontal and parietal ROIs. Classifier performance did not exceed chance for the frontal ROIs but successfully classified the test data significantly better than chance in the parietal regions (indicated by the gray shaded portion of the plots; p < 0.01). This pattern was consistent across subjects as can be seen in the individual classification timecourses (this was also true for a parallel analysis performed in the volume, and was partially confirmed in a whole-brain searchlight MVPC analysis; see  Supplemental Figures S1  &  S5 ). Classification accuracy in the parietal ROIs was significantly greater than chance at timepoints 4 through 8 seconds (left parietal) and 3 through 8 seconds (right parietal) after shift cue onset. Notably, the classifier did not perform above chance in the parietal ROIs early or late in the timecourse; the peak classifier performance occurs at about the same time as the peak event-related BOLD activity evoked by shift cues (cf. event-related average plots in  Figure 4 ). However, the shape of the event-related classification rate is markedly different from that of the event-related averages; while the event-related averages are fairly symmetrical, the event-related classification rates have a quick rise-time and gradually fall back to chance performance by about 9 seconds post-cue. We also note that the profile of event-related classification timecourses, as performed in the volume (see  Supplemental Figures ), is markedly different from those resulting from surface-based classification. Specifically, the volume-based classification rates are less transient than those of the surface-based classification (compare  Figure 4  to  Figure S1 ). 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 We used fMRI to measure the timecourse of cortical activity following shifts of visual attention within two domains: location and color. Both the sensory stimulus and the motor response demands were constant throughout the experiment. This allowed for a direct comparison of shift-related cortical activity in the two domains. Visual sensory regions in extrastriate cortex reflected attentional modulations consistent with sustained deployments of spatial attention. For spatial attention shifts, the observed crossover pattern of neural activity replicates previous reports ( Motter, 1994 ;  Yantis et al., 2002 ;  Kelley et al., 2008 ). For attention shifts between colors, we observed low-amplitude, transient modulations of contralateral extrastriate cortex (relative to hold cue-evoked activity) similar to those seen in frontoparietal attentional control regions (compare  Figs. 2c & 2e  with  Fig. 4b – 4f ). This echoes a finding reported by  Serences et al. (2004)  in which a similar modulation of extrastriate cortex followed shifts of object-based attention. Those authors suggested that task-specific segmentation processes (in their case, segmenting two objects; in our case, segmenting two colors) may briefly accompany the attention shift signal and cause heightened activity in sensory areas. We postulate that this modulation is not the same reflection of top-down control seen in frontoparietal regions, but instead the result of low-level perceptual processing. 
 As noted in the Introduction, several previous studies have reported that a region in the mSPL exhibits transient activation following a cue to shift attention. Here, we examined the neural correlates of attention shifts between values within two different perceptual domains in the same experiment to test the hypothesis that dorsal regions of PPC and prefrontal cortex produce a domain-independent signal that serves to reconfigure the current state of attentional selection. A conjunction analysis of spatial and color shift activity yielded significant activation of bilateral mSPL as well as bilateral FEF/SEF and left MFG. In each of these regions, mean event-related BOLD timecourses for both color and spatial shifts of attention exhibited a transient increase in activity with a peak at about 4-5 seconds after cue onset. Importantly, the activity for both types of shifts was nearly identical and did not vary for the two values tested in each domain. 
 A group analysis of sustained spatial attention revealed a region of activation from ventrotemporal through extrastriate visual cortex along with an area of PPC during periods in which subjects maintained attention to the contralateral hemifield. These parietal regions of activation partially overlapped with the domain-independent shift-related activity shown in the conjunction analysis. However, the significant sustained attention activity spread more laterally into the IPL, whereas common shift-related activity was localized more medially in precuneus/SPL. This result is consistent with the recent finding of differential contributions of SPL and IPS following changes of attentional priority ( Molenberghs et al., 2007 ). Both that study and the current one report evidence of mSPL involvement in shifts of spatial attention while IPS/IPL subserves endogenous maintenance of attention. However,  Molenberghs et al. (2007)  argue that SPL is more closely involved in spatial, and not feature-based, shifts of attention. They suggest that previous studies reporting non-spatial attention shift signatures in SPL (e.g.,  Liu et al., 2003 ;  Serences et al., 2004 ;  Shomstein and Yantis, 2006 ) employed tasks that may have allowed subjects to use a spatial strategy. In the current study, however, such a spatial strategy (e.g., tracking an individual dot as it moved, and shifting spatial attention from the currently attended dot to a dot in the to-be-attended color) would give rise to transient signals throughout the entire experiment (not solely at the moment of a color shift). Because individual dot lifetime was limited, such a strategy would require frequent shifts from a dot in the attended color to another dot in the attended color when the currently tracked dot disappeared. This would have evoked multiple instances of spatial attention shifts (and corresponding transient control signals) during sustained periods of attention. Our data do not support this possibility. Thus, our results suggest that mSPL plays a role in both spatial and non-spatial shifts of attention. 
 Multivariate pattern classification analysis of our data revealed that in parietal ROIs, which exhibited nearly identical mean BOLD timecourses for color and location shifts, domain-specific information is expressed in the spatiotemporal patterns of nodewise activation within mSPL. Furthermore, mean-centering procedures had little effect on classification accuracy and mean timecourse classification yielded chance classifier performance (see  Supplemental Figures ), lending further support to separability of function at the sub-ROI level. Our findings suggest that PPC contains distinct subpopulations of neurons distributed throughout this region, each with domain-specific tuning functions for cognitive control. This finding also provides evidence against the hypothesis (suggested by  Molenberghs et al., 2007 ) that shifts of attention between features are instances of spatial attention shifts. 
 Recent evidence for interleaved subpopulations of neurons tuned for different domains of control was recently reported by  Schenkluhn and colleagues (2008) . They applied transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to PPC while subjects performed a visual search task. In this paradigm, subjects were cued to either the color or location of a target item in a subsequent visual search array. The authors applied TMS after the cue and observed an impairment on both color and spatial trials when TMS was applied to anterior IPS (stimulation of a more lateral site in PPC disrupted only spatial cue trials). The disruption of preparatory shifts of attention to a specific color and a specific location is consistent with our finding that spatially distributed and intermixed populations of neurons exhibit differential tuning to these two domains of attentional control. 
 Recent studies have implicated the PPC in not only shifts of attention within perceptual domains, but also non-perceptual shifting of categorization rules held in memory ( Chiu and Yantis, 2009 ). Multivoxel pattern classification revealed distinct spatiotemporal patterns of activity within PPC for spatial shifts of attention versus rule shifts ( Esterman et al., 2009 ). Esterman and colleagues suggested that the patterns of activity in mSPL associated with spatial attention shifts and rule switches could be accounted for by postulating dimensions of perceptual vs. non-perceptual or spatial vs. non-spatial acts of cognitive control. The current study demonstrates that spatial shifts of attention elicit distinct patterns of activity from (nonspatial) color shifts, both shifts of perceptual selection. Additional studies that explore two different nonspatial domains of cognitive control will further clarify the organizational structure of mSPL. 
 The current study did not examine shifts between distinct perceptual domains: shifts of spatial attention were always between dot fields of the same color, and color shifts were always between dot fields at the same spatial location. Two previous studies, however, have shown that cross-domain shifts of attention between color and motion ( Liu et al., 2003 ) and between vision and audition ( Shomstein and Yantis, 2004 ) also evoke transient increases in mSPL. Based on the current findings, we would predict that pattern classification of those data would reveal distinct spatiotemporal patterns of activity for shifts in one direction vs. the other. 
 The notion that there exists a generalized frontoparietal attention control network that works together with specialized subregions of this network in order to execute a shift of attention has been raised previously (e.g.,  Shulman et al., 2002 ;  Slagter et al., 2007 ). The present data support both this global hypothesis as well as specifications that propose separate roles for the frontal and parietal portions of this network.  Shulman and colleagues (2002) , for example, suggest that preparatory signals for specifying task-relevant information emanate from frontal portions of this network; the signals are then propagated to posterior parietal attention regions that reflect both preparatory and task-execution processes. They observed that preparatory signals (frontal and parietal) were domain-independent while task execution signals (parietal only) contained both domain-independent and task-specific components. The current data are in accord with these findings in that pattern classification was successful in distinguishing between the two shift conditions in PPC but not in the frontal ROIs, suggesting domain-generality in the frontal regions and domain-specificity in parietal regions. 
 Furthermore,  Slagter et al. (2007)  suggest that subregions of this frontoparietal network are specialized for either content information (e.g., a specific location in space) or type of process (e.g., a shift of attention). The present data echo this idea, suggesting that domain-independent frontal regions reflect process type whereas parietal regions may reflect content information. However, we include the caveat that portions of several frontal regions we submitted to ROI-based MVPC may contain reliable spatiotemporal information about the domain of attention shift performed, as evidenced by our searchlight pattern classification results (see  Supplemental Figures  and Methods for discussion). 
 The present results contribute to a growing body of evidence that medial SPL serves as a cortical hub for the initiation of attention and task shifts in multiple domains. Distinct spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity are associated with acts of cognitive control in different domains. These patterns of activity may participate in the specification of the new state of attention and/or the disengagement from the current state of attention—or both. A remaining challenge is to discover the mechanism by which these attentional specifications target domain-spectific activity in sensory cortex. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supp1 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 We thank T. Brawner & K. Kahl for help with scanning; and J. Gillen for technical assistance. We also thank Yuefeng Han for help with the searchlight analysis. This work was supported by NIH grants R01-DA13165 (S. Yantis) and F31-NS055664 (A. Greenberg). 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Dierker 
 DL 
 
 
 Gillespie 
 SK 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Csernansky 
 JG 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Comparing surface-based and volume-based analyses of functional neuroimaging data in patients with schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 41 
 835 
 848 
 18434199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Detection versus estimation in event-related fMRI: choosing the optimal stimulus timing 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 252 
 264 
 11771993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bisley 
 JW 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 ME 
 
 
 Neuronal activity in the lateral intraparietal area and spatial attention 
 Science 
 2003 
 299 
 81 
 86 
 12511644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brainard 
 DH 
 
 
 The Psychophysics Toolbox 
 Spatial Vision 
 1997 
 10 
 433 
 436 
 9176952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C-C 
 
 
 Lin 
 C-J 
 
 
 LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines 
 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 A domain-independent source of cognitive control for task sets: shifting spatial attention and switching categorization rules 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 3930 
 3938 
 19321789 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chung 
 MK 
 
 
 Robbins 
 SM 
 
 
 Dalton 
 KM 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Alexander 
 AL 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Cortical thickness analysis in autism with heat kernel smoothing 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 1256 
 1265 
 15850743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 Parametric analysis of fMRI data using linear systems methods 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 6 
 93 
 103 
 9299383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2002 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1995 
 18 
 193 
 222 
 7605061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esterman 
 M 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Tamber-Rosenau 
 BJ 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Decoding cognitive control in human parietal cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2009 
 106 
 17974 
 17979 
 19805050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Grasby 
 PJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Analysis of fMRI time-series revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 1995 
 2 
 45 
 53 
 9343589 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giesbrecht 
 B 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of top-down control during spatial and feature attention 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 19 
 496 
 512 
 12880783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grosbras 
 MH 
 
 
 Lobel 
 E 
 
 
 Van de Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 LeBihan 
 D 
 
 
 Berthoz 
 A 
 
 
 An anatomical landmark for the supplementary eye fields in human revealed with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1999 
 9 
 705 
 711 
 10554993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jo 
 HJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 JM 
 
 
 Kim 
 JH 
 
 
 Shin 
 YW 
 
 
 Kim 
 IY 
 
 
 Kwon 
 JS 
 
 
 Kim 
 SI 
 
 
 Spatial accuracy of fMRI activation influenced by volume- and surface-based spatial smoothing techniques 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 34 
 550 
 564 
 17110131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kamitani 
 Y 
 
 
 Tong 
 F 
 
 
 Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2005 
 8 
 679 
 685 
 15852014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kamitani 
 Y 
 
 
 Sawahata 
 Y 
 
 
 Spatial smoothing hurts localization but not information: Pitfalls for brain mappers 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Mechanisms of visual attention in the human cortex 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2000 
 23 
 315 
 341 
 10845067 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelley 
 TA 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Giesbrecht 
 B 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Cortical mechanisms for shifting and holding visuospatial attention 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 114 
 125 
 17434917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Cusack 
 R 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 P 
 
 
 How does an fMRI voxel sample the neuronal activity pattern: Compact-kernel or complex spatiotemporal filter? 
 Neuroimage 
 (in press) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 Sorger 
 B 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Individual faces elicit distinct response patterns in human anterior temporal cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2007 
 104 
 20600 
 20605 
 18077383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 T 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Cortical mechanisms of feature-based attentional control 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2003 
 13 
 1334 
 1343 
 14615298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molenberghs 
 P 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Peeters 
 R 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 RR 
 
 
 Remapping attentional priorities: differential contribution of superior parietal lobule and intraparietal sulcus 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 2703 
 2712 
 17264251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Motter 
 BC 
 
 
 Neural correlates of feature selective memory and pop-out in extrastriate area V4 
 J Neurosci 
 1994 
 14 
 2190 
 2199 
 8158265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Hayasaka 
 S 
 
 
 Controlling the familywise error rate in functional neuroimaging: a comparative review 
 Stat Methods Med Res 
 2003 
 12 
 419 
 446 
 14599004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Polyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Detre 
 GJ 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Beyond mind-reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2006 
 10 
 424 
 430 
 16899397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Beeck 
 HP 
 
 
 Against hyperacuity in brain reading: Spatial smoothing does not hurt multivariate fMRI analyses? 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Location and function of the human frontal eye-field: a selective review 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1996 
 34 
 475 
 483 
 8736560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pelli 
 DG 
 
 
 The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies 
 Spatial Vision 
 1997 
 10 
 437 
 442 
 9176953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Sipila 
 PK 
 
 
 Attention systems and the organization of the human parietal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 2001 
 21 
 5262 
 5271 
 11438601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 AFNI Program: SurfClust 
 2005a 
 National Institute of Mental Health 
 Bethesda, MD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 AFNI Program: SurfSmooth 
 2005b 
 National Institute of Mental Health 
 Bethesda, MD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 RC 
 
 
 Argall 
 B 
 
 
 Japee 
 S 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 SUMA: An interface for surface-based intra- and inter-subject analysis with AFNI 
 2004 
 1510 
 1513 
 2nd IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: Macro to Nano 
 Arlington, VA, United states 
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Retinotopy and attention in human occipital, temporal, parietal, and frontal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 2158 
 2168 
 18234687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schenkluhn 
 B 
 
 
 Ruff 
 CC 
 
 
 Heinen 
 K 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Parietal stimulation decouples spatial and feature-based attention 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 11106 
 11110 
 18971453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Spatially selective representations of voluntary and stimulus-driven attentional priority in human occipital, parietal, and frontal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 284 
 293 
 16514108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Schwarzbach 
 J 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Golay 
 X 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Control of object-based attention in human cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 1346 
 1357 
 15166105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Pitzalis 
 S 
 
 
 Martinez 
 A 
 
 
 Mapping of contralateral space in retinotopic coordinates by a parietal cortical area in humans 
 Science 
 2001 
 294 
 1350 
 1354 
 11701930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shomstein 
 S 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Control of attention shifts between vision and audition in human cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 2004 
 24 
 10702 
 10706 
 15564587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shomstein 
 S 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Parietal cortex mediates voluntary control of spatial and nonspatial auditory attention 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 435 
 439 
 16407540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 d’Avossa 
 G 
 
 
 Tansy 
 AP 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Two attentional processes in the parietal lobe 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2002 
 12 
 1124 
 1131 
 12379601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Franke 
 D 
 
 
 Pope 
 DL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and basal ganglia-cortical networks 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 4392 
 4407 
 19357267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silver 
 MA 
 
 
 Ress 
 D 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Topographic maps of visual spatial attention in human parietal cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2005 
 94 
 1358 
 1371 
 15817643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slagter 
 HA 
 
 
 Giesbrecht 
 B 
 
 
 Kok 
 A 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Kenemans 
 JL 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 fMRI evidence for both generalized and specialized components of attentional control 
 Brain Res 
 2007 
 1177 
 90 
 102 
 17916338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain, illustrated Edition 
 1988 
 George Thieme Verlag 
 Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Functional specificity of superior parietal mediation of spatial shifting 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 14 
 661 
 673 
 11506539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vapnik 
 VN 
 
 
 The nature of statistical learning theory 
 1995 
 Springer-Verlag 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Reading 
 S 
 
 
 Neuroimaging studies of shifting attention: a meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 1679 
 1693 
 15275924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Schwarzbach 
 J 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Carlson 
 RL 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 MA 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Transient neural activity in human parietal cortex during spatial attention shifts 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2002 
 5 
 995 
 1002 
 12219097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Static examples of moving displays. Each of the two apertures of dot fields measured 2.6 degrees in diameter and was centered 4.5 degrees to the left and right of fixation. In each aperture, one dot field color was moving in one of eight directions while the other was stationary. Once per second, the direction of the moving dots changed, or they became stationary (and the stationary dots began moving). During each run, subjects covertly attended to one location and one color (e.g., green dots on the left side) as they monitored for cues defined by the direction of motion of the currently attended dot field. Subjects responded by button press to three different types of cues:  shift color  cues directed subjects to shift attention from one color value to the other, on the currently-attended side of space;  shift location  cues directed subjects to shift attention from the currently-attended location to the same color dots on the other side of fixation; and  hold  cues directed subjects to continue attending to the currently-attended color and location. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Effects of attention in extrastriate visual cortex: group data. (a) Functional map showing mixed effects group analysis resulting from a contrast between epochs of attention to the left stimulus aperture vs. attention to the right aperture. (b-e) Event-related average timecourse plots of left (b-c) and right (d-e) extrastriate cortex. Timecourses locked to the onset of the shift/hold cue are the average percentage change (across trials) relative to mean BOLD signal in each run. In each plot, activation contralateral to hold cues is sustained at a high level and activation ipsilateral to hold cues is sustained at a low level. Activation contralateral to location shift cues begins high and ends low as the subject shifts attention from the contralateral, preferred visual field to the ipsilateral, non-preferred visual field, and vice versa for activity ipsilateral to location shift cues. Color shift cues evoked small transient increases (above sustained hold cue levels) both ipsilateral and contralateral to extrastriate cortex regions. Timecourses are generated from a non-independent analysis and are therefore merely illustrative. Shaded error regions represent ±1 SEM across subjects. IPS = Intraparietal Sulcus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Sources of attentional control in fronto-parietal cortex: group data. This functional map is the result of a conjunction of 4 specific contrasts (see text for full description) that depict common regions (colored yellow) activated by both color shifts and location shifts relative to hold cues. Regions specific to color shift activity are shown in green and regions specific to location shift activity are in red. MFG = Middle Frontal Gyrus; FEF = Frontal Eye Fields; mSPL = medial Superior Parietal Lobule. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Transient cue-evoked activity in attentional control regions. (a) Frontal and parietal regions selected from the conjunction maps in the individual subject leave-one-run-out GLM procedure (see text for details) were used to extract timecourses locked to the onset of the three cue types: Shift-Location, Shift-Color, & Hold. (b-f) Mean event-related averages of all trials across subjects. In each region that reached significance in the conjunction, the activation for both types of shift cues is significantly larger than that of Hold cues. The two types of shift cues evoked similar activation profiles throughout the frontoparietal attention network. Shaded error regions represent ±1 SEM across subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Pattern classification results from our group of subjects. A leave-one-run-out procedure (see text for details) was used to generate ROIs (independent of the extracted data) that were, in turn, used to define the features (surface nodes) that were submitted to the SVM classifier. (a-d) Event-related classification accuracy (time zero marks cue onset) for the group (thick black line) and each individual (thin colored lines). The linear classifier performed at chance levels (dotted line) on shift cue discrimination at all timepoints tested in frontal regions (a-b). However, the classifier reached accuracy levels significantly (p < 0.01) above chance for several timepoints (indicated by gray shading) in the parietal ROIs (c-d). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Mean accuracy of cue detection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shift Color Left 
 Shift Color Right 
 Shift Location Left 
 Shift Location Right 
 Hold 
 
 
 
 
 Mean % correct (SEM) 
 83.6 (5.6) 
 84.7 (6.2) 
 84.4 (5.8) 
 85.9 (5.2) 
 84.0 (6.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Centroid of brain regions active during sustained spatial attention. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Talairach coords of central node (mm) 
 Area (mm 2 ) 
 Number of surface nodes 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 L 
 −33 
 −74 
 9 
 1297 
 2975 
 
 
 
 R 
 26 
 −79 
 17 
 1263 
 2852 
 
 
 Lateral SPL/IPL 
 L 
 −27 
 −55 
 53 
 580 
 1285 
 
 
 
 R 
 24 
 −59 
 45 
 309 
 651 
 
 
 Lingual/Fusiform Gyri 
 L 
 −19 
 −69 
 −7 
 1202 
 2632 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Centroid of brain regions active during transient shifts of attention between colors and locations (conjunction). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Talairach coords of central node (mm) 
 Area (mm2) 
 Number of surface nodes 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus/mSPL 
 L 
 −19 
 −16 
 45 
 2843 
 6453 
 
 
 
 R 
 12 
 −60 
 51 
 2307 
 5086 
 
 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 L 
 −17 
 3 
 55 
 75 
 169 
 
 
 
 R 
 25 
 −8 
 52 
 640 
 1556 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 L 
 −39 
 22 
 31 
 817 
 1801 
 
 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 L 
 −33 
 −78 
 18 
 937 
 2153 
 
 
 
 
 
