
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 21146553 
 3034783 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.12.004 
 NIHMS258392 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The influence of sentence novelty and figurativeness on brain activity 
 
 
 
 
 Diaz 
 Michele T. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Barrett 
 Kyle M. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Hogstrom 
 Larson J. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Duke-UNC Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA
 
 
 Please address correspondence to:  Michele T. Diaz, Ph.D., Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, 2424 Erwin Rd, Suite 501, Durham, NC 27705,  mtd3@duke.edu , Phone: 1 (919) 681-9528, Fax: 1 (919) 681-7033 
 
 
 14 
 12 
 2010 
 
 
 10 
 12 
 2010 
 
 
 2 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2012 
 
 49 
 3 
 320 
 330 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The predominance of the left hemisphere in language comprehension and production is well established. More recently, the right hemisphere’s contribution to language has been examined. Clinical, behavioral, and neuroimaging research support the right hemisphere’s involvement in metaphor processing. But, there is disagreement about whether metaphors, in and of themselves, engage the right hemisphere or if other factors that vary between metaphors and literal language elicit right hemisphere engagement. It is important to disambiguate these issues to improve our basic knowledge of figurative language processing, to more precisely define how the right hemisphere supports language, and to facilitate our ability to understand and treat language impairments. Here we investigated the role of the right hemisphere in language comprehension with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) by manipulating familiarity in both literal and metaphoric sentences. In an event-related design, participants viewed English sentences that appeared every 4.5 to 9 seconds, and to which they made a pleasantness judgment. All sentences elicited activation in traditional language brain regions including left inferior frontal gyrus, left anterior inferior temporal and left posterior middle temporal gyri. Overall, metaphors and novel stimuli elicited activation in bilateral inferior frontal gyri and left temporal regions. Additionally, metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in right temporal pole. Although our results are partially consistent with the graded salience hypothesis and the coarse coding hypothesis, the right hemisphere’s sensitivity to familiar metaphors suggests that right hemisphere recruitment is most influenced by semantic integration demands. 
 
 
 metaphor 
 novelty 
 language 
 semantics 
 laterality 
 hemispheric contribution 
 
 
 
 
 1. INTRODUCTION 
 Metaphors and other literary devices occur frequently, and contribute to the richness of language. They can provide a succinct, effective, and vivid description of an object, person, or event (e.g., “You are a window the sun shines through.”). Metaphors differ from literal language in that they have both literal and figurative meanings. In addition to their dual meanings, metaphors may differ from literal text along other factors, such as novelty, ease of integration, and valence. Researchers have questioned whether the differences in processing metaphors are due to metaphors  per se  or to these other factors. Additionally, these same factors can vary within metaphors themselves. Conventional metaphors (e.g., ‘sweet dreams’), also known as frozen, familiar, or dead metaphors, may become instantiated in semantic memory much like the definition of a word because of their frequency of use. If this is the case, accessing and understanding such phrases may be similar to processing literal language. In contrast, processing novel metaphors requires integrating multiple disparate concepts dynamically. For example, in the metaphor “During the tedious meeting, her thoughts were a cool breeze.” the idea of refreshment and invigoration from ‘cool breeze’ must be integrated with the concept ‘her thoughts’. These two concepts may never have been associated prior to encountering that sentence. Thus, conventional and novel metaphors may engage different cognitive processes and may require different neural resources. However, differences in novelty are not restricted to figurative sentences alone. Literal sentences may also vary along this dimension. A remaining question for the field is how manipulations of novelty influence hemispheric recruitment when processing both figurative and literal sentences. 
 
 1.1 Hemispheric Differences in Language Processing 
 The importance of the left hemisphere in language processes has been thoroughly established through experimental manipulations (For a review see ( Bookheimer, 2002 )) and neurological observations ( Bookheimer, 2002 ;  Broca, 1861 ;  Davis & Wada, 1978 ;  Dejerine, 1891 ). More recently, there has been a growing appreciation for the role of the right hemisphere in language. One hypothesis that has been proposed regarding hemispheric differences in language processing is the Gradient Salience Hypothesis (GSH) ( R. Giora, 1997 ,  1999 ,  2003 ). The GSH postulates that hemispheric recruitment is influenced by salience rather than by whether an item is literal or figurative. According to the GSH, several factors influence the degree of salience including frequency, familiarity, and the amount of context that is provided. For example, the dimension of frequency can be examined using polysemous words such as bark (canine sound or tree covering), in which the dominant, more frequently used, sense (canine sound) is proposed to be more salient than the subordinate, less frequently used, sense (tree covering). According to the GSH, highly salient words and phrases are easier to process, are activated before alternative, less salient interpretations, and primarily engage the left hemisphere. In contrast, less salient words and phrases require additional cognitive resources, are activated after more salient interpretations, and recruit additional neural resources from the right hemisphere. 
 While the GSH provides a rich psycholinguistic framework for understanding figurative language, it does not propose any specific neural mechanism. The Coarse Coding Hypothesis (CCH) ( Beeman & Chiarello, 1998 ;  Beeman et al., 1994 ;  Chiarello, 1988 ;  Jung-Beeman, 2005 ) provides additional mechanistic detail regarding the roles of the two hemispheres in understanding language. It proposes that both the right and left hemisphere are engaged in semantic activation, integration, and selection. The right hemisphere is involved in non-selective, widespread, semantic activation (i.e., coarse coding), while the left hemisphere supports more focused, context-relevant, semantic activation (i.e., fine coding). For example, returning to the previous example of the word ‘bark’, the CCH suggests that the right hemisphere would keep both senses of bark (canine sound and tree covering) active, while the left hemisphere would activate only the sense that was contextually congruent. This has relevance to literal and figurative language processing in that literal language, in particular when it contains familiar semantic relationships, should benefit from focal, context-relevant analyses (i.e., left hemisphere), while figurative language, especially novel metaphoric language, benefits from the activation of many, loosely related concepts (i.e., right hemisphere). 
 Much of the evidence in support of the Coarse Coding Hypothesis has been derived from behavioral visual half field studies. However, electrophysiological evidence has provided evidence in support of another neural hypothesis regarding how the right and left hemisphere support language. Work by Federmeier and colleagues has suggested that the left hemisphere adopts a top-down, predictive approach in processing language, while the right hemisphere incorporates a bottom-up, integrative approach ( Federmeier, 2007 ). Federmeier and colleagues conducted a series of studies in which participants read sentences that ended with either the most expected item, an unexpected word that came from the same category as the most expected word, or an equally unexpected word from a different semantic category (e.g., They wanted to make the hotel look more like a tropical resort. So, along the driveway, they planted rows of palms/pines/tulips.) ( Federmeier & Kutas, 1999a ,  1999b ,  2002 ;  Federmeier, McLennan, De Ochoa, & Kutas, 2002 ). In their visual half-field study they found an N400 reduction to words that were from the same semantic category as the expected sentence final word, but only in the left hemisphere ( Federmeier & Kutas, 1999a ). They hypothesized that this facilitation to an essentially implausible word was mediated by pre-activation of semantic features of the expected word. In the right hemisphere, the N400 responses to both violations were equivalent. This pattern of response suggests that unlike the left hemisphere, the right hemisphere does not have a predictive role, but rather integrates stimuli as they appear ( Federmeier, 2007 ). Although these theoretical frameworks postulate different roles for the right hemisphere in language processing (salience, coarse coding, integration), each theory highlights the importance of the right hemisphere when processing unique or unexpected semantic relationships. 
 Hemispheric function has also been examined experimentally by observing patients with brain damage. Individuals with brain damage to the right hemisphere often have difficulty understanding non-literal language, such as metaphors ( Winner & Gardner, 1977 ) and jokes ( Bihrle, Brownell, Powelson, & Gardner, 1986 ), and show deficits in understanding prosody ( Tucker, Watson, & Heilman, 1977 ). In a seminal study, patients with damage to the right or left hemisphere were asked to select pictures that corresponded to verbal metaphors ( Winner & Gardner, 1977 ). Patients with right hemisphere damage (RHD), but not left hemisphere damage (LHD), had difficulty matching pictures to metaphors. This result was replicated using a similar picture-matching task ( Bryan, 1988 ) and extended with a verbal-matching task ( Rinaldi, Marangolo, & Baldassarri, 2004 ). Several other clinical studies have demonstrated that patients with RHD have difficulty understanding metaphors ( Brownell, Simpson, Bihrle, Potter, & Gardner, 1990 ) and interpreting metaphors ( McIntyre, Pritchard, & Lombroso, 1976 ). In addition, a double dissociation between injured hemisphere and type of language has been reported. Patients with RHD had more difficulty processing idioms, while patients with LHD had more difficulty processing literal sentences ( Kempler, Van Lancker, Marchman, & Bates, 1999 ;  Van Lancker & Kempler, 1987 ). Giora and colleagues found that LHD patients had more difficulty explaining conventional metaphors (high salience) than RHD patients, while RHD patients were impaired in comprehending sarcasm (low salience) compared to LHD patients ( Rachel Giora, Zaidel, Soroker, Batori, & Kasher, 2000 ). However, other studies have found that patients with either LHD or RHD were equally impaired in processing metaphors ( Gagnon, Goulet, Giroux, & Joanette, 2003 ;  Tompkins, 1990 ) and these deficits may be particularly apparent when controlled or strategic processes were involved. Specifically, unlike controls, LHD and RHD participants failed to adopt strategies during an auditory lexical decision task when the ISI between prime and target words was long ( Tompkins, 1990 ). Patient research has also indicated right hemisphere involvement in making remote semantic associations ( Joanette, Goulet, & Le dorze, 1988 ), processing subordinate meanings of words ( Burgess & Cushman, 1990 ), and suppressing contextually-inappropriate meanings of ambiguous words ( Tompkins, Baumgaertner, Lehman, & Fossett, 1997 ). 
 fMRI studies have also supported the role of the right hemisphere in conceptual integration. St. George and colleagues examined discourse comprehension by presenting titled and untitled paragraphs ( St George, Kutas, Martinez, & Sereno, 1999 ). The paragraphs were identical and were written such that the untitled condition involved activating and integrating multiple concepts in the absence of an overall framework. Greater activation in right middle temporal sulcus was found when participants read untitled paragraphs compared to titled paragraphs. Others have found right hemisphere involvement in processing unusual semantic relationships ( Seger, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 2000 ) and in drawing inferences ( Mason & Just, 2004 ). In summary, behavioral, patient, and functional imaging research strongly support the right hemisphere’s involvement in processing semantic information that requires accessing and integrating loosely related concepts. 
 
 
 1.2 The Functional Imaging of Metaphor Comprehension 
 Several studies have used imaging techniques to examine the neural substrates of metaphor processing in healthy young adults. In one of the earliest experiments, Bottini and colleagues examined brain activation during a metaphor comprehension task, a literal sentence comprehension task, and a lexical decision task ( Bottini et al., 1994 ). In addition to traditional left hemisphere language regions, they found that metaphors recruited several additional regions in the right hemisphere including the prefrontal cortex, the middle temporal gyrus, the precuneus, and the posterior cingulate. 
 Other studies examining sentential metaphors have also found right hemisphere recruitment during metaphor processing ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ). Comparing metaphors and literal sentences, several studies have found that metaphors elicit greater activation than literal sentences in right middle temporal gyrus ( Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ), right inferior temporal gyrus ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ), right inferior frontal gyrus ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ), and right insula ( Schmidt & Seger, In Press ). For example, in an experiment examining brain activation while participants read brief stories that ended with a metaphoric, ironic, or literal sentence ( Eviatar & Just, 2006 ), metaphors elicited greater activation in left inferior frontal gyrus and bilateral inferior temporal gyri compared to literal and ironic sentences. A comparison of literal sentences, conventional metaphors, and anomalous metaphors in Mandarin Chinese revealed that both anomalous and conventional metaphors elicited greater activation in right inferior temporal gyrus compared to literal sentences ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ). In addition, anomalous metaphors elicited greater activation compared to literal sentences in bilateral superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri, and bilateral superior and middle temporal gyri. Source localization techniques, used in combination with electrophysiological data, found that differences between related and unrelated metaphoric sentences localized to the right middle and superior temporal gyri ( Sotillo et al., 2005 ). However, others have failed to find electrophysiological differences between the hemispheres in processing low cloze literal and low cloze metaphoric sentence endings, suggesting that the two hemispheres processed metaphors similarly ( Coulson & Van Petten, 2007 ). 
 Several investigations with sentences have also explored other factors that may influence hemispheric recruitment in metaphor processing. Schmidt and colleagues examined familiarity and difficulty by comparing literal sentences, familiar metaphors that were easy to understand, unfamiliar metaphors that were easy to understand, and unfamiliar metaphors that were difficult to understand ( Schmidt & Seger, In Press ). Overall, metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in right insula, right inferior frontal gyrus, and left temporal pole. In addition they found a general effect of difficulty in left inferior frontal gyrus in which difficult metaphors elicited greater activation than easy metaphors. Familiarity influenced activity in right inferior and middle frontal gyri. However, it was easy familiar metaphors that elicited greater activation than easy unfamiliar metaphors. Unfamiliar metaphors elicited greater activation than familiar metaphors, but not in regions primarily involved in language (e.g., left cingulate, left hippocampus). Yang and colleagues also compared novel and conventional metaphors in a valence and an imagery task ( Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ). When participants were asked to judge the valence of the sentence, novel metaphors elicited greater activation in right inferior frontal gyrus than both literal sentences and conventional metaphors. When participants were asked to create a mental image of each sentence, novel metaphors elicited greater activation in right inferior frontal gyrus and right inferior temporal gyrus when compared to literal sentences. 
 Several other investigators have also examined novelty in metaphors using word pairs. An investigation of metaphor processing comparing literal word pairs, conventional metaphors (e.g., sweet dreams), novel metaphors (e.g., wisdom dust), and unrelated words found that novel metaphoric word pairs elicited greater activation than conventional metaphoric word pairs in right superior temporal sulcus, and right middle and inferior frontal gyri ( Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ). A principal components analysis of the same data set found a right hemisphere homologue of Wernicke’s area that was involved during the processing of novel, but not conventional metaphors ( Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ). A transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) investigation of word pairs found that TMS over right posterior superior temporal sulcus disrupted the processing of novel metaphors but not conventional metaphors or literal word pairs. TMS over left inferior frontal gyrus impaired literal and conventional metaphors but not novel metaphors ( Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ). Taken together these findings support a role for right prefrontal and temporal gyri in novel metaphor comprehension. 
 However, not everyone has found preferential right hemisphere recruitment for metaphors. In an event-related fMRI study comparing literal and metaphoric sentences in German ( Rapp, Leube, Erb, Grodd, & Kircher, 2004 ,  2007 ), metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in left inferior frontal, left inferior temporal, and left middle temporal gyri. However, they failed to find differences in laterality or a right hemisphere preference for metaphors. In another study examining metaphoric and literal Hebrew sentences, Mashal and colleagues found only left hemisphere activation for novel metaphoric sentences and literal sentences ( Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2009 ). However, a post-scan assessment suggested that participants may not have been aware of the metaphoric nature of some of the sentences. Likewise,  Lee and Dapretto (2006)  failed to find right hemisphere activity for metaphoric word triplets. Instead they reported differences between metaphors and literal stimuli in left inferior frontal gyrus, left middle temporal gyrus, and left inferior parietal gyrus ( Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ). Stringaris and colleagues used event-related fMRI to compare brain activation elicited by metaphoric sentences, literal sentences, and anomalous sentences during which they found that the left inferior frontal gyrus and left thalamus were more active to metaphors and anomalous sentences than literal sentences ( Stringaris, Medford, Giampietro, Brammer, & David, 2007 ). Although metaphors elicited activation in right temporal regions (BA 39), literal sentences and nonsense sentences also elicited activation in neighboring right temporal regions (BA 37). 
 It is possible that these discrepancies in results may be due to differences in characteristics of the stimuli. Familiarity is a dimension that should affect processing according to several theoretical frameworks ( Federmeier, 2007 ;  R. Giora, 1997 ;  Jung-Beeman, 2005 ). Familiar metaphors are likely to be encoded in the lexicon (i.e., salient), and have close semantic relationships that would not require or benefit from weak activation of loosely related semantic concepts (e.g., coarse coding or post-lexical integration of the right hemisphere). Likewise unfamiliar word pairs and sentences are likely to have different integration demands compared to familiar items. Some of the studies that did not find differential right hemisphere activation used metaphors that could have been familiar to participants (e.g., surgeons as butchers) ( Stringaris, Medford, Giampietro, Brammer, & David, 2007 ) or were not rated for novelty ( Rapp, Leube, Erb, Grodd, & Kircher, 2004 ,  2007 ). Additionally, several studies that failed to find differences between figurative and literal stimuli repeated sentence or word contexts across conditions (e.g., The lover’s words are harp sounds/lies,  Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ,  2007 ;  Stringaris et al., 2007 ). 
 An additional factor that may influence right hemisphere engagement is the context in which a word is presented. Some research has suggested that the two cerebral hemispheres may differ in their processing abilities, whereby the right hemisphere is primarily sensitive to word-level or lexical associations and less sensitive to context and message level information than the left hemisphere ( Faust, Babkoff, & Kravetz, 1995 ;  Faust, Bar-lev, & Chiarell, 2003 ;  Faust, Kravetz, & Babkoff, 1993 ). For example, behavioral studies using the visual half field (VHF) paradigm have found a larger magnitude of priming in the right visual half field/ left hemisphere (RVF/LH) compared to the left visual field/ right hemisphere (LVF/RH) when words were preceded by a syntactically and semantically valid sentence ( Faust, Babkoff, & Kravetz, 1995 ;  Faust, Bar-lev, & Chiarell, 2003 ). Additionally, associatively primed words embedded in meaningless sentences yielded priming in the LVF/RH but not the RVF/LH ( Faust, Barlev, & Chiarell, 2003 ). These findings suggest that the left hemisphere is more sensitive to sentential context than the right hemisphere, and that the right hemisphere may be more sensitive to word level processes than the left hemisphere. However, electrophysiological investigations using the VHF paradigm have suggested that both hemispheres are sensitive to message level information ( Coulson & Van Petten, 2007 ;  Federmeier, 2007 ;  Federmeier & Kutas, 1999a ). 
 If the right hemisphere is biased toward lexically-mediated processes, then metaphoric word pairs may elicit more right hemisphere activation than sentential metaphors. Of four data sets that did not find right hemisphere or differential right hemisphere activation to metaphors, three involved sentential metaphors ( Mashal et al., 2009 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ,  2007 ;  Stringaris et al., 2007 ) and one incorporated word triplets ( Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ). So although context may influence metaphor processing, presenting metaphoric ideas in a sentence context does not seem to prevent right hemisphere recruitment ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Sotillo et al., 2005 ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ). 
 In the present experiment we used fMRI to examine the relationship between novelty and figurativeness and how these factors influence hemispheric recruitment. Previous research investigating metaphors suggests that the right hemisphere may be important for figurative language processing. However, it is unclear whether figurative language in and of itself underlies right hemisphere involvement, or if other factors, such as stimulus novelty may contribute to these findings. While some previous research has manipulated novelty within metaphors ( Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ,  2009 ;  Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ), prior work has failed to examine whether the right hemisphere is sensitive to manipulations of novelty in literal text. This comparison is critical to understanding how the right hemisphere supports figurativeness, novelty, or a combination of both factors in language. 
 
 
 
 2. METHODS 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Sixteen right-handed, native English speaking, healthy young adults (mean age 23.8; age range 18-30; 8 male) participated in this study. All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision, and none had a history of neurological or psychological disorders. Each participant provided informed consent and was paid for his or her participation. All experimental procedures were approved by the Duke University Medical Center Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
 2.2 Stimuli 
 Stimuli consisted of literal and metaphoric grammatical English sentences that varied in their novelty. This yielded four conditions of valid English sentences: familiar literal sentences, novel literal sentences, familiar metaphors, and novel metaphors. A fifth condition of nonword sentences was also included to control for brain activation to basic visual characteristics of the stimuli, letter level processing, and motor responses. Each of the five conditions contained 40 sentences (3 - 9 words in length, average length = 5.97). A behavioral pilot study was conducted with a separate group of participants (N=15) to select the stimuli for the fMRI study. Familiar and novel metaphors were collected from published sources ( Katz, Paivio, & Marschark, 1985 ;  Katz, Paivio, Marschark, & Clark, 1988 ), and the initial set was created using published ratings. Novelty was manipulated in literal sentences by using semantic feature and prototypicality ratings ( McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan, 2005 ;  McRae, Cree, Westmacott, & De Sa, 1999 ). From these ratings we selected the most and least prototypical exemplars from a category, and created an initial set of sentences. For example, a robin is a prototypical bird while an emu is less prototypical. A car is an example of a more prototypical vehicle, while an ambulance is an example of a less prototypical vehicle. Only one item from each category (e.g., bird or vehicle) was included in the final stimulus set. To control for syntactic complexity, all stimuli followed a noun-verb-noun sentence format. These initial set of stimuli were then rated by a separate group of individuals for familiarity, ease of comprehension, and positivity on 7 point Likert scales. There was a significant effect of Novelty (t=11.01, df=158, p<.001) when comparing novel and familiar stimuli. There was also a significant main effect of comprehension between metaphors and literal sentences (t=11.01, df=158, p<.001) and between novel and familiar sentences (t=7.15, df=158, p<.001). Metaphors were slightly more difficult to comprehend compared to literal sentences (average comprehension rating metaphors = 5.1, literal = 6.2 out of 7.0) and novel sentences were slightly more difficult to comprehend compared to familiar sentences (average comprehension rating novel = 5.2, familiar = 6.0 out of 7.0). Higher values on the Likert scale indicated greater comprehension. Although these significant differences were present in the materials, the overall comprehension ratings for all sentences were well above the midpoint of the measure, indicating that all sentences were understandable. Across sentence categories, sentences did not differ in their positivity ratings. These initial behavioral measures were also used to confirm that adequate reading time was allocated in the scanner. 
 Across all conditions, sentences were matched for length. Nouns within the four English sentence conditions were matched for frequency ( Coltheart, 1981 ;  Kucera & Francis, 1967 ;  Wilson, 1988 ), and concreteness ( Coltheart, 1981 ;  Wilson, 1988 ). Ratings of frequency and concreteness were obtained from the MRC psycholinguistic database ( Coltheart, 1981 ). Nonword letter strings were created using a random letter generator that randomly selected letters of the alphabet. No valid English words were embedded in any portion of the nonwords, and nonwords were not constrained to follow English phonology. 
 
 
 2.3 Experimental Task 
 Each run began and ended with the presentation of a fixation cross. To ensure that participants were attentive to the stimuli during the fMRI session, participants were asked to read each sentence and rate the valence of each sentence as positive, neutral, or negative. Participants were instructed to make their best assessment about the emotional connotation of each sentence. For example, the sentence ‘ The rumor was a disease.’  has a negative connotation whereas the sentence ‘ That bird is a robin.’  might be considered neutral. Each trial consisted of a single sentence drawn randomly from one of the five conditions: familiar literal sentences, novel literal sentences, familiar metaphors, novel metaphors, or nonword sentences. Each sentence was presented for 6 seconds and a fixation cross was presented between each sentence for a variable interval, 4.5 to 9 seconds in length. Randomized order of presentation and a variable inter-stimulus-interval were incorporated to minimize participant preparation and anticipation of subsequent stimuli. Trials were presented in ten, 4.5 minute runs. All stimuli were presented via LCD goggles (MRI Resonance Technologies, Los Angeles, CA, USA) using the CIGAL experimental control program ( Voyvodic, 1999 ). Responses were recorded with a hand-held fiber optic response box (Current Designs, Philadelphia, PA, USA). An overview of the task is provided in  Figure 1 . 
 
 
 2.4 Acquisition of MRI Data 
 MRI scanning was completed on a 3.0 Tesla GE EXCITE HD whole-body 60 cm bore human scanner equipped with 40 mT/m gradients and a 150 T/m/s slew rate. An eight-channel head coil was used for Radio Frequency reception (General Electric, Milwaukee Wisconsin, USA). Sagittal T-1 weighted localizer images were acquired and used to define a volume for high order shimming. The anterior and posterior commisures were identified for slice selection and shimming. A semi-automated high-order shimming program was used to ensure global field homogeneity. High-resolution structural images were acquired using a 3D fast SPGR pulse sequence (TR=7.456ms; TE=3.016 ms; FOV=25.6 cm 2 ; flip angle=12°; voxel size= 1 × 1 × 2mm; 60 contiguous slices). Functional images sensitive to blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) contrast were acquired using an inverse spiral pulse sequence (TR=1.5s; TE=30ms; FOV=25.6m 2 ; flip angle=60°; voxel size=4 × 4 × 4mm; 30 contiguous axial slices). Each of 10 runs consisted of the acquisition of a time series of 182 brain volumes. Four initial RF excitations were performed to achieve steady state equilibrium, and were subsequently discarded. 
 
 
 2.5 Data Analysis 
 FSL was used to assess functional activations to each sentence condition. Preprocessing and first level analysis of each individual run for each participant were performed using FSL version 4.1.4 [Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB), Oxford University, U.K.] ( Smith et al., 2004 ;  Woolrich et al., 2009 ). Functional image data were motion-corrected, high-pass filtered, and spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel (FWHM= 8 mm) ( Jenkinson, Bannister, Brady, & Smith, 2002 ;  Jenkinson & Smith, 2001 ). No participant had a greater than 4mm movement in the X, Y, or Z dimension, and motion parameters were included in the overall FSL model. Pre-whitening or voxel-wise temporal autocorrelation was estimated and corrected using FMRIB’s Improved Linear Model (FILM) ( Woolrich, Ripley, Brady, & Smith, 2001 ). The skull and other coverings were stripped from the structural brain images using the FSL brain extraction tool ( Smith, 2002 ). Functional images of each participant were co-registered to structural images in native space, and structural images were normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard brain. The same transformation matrices used for structural-to-standard transformations were then used for functional-to-standard space transformations of co-registered functional images. A double γ function was used to model the hemodynamic response for each trial in each run. 
 The first level analyses from the experimental runs of each participant were combined and a second level analysis was performed for each participant. These second level analyses were then combined across participants into a group level analysis using the FMRIB Local Analysis of Mixed Effects (FLAME 1 & 2) to identify voxels that were activated by each trial type (p<.01) ( Beckman, Jenkinson, & Smith, 2003 ;  Woolrich, Behrens, Beckman, Jenkinson, & Smith, 2004 ). The results from higher level comparisons were masked by results from lower level analyses. Activations were masked to exclude clusters smaller than 7 voxels in extent. 
 In addition to the analyses described above, the single trial peri-event averages for each trial and segment were measured at each voxel ( Gadde & McCarthy, 2009 ). Percent signal change was determined by averaging the hemodynamic response elicited by each condition and segment and calculating the difference between baseline and peak points for each condition. These t-statistic peri-event waveforms were combined across participants using a random effects analysis, and the results were masked by brain regions which were significant in the main FSL analyses. Coordinates of the centroids of activation and their corresponding anatomical gyri were determined through the use of anatomical atlases ( Lancaster et al., 2000 ;  Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ). All reported coordinates are in MNI space. Results are displayed overlaid on an individual participant’s brain normalized to MNI space. 
 
 
 
 3. RESULTS 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Results 
 Participants’ average accuracy for the pleasantness rating task was 93.5% (SD=7.9%); accuracies across conditions were as follows: familiar literal sentences 94.1% (SD=7.1%), novel literal sentences 93.7% (SD=7.8%), familiar metaphors 95.0% (SD=7.9%), novel metaphors 92.1% (SD=8.4%), and nonword sentences 92.9% (SD=10.5%). Across all 5 conditions, there were no significant differences in accuracy. Trials with no response and trials with response times less than 250 ms or greater than 3 standard deviations from the mean were treated as errors and removed from further analyses. This eliminated 2.1% of the data. Behavioral data from three participants was lost due to computer error. 
 The average response time (RT) for the pleasantness rating task was 2572 ms (SD=847 ms); response times across conditions were as follows: familiar literal sentences 2548 ms (SD=680 ms), novel literal sentences 2932 ms (SD=763 ms), familiar metaphors 2730 ms (SD=710 ms), novel metaphors 2973 ms (SD=793 ms), and nonword sentences 1678 ms (SD=502 ms). Nonword sentences were responded to significantly faster than the other conditions F(4,79) = 8.61, p<.01. However, across valid English sentence categories, the conditions of greatest interest, there were no significant differences in response times F(3,63) = 1.13, p=0.34. The accuracy and response time data indicated that the participants were able to perform the task successfully. Moreover, the lack of differences in accuracy and response times across the English sentence conditions suggests that there were no differences in task difficulty across conditions. 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI Activation 
 We first report the results of the individual conditions (familiar literal sentences, novel literal sentences, familiar metaphors, and novel metaphors) compared to the nonword baseline condition. Collapsing across all sentence conditions revealed activation in classic left hemisphere language regions including: left inferior frontal gyrus, left anterior middle temporal gyrus, and left posterior middle temporal gyrus. We also observed subcortical activation (thalamus, bilateral caudate and midbrain) in the comparison between all sentences and nonword sentences. Novel and familiar metaphors both elicited activation in bilateral inferior frontal gyri, left parahippocampal/ medial inferior temporal gyrus, left posterior middle temporal gyrus, and subcortical regions. The large cluster of activation located in left inferior frontal gyrus extended into the superior portion of the left temporal lobe for both novel and familiar metaphors. Additionally, novel metaphors elicited activation in right middle temporal gyrus and right temporal pole. Novel literal sentences elicited activation in left inferior frontal gyrus, right superior frontal gyrus, left parahippocampal/ medial inferior temporal gyrus, left posterior middle temporal gyrus, and subcortical regions. Familiar literal sentences elicited activation in left inferior frontal gyrus, left posterior middle temporal gyrus, and subcortical regions. A summary of the activations to individual conditions that were found in traditional language regions is presented in  Table 2 . 
 Of greatest interest were comparisons between metaphors and literal sentences, and between novel and familiar sentences (Figures  3  &  4 ). These comparisons showed that metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in bilateral inferior frontal gyri, left medial superior frontal gyrus, left anterior inferior temporal gyrus, left anterior middle temporal gyrus, left posterior middle temporal gyrus, and right temporal pole. Literal stimuli elicited greater activation than metaphoric stimuli in right superior, medial frontal gyri. As noted above, there was a significant effect of figurativeness in right inferior frontal gyrus and right temporal pole. To examine these effects further, we conducted pair-wise comparisons of novel metaphors with novel literal sentences and familiar metaphors with familiar literal sentences. There were no significant differences between novel metaphors and novel literal sentences. However, familiar metaphors elicited significantly greater activation than familiar literal sentences in left inferior frontal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −56, 28, 2; max z=4.31; 1966 voxels), left inferior temporal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −62, −8, −18; max z=3.33; 142 voxels), and left middle temporal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −44, 2, −32; max z=3.80; 544 voxels). 
 Novel stimuli elicited greater activation than familiar stimuli in bilateral inferior frontal gyri, right middle frontal gyrus, left medial frontal gyrus, left parahippocampal gyrus/ medial inferior temporal gyrus, left posterior middle temporal gyrus, bilateral occipital gyri, and subcortical regions. There were no regions in which familiar stimuli elicited significantly greater activation than novel stimuli. As noted above, there was a significant effect of novelty in right inferior frontal gyrus. To examine these effects further, we conducted pair-wise comparisons between novel and familiar metaphors and novel and familiar literal sentences. There were no significant differences between novel and familiar metaphors, however novel literal sentences elicited greater activation than familiar literal sentences in left inferior frontal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −40, 18, −10; max z=3.93; 2235 voxels), left inferior temporal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −48, −4, −32; max z=2.9; 11 voxels), and left middle temporal gyrus (X, Y, Z: −58, −64, 4; max z=3.36; 326 voxels). A summary of the activations to metaphors and literal stimuli, and to novel and familiar stimuli that were found in traditional language regions is presented in  Table 3 . 
 
 
 
 4. DISCUSSION 
 The role of the right hemisphere in figurative language processing has been a recent topic of investigation. Metaphors, in particular novel metaphors, are hypothesized to require additional processing resources as comprehension requires integrating the commonalities of two semantically distinct concepts (e.g., tree trunks as straws). Several studies have suggested that the right hemisphere is involved in processing metaphors ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ;  Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Sotillo et al., 2005 ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ). However, other studies have yielded discrepant results ( Lee & Dapretto, 2006 ;  Mashal et al., 2009 ;  Rapp et al., 2004 ,  2007 ;  Stringaris et al., 2007 ). An unanswered question is how does sentence novelty influence right hemisphere recruitment in processing both figurative and literal language. Here we used functional MRI to examine the role of sentence figurativeness and novelty on patterns of brain activation. 
 
 4.1 Activation in Inferior Frontal Regions 
 In inferior frontal regions, the patterns of activation for metaphors and novel stimuli were similar. There was a main effect of figurativeness in which metaphors elicited more activation than literal sentences in bilateral inferior frontal gyri (IFG). Examination of the individual conditions against the nonword baseline indicated that both metaphoric conditions elicited bilateral activation in IFG, while both literal conditions elicited activation in left, but not right IFG. Although all four sentence conditions elicited significant activation in left IFG, pair-wise comparisons suggested both novelty and figurativeness modulated activity within this region. Novelty modulated the response of this region among literal sentences where novel literal sentences elicited greater activation than familiar literal sentences in left IFG. Similarly, sentence figurativeness modulated activation within familiar sentences where familiar metaphors elicited greater activation than familiar literal sentences in left IFG. These patterns of activation suggest that while all sentences engaged this region, both stimulus novelty and figurativeness further influenced activation in left prefrontal regions. 
 In right prefrontal regions, there were significant main effects of figurativeness and novelty: figurative sentences elicited more activation than literal sentences and novel sentences elicited greater activation than familiar sentences. Analyses of individual conditions against a nonword baseline showed that both novel and familiar metaphors elicited activation in right prefrontal regions, while both literal conditions did not. Moreover, pair-wise comparisons indicated no statistically significant differences between metaphoric conditions. These results suggest that all metaphors, even familiar ones, require additional processing resources that include right inferior frontal regions. 
 Although the results from the individual comparisons suggests that novel metaphors may underlie the main effect of novelty that was observed within right IFG, a pair-wise comparison showed no statistically significant differences between novel metaphors and novel literal sentences in right IFG. That is, within the right IFG novel sentences were processed to a similar extent regardless of the metaphoric or literal nature of the stimulus. These patterns of activation suggest that processing both figurative language and novel semantic relationships require additional resources, including right prefrontal regions. 
 Our results in inferior frontal regions are generally consistent with previous research on metaphor processing. Several studies have reported bilateral inferior frontal activation for metaphors ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal et al., 2007 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ). Several studies have also found that novelty increased activation in right prefrontal regions among familiar and novel metaphoric word pairs ( Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal et al., 2007 ) and between novel and familiar metaphoric sentences ( Schmidt & Seger, In Press ). Finally, a study using transcranial magnetic stimulation reported that stimulation of left IFG impaired literal stimuli and conventional metaphors but not novel metaphors suggesting that processing novel metaphors requires neural resources beyond left IFG, which may include right inferior frontal gyrus ( Pobric et al., 2008 ). 
 In our study, both novel and familiar metaphors engaged right prefrontal regions, and among metaphors novelty did not modulate activation within right IFG. It is possible that all metaphors engaged participants in additional cognitive processes that included right prefrontal regions. Electrophysiological evidence has indicated that metaphoric stimuli may require additional integration even when other factors, such as cloze probability remain constant ( Coulson & Van Petten, 2002 ;  Coulson & Van Petten, 2007 ). Although Coulson and Van Petten did not find differences in how the hemispheres processed metaphors, they do report consistently larger N400 responses to metaphors. These results suggest that even when metaphors are as plausible as literal stimuli, they require additional cognitive resources. Our results also indicated that overall novelty increased activation in bilateral prefrontal regions compared to familiar stimuli and that among literal stimuli, novelty increased activation in left inferior frontal gyrus. These results indicate that novelty is an important semantic characteristic that can increase processing demands. 
 
 
 4.2 Activation in Temporal Regions 
 In addition to activation within prefrontal regions, we also observed effects of figurativeness and novelty in several temporal regions. Metaphors elicited greater activation than literal stimuli in left posterior and anterior middle temporal gyri (MTG) and right temporal pole. Moreover, in left MTG, familiar metaphors elicited greater activation than familiar literal sentences. Although significant differences between conditions were observed in left posterior MTG, each of the sentential conditions also elicited significant activation within this region. This suggests that this region is responding to general activation of semantic characteristics of the stimuli, and that this general response may also be sensitive to other factors such as novelty and figurativeness. Unlike activation in posterior regions, activation in left anterior MTG and right temporal pole was restricted to our comparison between metaphors and literal stimuli. We did not observe a significant main effect of novelty in anterior MTG or right temporal pole. 
 Although novel sentences did not elicit greater activation than literal sentences in right temporal regions, they did elicit activation in left posterior middle temporal gyrus and left parahippocampal/ inferior temporal gyrus. In left parahippocampal gyrus and left inferior temporal gyrus novel stimuli elicited greater activation than familiar stimuli. In addition, comparisons with the nonword condition indicated that all metaphors and novel literal sentences engaged left inferior temporal gyrus ( Figure 2 ). Pair-wise comparisons indicated that novel literal sentences and familiar metaphors elicited greater activation in this region compared to familiar literal sentences. This pattern of activation in inferior and medial temporal regions suggests that this area was sensitive to both novelty and figurativeness. This region in particular, has been found to be sensitive to both conceptual and perceptual stimulus novelty [e.g., ( Knight, 1996 ;  O’Kane, Insler, & Wagner, 2005 ;  Tulving, Markowitsch, Craik, Habib, & Houle, 1996 )]. It is possible that activation in this region reflects the conceptual novelty of the sentences. Although we used relatively more and less familiar metaphors, we did not include many frozen or highly familiar metaphors. Post-hoc comparisons indicated that familiar metaphors were significantly more novel than familiar literal sentences (Tukey HSD, p<.01), although they were still less novel than novel literal sentences. 
 In general our results are consistent with several previous studies that suggest metaphors elicit greater activation in right temporal regions ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ;  Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ). Although we did not find significant main effects of figurativeness or novelty in right superior temporal sulcus (rSTS), one condition, novel metaphors, elicited activation in a neighboring region: right posterior middle temporal gyrus. Several studies using fMRI and transcranial magnetic stimulation have reported rSTS involvement in processing novel metaphors ( Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ;  Pobric, Mashal, Faust, & Lavidor, 2008 ). Others have shown right superior temporal gyrus recruitment for novel ironic sentences ( Eviatar & Just, 2006 ). At least one other study using literal and metaphoric sentences did not report activation in rSTS or any other right temporal region ( Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2009 ). In that study, the authors attributed the lack of right hemisphere involvement to the use of sentences as the experimental stimuli. Prior studies by Mashal and colleagues that found activation in the rSTS incorporated word pairs ( Mashal, Faust, & Hendler, 2005 ;  Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2007 ), while their more recent work used sentences ( Mashal, Faust, Hendler, & Jung-Beeman, 2009 ). Although context may influence metaphor processing, use of sentences does not seem to preclude right hemisphere activation ( Ahrens et al., 2007 ;  Bottini et al., 1994 ;  Chen, Widick, & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Eviatar & Just, 2006 ;  Schmidt & Seger, In Press ;  Sotillo et al., 2005 ;  Stringaris et al., 2006 ;  Yang, Edens, Simpson, & Krawczyk, 2009 ) and several other studies have shown right hemisphere involvement in discourse and sentence processing in general (e.g., ( St George, Kutas, Martinez, & Sereno, 1999 ). Moreover, in the present experiment, which incorporated sentences, we observed activation in the right hemisphere. 
 One additional consideration is whether task difficulty influenced the patterns of results seen here. Prior research that has examined difficulty found a main effect of difficulty in left inferior frontal gyrus. While we found differences in activation across several comparisons in left IFG, the absence of differences in accuracy and response time among the four grammatical English sentence conditions suggests that there were not substantial differences in difficulty. 
 
 
 4.3 Integration of Results with Theoretical Frameworks 
 Our results are partially consistent with the Graded Salience Hypothesis, which suggests that right hemisphere recruitment is influenced by the salience of a stimulus ( R. Giora, 1997 ). We found that overall novel stimuli engaged right prefrontal regions more than familiar sentences. However, all metaphors also engaged right IFG and pair-wise analyses did not show any differences between novel and familiar metaphors. These results suggest that both familiar and novel metaphors engaged the right IFG to a similar extent. Neither literal sentence condition engaged the right hemisphere and differences between literal sentences were restricted to the left hemisphere. 
 The coarse coding hypothesis (CCH) proposes additional details about the function of anatomical regions, and again, our results are partially consistent with this theoretical framework ( Jung-Beeman, 2005 ). The CCH suggests that bilateral posterior temporal regions are involved in semantic activation, bilateral anterior temporal regions are involved in semantic integration and bilateral prefrontal regions are involved in semantic selection. Critically, right hemisphere resources should be recruited when integrating or selecting among loosely related concepts. In our experimental design, novel sentences contained semantic concepts that were weakly related. Therefore, we would expect greater right hemisphere activation to novel, but not familiar stimuli. 
 All of our sentential conditions elicited some activation in left posterior MTG and left IFG. Our results also indicated that both sentence novelty and metaphor status modulated activation in these regions, suggesting that novel stimuli and metaphors engaged additional neural resources when processed. Because lexical characteristics such as word frequency were controlled for across sentence categories, it is unlikely that either region is responding to purely lexical features. Rather, the pattern of results suggests sensitivity to semantic features. Our results are generally consistent with the role that the CCH proposes for posterior lateral temporal regions: semantic activation ( Jung-Beeman, 2005 ). However, we also observed the same pattern of activation within left inferior frontal regions, which the CCH proposes is involved in semantic selection. Our experiment did not specifically manipulate selection demands, and therefore is not ideally suited to disambiguate semantic activation from semantic selection. 
 Inconsistent with the CCH, we did not observe any effects of novelty in right temporal regions. Although we saw a significant effect of novelty in right IFG, we also observed a main effect of figurativeness in right IFG and right temporal pole. Individual comparisons indicated that both metaphoric conditions, but neither literal sentence condition elicited activation in right IFG. These results suggest that some stimuli that may have closer semantic relationships (familiar metaphors) engaged the right hemisphere, while some stimuli with distant semantic relationships (novel literal sentences) did not. In the current experiment, we used familiarity as a proxy for semantic relatedness and these two stimulus dimensions may not correlate completely. Moreover, our familiar metaphors were not the most familiar or ‘frozen’ metaphors. Therefore, it is possible that our familiar metaphors still activated loosely related concepts to some extent. 
 Alternatively, it is possible that because metaphors require integration of non-literal aspects of words, they would engage participants in more elaborate semantic integration processes. Some research has suggested that metaphors require additional integration demands, even when equated along other dimensions such as sentential constraint ( Coulson & Van Petten, 2002 ;  Coulson & Van Petten, 2007 ). Likewise, sentences that contain novel semantic relationships would also require relatively more semantic integration compared to sentences that contain familiar semantic relationships. Examined from this framework, our results are consistent with the right hemisphere’s involvement in semantic integration ( Federmeier, 2007 ). Overall, conditions with the highest semantic integration demands engaged right hemisphere resources (novel stimuli overall, and familiar and novel metaphors individually). 
 
 
 4.4 Conclusions 
 The present fMRI study demonstrated that both novelty and figurativeness influenced recruitment of the right hemisphere. In right inferior frontal regions, metaphors elicited greater activation than literal stimuli, and novel sentences elicited greater activation than literal sentences. In addition, metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in right temporal pole. In the left hemisphere, all sentences elicited activation in posterior middle temporal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus. However, both figurativeness and novelty modulated activity within these regions. These results are partially consistent with the Graded Salience Hypothesis and the Coarse Coding Hypothesis in that sentences with novel semantic relationships engaged right inferior frontal gyrus more than familiar stimuli. Both hypotheses predict greater recruitment of right hemisphere resources when processing stimuli with distant semantic relationships. However, we also found right hemisphere activation to familiar metaphors in both inferior frontal and temporal regions, which is contrary to the predictions of the Graded Salience and Coarse Coding Hypotheses. While it is possible that our familiar metaphors still engaged semantically distant items, these results are also consistent with the right hemisphere’s involvement in semantic integration. It may be that metaphors, even ones that are relatively familiar, still require additional integrative strategies beyond those required for literal language. 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 We thank Micah Johnson for helpful comments on the manuscript. This research was supported by CHHD grant R03 HD059220 to MTD and the Brain Imaging and Analysis Center at Duke University. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Ahrens 
 K 
 
 
 Liu 
 H-L 
 
 
 Lee 
 C-Y 
 
 
 Gong 
 S-P 
 
 
 Fang 
 S-Y 
 
 
 Hsu 
 Y-Y 
 
 
 Functional MRI of conventional and anomalous metaphors in Mandarin Chinese 
 Brain and Language 
 2007 
 100 
 2 
 163 
 171 
 16298426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckman 
 CF 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 General multi-level linear modeling for group analysis in FMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 20 
 1052 
 1063 
 14568475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Chiarello 
 C 
 
 
 Right Hemisphere Language Comprehension: Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1998 
 Erlbaum 
 Mahwah, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Friedman 
 RB 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Perez 
 E 
 
 
 Diamond 
 S 
 
 
 Lindsay 
 MB 
 
 
 Summation priming and coarse semantic coding in the right hemisphere 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1994 
 6 
 1 
 26 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bihrle 
 AM 
 
 
 Brownell 
 HH 
 
 
 Powelson 
 JA 
 
 
 Gardner 
 H 
 
 
 Comprehension of humorous and nonhumorous materials by left and right brain-damaged patients 
 Brain and Cognition 
 1986 
 5 
 4 
 399 
 411 
 3580185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 S 
 
 
 Functional MRI of language: New approaches to understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2002 
 25 
 151 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bottini 
 G 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 R 
 
 
 Sterzi 
 R 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Schenone 
 P 
 
 
 Scarpa 
 P 
 
 
 
 The role of the right hemisphere in the interpretation of figurative aspects of language A positron emission tomography activation study 
 Brain 
 1994 
 117 
 1241 
 1253 
 7820563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Broca 
 P 
 
 
 Remarques sur le siege de la faculte du language articule: suivies d’une observation d’aphemie 
 Bulletin de la Societe Anatomique de Paris 
 1861 
 6 
 330 
 357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brownell 
 HH 
 
 
 Simpson 
 TL 
 
 
 Bihrle 
 AM 
 
 
 Potter 
 HH 
 
 
 Gardner 
 H 
 
 
 Appreciation of metaphoric alternative word meanings by left and right brain-damaged patients 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1990 
 28 
 4 
 375 
 393 
 1692980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bryan 
 KL 
 
 
 Assessment of language disorders after right hemisphere damaged 
 British Journal of Disorders of Communication 
 1988 
 23 
 11 
 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 C 
 
 
 Cushman 
 
 
 Right hemisphere processing of subordinate word meanings: Evidence from brain damaged patients 
 Paper presented at the International Neuropsychological Society 
 Orlando, FL 
 1990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 E 
 
 
 Widick 
 P 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 Functional–anatomical organization of predicate metaphor processing 
 Brain & Language 
 2008 
 107 
 194 
 202 
 18692890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiarello 
 C 
 
 
 Right hemisphere contributions to lexical semantics 
 1988 
 Springer-Verlag 
 Berlin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coltheart 
 M 
 
 
 The MRC psycholinguistic database 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1981 
 33A 
 497 
 505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coulson 
 S 
 
 
 Van Petten 
 C 
 
 
 Conceptual integration and metaphor: an ERP study 
 Memory & Cognition 
 2002 
 30 
 958 
 968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coulson 
 S 
 
 
 Van Petten 
 C 
 
 
 A special role for the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension? ERP evidence from hemifield presentation 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1146 
 128 
 145 
 17433892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 AE 
 
 
 Wada 
 JA 
 
 
 Speech dominance and handedness in the normal human 
 Brain & Language 
 1978 
 5 
 1 
 42 
 55 
 618568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dejerine 
 J 
 
 
 Sur un cas eccite verbale avec graphie, suivi d’autopsie 
 C.R.Societe du Biologie 
 1891 
 43 
 197 
 201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eviatar 
 Z 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Brain correlates of discourse processing: An fMRI investigation of irony and conventional metaphor comprehension 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 12 
 2348 
 2359 
 16806316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Babkoff 
 H 
 
 
 Kravetz 
 S 
 
 
 Linguistic processes in the two cerebral hemispheres: Implications for modularity vs interactionism 
 Journal of Clinical & Experimental Neuropsychology 
 1995 
 17 
 2 
 171 
 192 
 7629266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Bar-lev 
 A 
 
 
 Chiarell 
 C 
 
 
 Sentence priming effects in the two cerebral hemispheres: Influences of lexical relatedness, word order, and sentence anomaly 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 4 
 480 
 492 
 12559164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Kravetz 
 S 
 
 
 Babkoff 
 H 
 
 
 Hemisphericity and top-down processing of language 
 Brain & Language 
 1993 
 44 
 1 
 1 
 18 
 8467373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Thinking ahead: The role and roots of prediction in language comprehension 
 Psychophysiology 
 2007 
 44 
 491 
 505 
 17521377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 Right words and left words: Electrophysiological evidence for hemispheric differences in meaning processing 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 1999a 
 8 
 3 
 373 
 392 
 10556614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 A rose by any other name: Long-term memory structure and sentence processing 
 Journal of Memory & Language 
 1999b 
 41 
 4 
 469 
 495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 Picture the difference: Electrophysiological investigations of picture processing in the two cerebral hemispheres 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2002 
 40 
 7 
 730 
 747 
 11900725 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 McLennan 
 DB 
 
 
 De Ochoa 
 E 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 The impact of semantic memory organization and sentence context information on spoken language processing by younger and older adults: An ERP study 
 Psychophysiology 
 2002 
 39 
 2 
 133 
 146 
 12212662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gadde 
 S 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 2009 
 http://www.nbirn.net/tools/bxh_tools/index.shtm . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gagnon 
 L 
 
 
 Goulet 
 P 
 
 
 Giroux 
 F 
 
 
 Joanette 
 Y 
 
 
 Processing of metaphoric and non-metaphoric alternative meanings of words after right- and left-hemispheric lesion 
 Brain and Language 
 2003 
 87 
 2 
 217 
 226 
 14585291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Understanding figurative and literal language: The graded salience hypothesis 
 Cognitive Linguistics 
 1997 
 8 
 3 
 183 
 206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 On the priority of salient meanings: Studies of literal and figurative language 
 Journal of Pragmatics 
 1999 
 31 
 919 
 929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 On our mind: Salience, context, and figurative language 
 2003 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Soroker 
 N 
 
 
 Batori 
 G 
 
 
 Kasher 
 A 
 
 
 Differential Effects of Right- and Left-Hemisphere Damage on Understanding Sarcasm and Metaphor 
 Metaphor and Symbol 
 2000 
 15 
 1/2 
 63 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Improved optimisation for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 17 
 2 
 825 
 841 
 12377157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain images 
 Medical Image Analysis 
 2001 
 5 
 2 
 143 
 156 
 11516708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joanette 
 Y 
 
 
 Goulet 
 P 
 
 
 Le dorze 
 G 
 
 
 Impaired Word Naming in Right-Brain-Damaged Right- Handers: Error Types and Time-Course Analyses 
 Brain and Language 
 1988 
 34 
 54 
 64 
 3382933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 11 
 712 
 718 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katz 
 AN 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 Marschark 
 M 
 
 
 Poetic comparisons: Psychological dimensions of metaphoric processing 
 Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 
 1985 
 14 
 4 
 365 
 383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katz 
 AN 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 Marschark 
 M 
 
 
 Clark 
 JM 
 
 
 Norms for 204 literary and 260 nonliterary metaphors on 10 psychological dimensions 
 Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 
 1988 
 3 
 191 
 214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kempler 
 D 
 
 
 Van Lancker 
 D 
 
 
 Marchman 
 V 
 
 
 Bates 
 E 
 
 
 Idiom Comprehension in Children and Adults With Unilateral Brain Damage 
 Developmental Neuropsychology 
 1999 
 15 
 3 
 327 
 349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Contribution of human hippocampal region to novelty detection 
 Nature 
 1996 
 383 
 256 
 259 
 8805701 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kucera 
 H 
 
 
 Francis 
 W 
 
 
 Computational analysis of present-day American English 
 1967 
 Brown University Press 
 Providence, R.I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Parsons 
 LM 
 
 
 Liotti 
 M 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 
 Automated Talairach Atlas labels for functional brain mapping 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2000 
 10 
 120 
 131 
 10912591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 SS 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Metaphorical vs. literal word meanings: fMRI evidence against a selective role of the right hemisphere 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 29 
 536 
 544 
 16165371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 The role of the right hemisphere in processing nonsalient metaphorical meanings: Application of Principal Components Analysis to fMRI data 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2005 
 43 
 14 
 2084 
 2100 
 16243053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of the neural correlates underlying the processing of novel metaphoric expressions 
 Brain and Language 
 2007 
 100 
 115 
 126 
 16290261 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 An fMRI study of processing novel metaphoric sentences 
 Laterality 
 2009 
 14 
 30 
 54 
 18608849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mason 
 RA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 How the brain processes causal inferences in text 
 Psychological Science 
 2004 
 15 
 1 
 1 
 7 
 14717824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntyre 
 M 
 
 
 Pritchard 
 PB 
 
 
 Lombroso 
 CT 
 
 
 Left and right temporal lobe epileptics: A controlled investigation of some psychological differences 
 Epilepsia 
 1976 
 17 
 377 
 386 
 1001282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Cree 
 GS 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 McNorgan 
 C 
 
 
 Semantic feature production norms for a large set of living and nonliving things 
 Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 
 2005 
 37 
 4 
 547 
 559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Cree 
 GS 
 
 
 Westmacott 
 R 
 
 
 De Sa 
 VR 
 
 
 Further evidence for feature correlations in semantic memory 
 Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1999 
 53 
 4 
 360 
 373 
 10646207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Kane 
 G 
 
 
 Insler 
 RZ 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Conceptual and perceptual novelty effects in human medial temporal cortex 
 Hippocampus 
 2005 
 15 
 326 
 332 
 15490462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pobric 
 G 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Faust 
 M 
 
 
 Lavidor 
 M 
 
 
 The role of the right cerebral hemisphere in processing novel metaphoric expressions: A transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 170 
 181 
 17919080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapp 
 AM 
 
 
 Leube 
 DT 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TT 
 
 
 Neural correlates of metaphor processing 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2004 
 20 
 3 
 395 
 402 
 15268917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapp 
 AM 
 
 
 Leube 
 DT 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TT 
 
 
 Laterality in metaphor processing: Lack of evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging for the right hemisphere theory 
 Brain and Language 
 2007 
 100 
 2 
 142 
 149 
 16677700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rinaldi 
 MC 
 
 
 Marangolo 
 P 
 
 
 Baldassarri 
 F 
 
 
 Metaphor comprehension in right brain-damaged patients with visuo-verbal and verbal material: a dissociation (re)considered 
 Cortex 
 2004 
 40 
 3 
 479 
 490 
 15259328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 GL 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Neural correlates of metaphor processing: The roles of figurativeness, familiarity and difficulty 
 Brain & Cognition 
 In Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for right-hemisphere involvement in processing unusual semantic relationships 
 Neuropsychology 
 2000 
 14 
 3 
 361 
 369 
 10928739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Fast robust automated brain extraction 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2002 
 3 
 143 
 155 
 12391568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckman 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 23 
 208 
 219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sotillo 
 M 
 
 
 Carreti 
 L 
 
 
 Hinojosa 
 JA 
 
 
 Tapia 
 M 
 
 
 Mercado 
 F 
 
 
 Lopez-Martin 
 S 
 
 
 
 Neural activity associated with metaphor comprehension: spatial analysis 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 2005 
 373 
 5 
 9 
 15555767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 St George 
 M 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 Martinez 
 A 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Semantic integration in reading: engagement of the right hemisphere during discourse processing 
 Brain 
 1999 
 122 
 1317 
 1325 
 10388797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stringaris 
 AK 
 
 
 Medford 
 N 
 
 
 Giora 
 R 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 CV 
 
 
 Brammer 
 JM 
 
 
 David 
 SA 
 
 
 How metaphors influence semantic relatedness judgments: The role of the right frontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 33 
 784 
 793 
 16963282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stringaris 
 AK 
 
 
 Medford 
 NC 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 David 
 AS 
 
 
 Deriving meaning: Distinct neural mechanisms for metaphoric, literal, and non-meaningful sentences 
 Brain and Language 
 2007 
 100 
 150 
 162 
 16165201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 Thieme 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tompkins 
 CA 
 
 
 Knowledge and strategies for processing lexical metaphor after right or left hemisphere brain damage 
 Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 
 1990 
 33 
 307 
 316 
 2359271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tompkins 
 CA 
 
 
 Baumgaertner 
 A 
 
 
 Lehman 
 MT 
 
 
 Fossett 
 TRD 
 
 
 Suppression and discourse comprehension in right brain-damaged adults: A preliminary report 
 Aphasiology 
 1997 
 11 
 4-5 
 505 
 519 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tucker 
 DM 
 
 
 Watson 
 RT 
 
 
 Heilman 
 KM 
 
 
 Discrimination and evocation of affectively intoned speech in patients with right parietal disease 
 Neurology 
 1977 
 27 
 10 
 947 
 950 
 561908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Markowitsch 
 HJ 
 
 
 Craik 
 FE 
 
 
 Habib 
 R 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Novelty and familiarity activations in PET studies of memory encoding and retrieval 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1996 
 6 
 1 
 71 
 79 
 8670640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Lancker 
 D 
 
 
 Kempler 
 D 
 
 
 Comprehension of Familiar Phrases by Left- but Not by Right-Hemisphere Damaged Patients 
 Brain and Language 
 1987 
 32 
 265 
 277 
 2446699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voyvodic 
 JT 
 
 
 Real-time fMRI integrating paradigm control, physiology, behavior and on-line statistical analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 10 
 91 
 106 
 10417244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 MD 
 
 
 The MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machine Readable Dictionary, Version 2 
 Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 
 1988 
 20 
 6 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 Gardner 
 H 
 
 
 The comprehension of metaphor in brain-damaged patients 
 Brain 
 1977 
 100 
 4 
 717 
 729 
 608117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Beckman 
 CF 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Multi-level linear modelling for FMRI group analysis using Bayesian inference 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 4 
 1732 
 1747 
 15050594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Patenaude 
 B 
 
 
 Chappell 
 M 
 
 
 Makni 
 S 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 
 Bayesian analysis of neuroimaging data in FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 45 
 S173 
 186 
 19059349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Ripley 
 BD 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Temporal autocorrelation in univariate linear modelling of FMRI data 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 6 
 1370 
 1386 
 11707093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yang 
 FG 
 
 
 Edens 
 J 
 
 
 Simpson 
 C 
 
 
 Krawczyk 
 DC 
 
 
 Differences in task demands influence the hemispheric lateralization and neural correlates of metaphor 
 Brain & Language 
 2009 
 111 
 114 
 124 
 19781756 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental Design. Participants viewed literal, metaphoric, and nonword sentences (duration=6s). Sentences occurred every 4.5 to 9 seconds, and a fixation cross was presented between sentences. Participants assessed each sentence for its valence. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Activation in Parahippocampal Gyrus and Inferior Temporal Gyrus. Regions in which novel literal sentences (blue), novel metaphors (green), and familiar metaphors (purple) elicited significant activation in left parahippocampal gyrus / medial inferior temporal regions (p<.01, cluster thresholded). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Activation in Inferior Frontal Gyri. Left: Regions in which metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences (blue) and in which literal sentences elicited greater activation than metaphors (red, p<.01, cluster thresholded). Metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences in bilateral inferior frontal gyri, and left medial superior frontal gyrus. Greater activation to literal sentences compared to metaphors can be seen in right medial superior frontal gyrus. Hemodynamic responses from the cluster in left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) are shown below. All sentences elicited a significant hemodynamic response in left IFG; however, this response was significantly larger for metaphors. Right: Regions in which novel sentences elicited greater activation than familiar sentences (green) and in which familiar sentences elicited greater activation than novel sentences (purple). Novel sentences elicited activation in bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, and left medial frontal gyrus. There were no regions in which familiar sentences elicited greater activation than novel sentences. Hemodynamic responses from the cluster in left IFG are shown below. All sentences elicited a significant hemodynamic response in left IFG; however, this response was significantly larger for novel sentences compared to familiar sentences. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Activation in Lateral Temporal Gyri. Left: Regions in which metaphors elicited greater activation than literal sentences (blue) can be seen in anterior regions of middle temporal gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus (p<.01, cluster thresholded). Hemodynamic responses (HDRs) from the cluster in left anterior middle temporal gyrus are shown. Metaphors elicited significantly larger hemodynamic responses in this region compared to literal sentences. Right: Regions in which novel sentences elicited greater activation than familiar sentences (green) can be seen in posterior middle temporal gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus. Hemodynamic responses from the cluster in left posterior middle temporal gyrus are shown. Although both novel and familiar sentences elicited a hemodynamic response in this region; HDRs were larger for novel stimuli. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Sentence Characteristics 
 Sentence length, Frequency, Concreteness, and Ratings are provided for the four sentence types. Word frequencies are from ( Kucera & Francis, 1967 ), and concreteness ratings are from the MRC database ( Wilson, 1988 ). Novelty, positivity, and comprehension ratings range from 1 to 7, where lower values indicate lower novelty, positivity, and comprehension. There was a significant effect of novelty where novel sentences were rated as more novel than familiar sentences. There was also a significant effect of comprehension where literal sentences had a higher comprehension rating than metaphors, and familiar sentences had a higher comprehension rating than novel sentences. Overall, all sentences were rated above the midpoint of the scale indicating a high level of comprehension overall 
 
 
 
 
 
 Novel Metaphors 
 Familiar Metaphors 
 Novel Literal 
 Familiar Literal 
 
 
 
 
 Length 
 5.5 (1.3) 
 5.5 (1.3) 
 5.9 (1.1) 
 5.9 (.9) 
 
 
 Frequency- Noun 1 
 78.4 (102.5) 
 100.9 (99.09) 
 136.6 (175.3) 
 91.7 (130.1) 
 
 
 Frequency - Noun 2 
 30.3 (86.2) 
 40.7 (59.5) 
 15.0 (20.0) 
 41.0 (45.9) 
 
 
 Concreteness - Noun 1 
 478.0 (128.5) 
 497.7 (121.8) 
 508.0 (108.4) 
 523.5 (95.7) 
 
 
 Concreteness - Noun 2 
 572.1 (80.1) 
 568.4 (57.9) 
 590.8 (37.0) 
 596.8 (31.8) 
 
 
 Novelty * 
 5.3 (0.2) 
 3.1 (0.5) 
 3.3 (.02) 
 1.9 (0.1) 
 
 
 Positivity 
 3.6 (1.2) 
 3.9 (1.4) 
 3.8 (0.5) 
 4.0 (0.3) 
 
 
 Comprehension ** 
 4.5 (0.4) 
 5.7 (0.4) 
 6.0 (0.4) 
 6.4 (0.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Significant main effect of novelty comparing novel and familiar sentences. 
 
 
 ** 
 Significant main effect of comprehension between literal sentences and metaphors, and between familiar and novel sentences. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 MNI Coordinates, maximum Z values, and number of active voxels for the centers of activation that were found in traditional language regions. Clusters are shown for areas in which each of the four sentential conditions elicited significantly more activation than the nonword condition 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Hemi- sphere 
 BA 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Max Z 
 # Voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 Novel Metaphors 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 10, 11, 45, 46, 47 
 −48 
 28 
 −8 
 4.15 
 3254 
 
 
 
 Right 
 45 
 64 
 22 
 2 
 3.07 
 53 
 
 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus/ITG 
 Left 
 20 
 −34 
 −20 
 −26 
 3.61 
 139 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 21 
 −72 
 −46 
 0 
 3.18 
 260 
 
 
 
 Right 
 21 
 64 
 6 
 −18 
 2.85 
 9 
 
 
 Temporal Pole 
 Right 
 38 
 44 
 10 
 −20 
 3.24 
 41 
 
 
 
 Familiar Metaphors 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 45, 47 
 −52 
 30 
 0 
 3.81 
 1734 
 
 
 
 Right 
 45 
 62 
 32 
 2 
 3.37 
 90 
 
 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus/ ITG 
 Left 
 20 
 −32 
 −14 
 −28 
 3.26 
 114 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 21 
 −54 
 −44 
 −6 
 2.49 
 25 
 
 
 
 Novel Literal Sentences 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 44 
 −62 
 16 
 14 
 3.65 
 1054 
 
 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus/ ITG 
 Left 
 36 
 −36 
 −16 
 −26 
 3.26 
 136 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 21 
 −56 
 −30 
 −4 
 2.42 
 17 
 
 
 
 Familiar Literal Sentences 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 44, 45 
 −64 
 18 
 14 
 3.57 
 223 
 
 
 
 Left 
 47, 38 
 −40 
 16 
 −20 
 3.27 
 90 
 
 
 
 Left 
 47 
 −52 
 34 
 −20 
 2.73 
 8 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 21 
 −66 
 −32 
 −14 
 2.45 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 ITG - Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 MNI Coordinates, maximum Z values, and number of active voxels for the centers of activation in traditional language regions. Clusters are shown for areas in which metaphors elicited greater activation than literal stimuli, and in which novel sentences elicited greater activation than familiar sentences. There were no clusters of activation in traditional language regions for the familiar > novel comparison, and there were no regions in which literal sentences elicited greater activation than metaphors 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Hemi- sphere 
 BA 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Max Z 
 # Voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metaphor > Literal 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 11, 38, 45, 47 
 −44 
 30 
 −6 
 4.53 
 3339 
 
 
 
 Right 
 45, 47 
 58 
 26 
 10 
 3.32 
 152 
 
 
 Anterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 20 
 −62 
 −8 
 −26 
 3.24 
 55 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 22 
 −64 
 −34 
 −4 
 2.53 
 16 
 
 
 
 Left 
 21 
 −72 
 −34 
 −4 
 3.21 
 12 
 
 
 
 Left 
 21 
 −58 
 −48 
 −2 
 2.57 
 8 
 
 
 Temporal Pole 
 Right 
 38 
 46 
 6 
 −18 
 2.62 
 7 
 
 
 
 Novel > Familiar 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 Left 
 45, 47, 36, 38, 6 
 −54 
 20 
 −8 
 4.46 
 2484 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 −28 
 2 
 30 
 3.09 
 8 
 
 
 
 Right 
 45 
 60 
 30 
 4 
 3.01 
 15 
 
 
 
 Right 
 45 
 60 
 22 
 14 
 2.62 
 7 
 
 
 
 Right 
 47 
 44 
 20 
 −6 
 2.76 
 8 
 
 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus/ ITG 
 Left 
 36 
 −28 
 −20 
 −26 
 2.98 
 112 
 
 
 Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Left 
 21, 22 
 −62 
 −50 
 8 
 3.36 
 273 
 
 
 
 Left 
 21, 22 
 −70 
 −28 
 −6 
 2.73 
 21 
 
 
 
 Left 
 37 
 −66 
 −54 
 −8 
 3.07 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 ITG - Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 
