
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 NeuroImage 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 21195191 
 3065208 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.065 
 NIHMS271499 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 fMRI investigation of unexpected somatosensory feedback perturbation during speech 
 
 
 
 
 Golfinopoulos 
 Elisa 
 
 a 
 * 
 
 
 
 Tourville 
 Jason A. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Bohland 
 Jason W. 
 
 b 
 a 
 
 
 
 Ghosh 
 Satrajit S. 
 
 c 
 a 
 
 
 
 Nieto-Castanon 
 Alfonso 
 
 d 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 Frank H. 
 
 a 
 c 
 e 
 f 
 g 
 
 
 a  Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA 
 b  Department of Health Sciences, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA 
 c  Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA USA 
 d  StatsANC LLC, Buenos Aires, Argentina 
 e  Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA 
 f  Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard University – Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA USA 
 g  Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA USA 
 
 
 * Correspondence should be addressed to: E. Golfinopoulos, Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems, Boston University, 677 Beacon Street, Boston, MA, 02215, United States. Tel. +1 617 353 6181. Fax: +1 617 353 7755.  egolfino@cns.bu.edu 
 
 
 16 
 2 
 2011 
 
 
 30 
 12 
 2010 
 
 
 1 
 4 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 4 
 2012 
 
 55 
 3 
 1324 
 1338 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Somatosensory feedback plays a critical role in the coordination of articulator movements for speech production. In response to unexpected resistance to lip or jaw movements during speech, fluent speakers can use the difference between the somatosensory expectations of a speech sound and the actual somatosensory feedback to adjust the trajectories of functionally relevant but unimpeded articulators. In an effort to investigate the neural substrates underlying the somatosensory feedback control of speech, we used an event-related sparse sampling functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm and a novel pneumatic device that unpredictably blocked subjects’ jaw movements. In comparison to speech,  perturbed speech , in which jaw perturbation prompted the generation of compensatory speech motor commands, demonstrated increased effects in bilateral ventral motor cortex, right-lateralized anterior supramarginal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  and ventral premotor cortex, and bilateral inferior posterior cerebellum (lobule VIII). Structural equation modeling revealed a significant increased influence from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right anterior supramarginal gyrus and from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right ventral premotor cortex as well as a significant increased reciprocal influence between right ventral premotor cortex and right ventral motor cortex and right anterior supramarginal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . These results suggest that bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis , right ventral premotor and motor cortices are functionally coupled and influence speech motor output when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech production. 
 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 structural equation modeling 
 speech motor control 
 right hemisphere 
 somatosensory feedback 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Afferent feedback can be used during speech production to provide information about the position of an articulator relative to its target within a particular reference frame. This information can be used by the speaker to generate compensatory responses when the trajectory of a moving articulator is unexpectedly perturbed. Unexpected perturbation of lip or jaw movements during speech has been used extensively to investigate aspects of subjects’ compensatory responses and probe the role of afferent feedback in speech motor control (e.g.,  Abbs and Gracco, 1984 ;  Folkins and Abbs, 1975 ;  Gomi et al., 2002 ;  Gracco and Abbs, 1985 ;  Ito et al., 2005 ;  Kelso et al., 1984 ). These studies indicate that fluent adult speakers compensate for unexpected resistance to individual articulator movements by adjusting the kinematics of functionally relevant articulators outside the influence of the perturbation (e.g.,  Abbs and Gracco, 1984 ;  Gomi et al., 2002 ;  Gracco and Abbs, 1985 ;  Ito et al., 2005 ;  Kelso et al., 1984 ;  Shaimain, 1989 ) and that speakers are capable of maintaining acoustic intelligibility in spite of dynamic perturbations to jaw movements ( Nasir and Ostry, 2006 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ). Several studies have also implicated a role for somatosensory feedback in the generation of compensatory responses to dynamic jaw perturbations (e.g.,  Nasir and Ostry, 2006 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ). For example,  Nasir and Ostry (2008)  recently demonstrated that with their implants turned off cochlear implant subjects could produce compensatory responses to jaw perturbations that were comparable to normal-hearing control subjects, indicating that the generation of compensatory responses is possible in the complete absence of auditory feedback. Collectively these studies suggest that during habitual speech production when articulator movement is unexpectedly perturbed, the speech motor system can utilize somatosensory feedback to generate functionally equivalent articulatory gestures and compensate for the perturbation. 
 Despite the large number of behavioral studies that have utilized static and dynamic perturbations to the articulators (e.g.,  Abbs and Gracco, 1984 ;  Baum et al., 1996 ;  Baum et al., 1997 ;  Baum, 1999 ;  Folkins and Abbs, 1975 ;  Folkins and Zimmerman, 1982 ;  Gay et al., 1981 ;  Gomi et al., 2002 ;  Gracco and Abbs, 1985 ;  Jacks, 2008 ;  Kelso et al., 1984 ;  Lane et al, 2005 ;  Lindblom et al., 1979 ;  McFarland and Baum, 1995 ;  Nasir and Ostry, 2006 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ), few researchers have attempted to use non-invasive imaging techniques to investigate the neural substrates underlying the somatosensory feedback control of fluent speech production. Part of the challenge is that a device must be created that not only perturbs subjects’ articulator movements, but is also MR compatible. In addition, the design must avoid employing a perturbation that would cause movement-related artifacts in the functional images. To perturb somatosensory feedback during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),  Baciu et al. (2000)  employed a tube fixed between subjects’ lips during the articulation of a vowel that requires lip protrusion. Peak responses associated with the compensation were reported in bilateral cerebellum and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, right supramarginal gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis , right posterior superior temporal gyrus, and right middle temporal gyrus. These findings suggest that compensatory responses to static somatosensory perturbations during speech movements are mediated by a distributed network of brain regions that include cerebellar, temporal, and fronto-parietal areas and may generally involve greater contributions from right hemisphere cortical regions. However, due to the static nature of the perturbation in that study, speakers could have adapted their feedforward commands (or motor programs) to compensate. An unpredictable perturbation prompts subjects to rely more directly on the somatosensory feedback control subsystem (i.e., a subsystem that detects that somatosensory feedback is not within the expected range for the current speech sound and contributes to the adjustment of speech motor commands). Using transcranial magnetic stimulation,  Ito et al. (2005)  demonstrated that compensatory responses of the upper lip to unexpected perturbations of the jaw involved the left primary motor cortex. Since the study only targeted the primary motor cortex, the neural substrates underlying compensatory responses to unanticipated somatosensory perturbations during speech has yet to be fully characterized. 
 Insight into the possible neural and computational bases underlying somatosensory feedback control in speech comes from the DIVA (Directions into Velocities of Articulators) model of speech production and acquisition in which model cells are associated with neuroanatomical substrates ( Golfinopoulos et al., 2010 ;  Guenther, 1994 ,  1995 ,  2006 ;  Guenther et al., 2006 ;  Guenther and Vladusich, 2010 ;  Tourville and Guenther 2010 ). According to the model, somatosensory feedback control typically contributes little to the speech of fluent adult speakers, since under normal settings feedforward motor programs for frequently produced syllables are highly tuned through practice and thus speakers make few, if any, significant somatosensory errors. However, an unexpected somatosensory perturbation will lead to a difference between the speaker’s somatosensory expectations of the current speech sound and the actual, afferent feedback ( Golfinopoulos et al., 2010 ;  Guenther, 1994 ,  1995 ,  2006 ;  Guenther et al., 2006 ;  Tourville and Guenther 2010 ). The DIVA model predicts that under these conditions in which somatosensory feedback is not within the expected range for the current speech sound there is increased activation in bilateral supramarginal gyrus (the location of the model’s  somatosensory error map ). In earlier versions of the DIVA model, somatosensory errors were transformed into compensatory motor commands via projections to bilateral ventral motor cortex (e.g.,  Guenther, 2006 ;  Guenther et al., 2006 ). A recent fMRI study of auditory feedback control of speech demonstrated the involvement of right prefrontal and ventral premotor areas in generating corrective speech motor commands ( Tourville et al., 2008 ). Increased bilateral activity in posterior superior temporal gyrus and ventral motor cortex was accompanied by increases in right ventral premotor cortex and inferior frontal gyrus,  pars triangularis  when auditory feedback was unpredictably perturbed during speech production relative to speech. Structural equation modeling of this network of regions revealed significantly greater effective connectivity between bilateral posterior superior temporal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  and right ventral premotor cortex for perturbed speech relative to unperturbed speech. These findings suggest that error signals detected in bilateral sensory cortex were transformed into compensatory speech motor commands via projections through right inferior frontal and ventral premotor cortex. This interpretation is reflected in the most recent version of the DIVA model (e.g.,  Golfinopoulos et al., 2010 ;  Tourville and Guenther, 2010 ). According to the model, an unanticipated  somatosensory  perturbation will result in increased bilateral activity in anterior supramarginal gyrus associated with somatosensory error detection and right-lateralized ventral premotor cortex and inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  along with bilateral ventral motor cortex activity associated with the compensatory motor response. Furthermore, the effective connectivity between anterior supramarginal gyrus and ventral premotor cortex and inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  should increase as a result of the perturbation. 
 To test these predictions, we measured blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) responses during  speech  and  baseline  tasks under unperturbed and perturbed conditions using event-related sparse sampling fMRI. Subjects produced bi-syllabic pseudowords aloud in periods of silence inside the scanner. During a subset of the  speech  and  baseline  trials, a pneumatic device unpredictably blocked subjects’ jaw closing movements. These unanticipated perturbations prompted subjects to adjust articulator trajectories in order to continue to produce the visually presented speech stimulus. BOLD activity associated with this perturbation during speech ( perturbed speech ) was contrasted with that under unperturbed speech conditions ( speech ) using both voxel-based and region of interest-based functional analyses. In addition, structural equation modeling was used to quantitatively assess changes in the effective connectivity between the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions. Path or structural equation modeling analysis has been used extensively on neuroimaging data to test specific hypotheses about regional connectivity (e.g.,  Au Duong et al., 2005 ;  Gonçalves et al. 2001 ;  Grafton et al., 1994 ;  Horwitz et al., 1995 ;  Rowe et al., 2002 ;  Schlösser et al., 2003 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ). However, SEM is sensitive to the choice of regions and the complexity of the structural model (e.g., limitations on the number of paths that can be fitted; for further discussion see  Penny et al., 2004 ). To mitigate these limitations, SEM is used here as a confirmatory tool; the network modeled and hypotheses tested are constrained by our prior theoretical and experimental work. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Subjects 
 Participants were 13 right-handed native speakers of American English (6 females; age range 23–51, mean age = 30) with corrected or normal vision. None of the subjects reported a neurological, speech, hearing, or voice impediment. All subjects were recruited and provided written informed consent in accordance with the guidelines of the Boston University Institutional Review Board and the Massachusetts General Hospital Human Research Committee. Subjects received monetary compensation for their participation in this study. 
 
 
 Experimental Protocol 
 During functional magnetic resonance imaging, subjects performed an overt speech production task and an observational baseline task. In the  speech  task, subjects were instructed to read aloud the stimulus (a pseudoword) that was orthographically presented for three seconds at the beginning of each trial. The speech materials consisted of two /aV/ pseudowords (au, ai) and six /aCV/ pseudowords (anu, ani, agu, agi, atu, and ati). During the  baseline  task, a control stimulus ( yyy ) was presented in place of the pseudoword, and subjects were instructed to silently observe the stimulus throughout the three second presentation. Subjects could view all stimuli, which were projected onto a display outside the MR scanner bore, via an adjustable mirror positioned on the head coil. The stimuli were presented in white against a black background in the center of the display. All stimuli were non-lexical so as to avoid possible confounds from semantic effects. 
 During stimulus presentation the scanner remained silent and a Shure SM93 Micro-Lavelier electrostatic microphone attached to the head coil (approximately 3 in. from the subject’s mouth) transmitted subjects’ speech productions to a computer inside the control room. On a subset of all  speech  and  baseline  trials, denoted  perturbed speech  and  perturbed non-speech  trials, jaw movements were blocked by the rapid inflation of a small balloon (for a description of the perturbation setup, see Somatosensory Perturbation section). Presentation software package (version 0.80;  www.neurobs.com ) was used to deliver the visual stimuli and to trigger both the perturbation and the scanner for image acquisition. Each experimental run consisted of 56  speech  trials (seven presentations of each pseudoword) and 16  baseline  trials. Subjects were asked to perform four, 13-minute runs in a single scanning session. For two subjects, only three runs were used in the analysis due to technical difficulties at the time of image acquisition. Subjects wore protective ear covering throughout the experiment. 
 
 
 Somatosensory Perturbation 
 Throughout the experiment a small, approximately tubular, inelastic balloon ( Fig. 1B ) was positioned between the molars on one side of each subject’s mouth. For six of the subjects the balloon was positioned on the left side of the mouth (hereafter called the  left balloon cohort ), and for the remaining seven subjects the balloon was positioned on the right side of the mouth (the  right balloon cohort ). The balloon was constructed from a finger of a heavy-duty nitrile rubber glove. Prior to scanning, subjects evaluated the fit of various balloons and chose the most comfortable shape for their mouth. None of the subjects reported that the uninflated balloon prevented speech-related movements. The balloon was connected to a long stiff plastic tube attached to a solenoid-driven air cylinder that was located inside the scanner control room to avoid providing auditory cues to the subject regarding the onset of the jaw perturbation ( Fig. 1A ). Computer-triggered activation of the solenoid delivered 4–5 psi and caused inflation of the balloon to a thickness of approximately 1 cm within 100 ms. 
 The balloon was inflated on one half of all  baseline  trials and one seventh of all  speech  trials pseudo-randomly distributed within each run so that the presentation of two consecutive perturbation trials was prohibited. The frequency of perturbation trials was chosen to avoid adaptation to, or anticipation of, the perturbation on any given trial. Previous dynamic perturbation experiments indicate that using 15% or fewer perturbations will prevent subjects from performing anticipatory motor acts that minimize the influence of the perturbation ( Abbs and Gracco, 1984 ;  Gracco and Abbs, 1985 ). Before the start of the experiment, subjects were informed of the possibility that the balloon would inflate during some trials, but that they should continue to produce the stimulus and avoid clenching their teeth. Subjects were instructed to keep their jaws relaxed and in a closed position during  baseline  trials and between trials. 
 Production of each pseudoword required articulator movements that are predictably disrupted by a jaw block. Specifically, all stimuli started with the vowel /a/, which under normal conditions involves a low (open) jaw position, and transitioned to consonants or vowels that involve high (relatively closed) jaw positions. During  perturbed speech  trials, the balloon inflation was triggered at the onset of voicing at the start of the /a/ (while the jaw was open, so the balloon expansion had very little effect) and continued through the remainder of the utterance, thereby impeding the closing jaw movement for the subsequent phoneme(s). Before entering the scanner, subjects were instructed to speak each word slowly and clearly and practiced the pronunciation of the stimuli until the subject’s production consistently matched a sample production. Inside the scanner, subjects’ productions were monitored to ensure proper performance and timing of the perturbation. For  baseline  trials, where voicing was not available as a cue, triggering of the balloon was initiated 500 ms after the onset of the trial and remained inflated until the baseline stimulus disappeared from the screen. 
 
 
 Behavioral Pilot Experiment 
 In order to ensure that subjects could compensate for the restrained jaw induced by the pneumatic device, a separate behavioral pilot study was performed on a healthy, native speaker of American English (1 male) prior to the fMRI experiment. The subject was recruited and provided written informed consent in accordance with the guidelines of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Review Board and received monetary compensation for his participation. The subject was comfortably seated in a modified dental chair in a quiet recording room and transducers were mounted on midsagittal points of the tongue body, upper and lower lips, and mandible. Kinematic data were collected using an electro-magnetic midsagittal articulometer that measured the positions of these transducers during  speech  and  perturbed speech  conditions. After becoming familiar with the perturbation setup and the stimuli, the subject performed a total of 248  speech  trials (31 unperturbed productions of each speech stimulus) and 32  perturbed speech  trials (4 productions of each stimulus in which jaw movement was unexpectedly perturbed) within a single run. 
 
 
 MRI Data Acquisition 
 Magnetic resonance imaging was performed on a Siemens Trio 3T whole-body scanner with a volume transmit-receive birdcage head coil (USA Instruments, Aurora, OH) at the Massachusetts General Hospital Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging in Charlestown, MA. Foam padding was packed around the subject’s head to minimize head movement during the experiment. For each subject, a high resolution T1-weighted anatomical volume (128 slices in the sagittal plane, slice thickness = 1.33 mm, in-plane resolution = 1 mm 2 , TR = 2000 ms, TE = 3300 ms, flip angle = 7°, FOV = 256 mm 2 ) was obtained prior to functional imaging. Functional volumes consisted of 32 T2*-weighted gradient echo, echo planar images covering the whole brain in the axial plane, oriented along the bicommissural line (slice thickness = 5 mm, in plane resolution = 3.125 mm 2 , no skip, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90°, FOV = 200 mm 2 ). 
 A sparse sampling ( Hall et al., 1999 ), clustered volume acquisition method, consisting of silent intervals between consecutive volume acquisitions, was used. Subjects performed the tasks during the silent intervals. The timeline for a single trial is schematized in  Fig. 1C . Functional acquisition began 4 s after the onset of the trial, following the completion of the task and consisted of two consecutive whole-brain functional volumes (TR = 2 s for each volume) within each trial. Acquisition timing was chosen to include the putative peak in the delayed hemodynamic response associated with task performance; the hemodynamic response delay has been estimated at 4–7 s, depending on the brain region and task ( Belin et al., 1999 ;  Yang et al., 2000 ). After the two volumes were collected, there was a 3 s interval before the onset of the following trial to allow for attenuation of the hemodynamic response to scanner noise between trials, resulting in a total trial length of 11 s. The sparse sampling protocol permitted speech production in the absence of high frequency, high intensity acquisition-related acoustic noise ( Belin et al., 1999 ). It also minimized movement-related imaging artifacts, since scanning occurred only after the behavioral task had ended ( Birn et al., 1999 ). 
 
 
 MRI Data Analyses 
 
 Voxel-based analysis 
 Functional imaging data were processed using tools from the SPM2 software package (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College of London;  http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ). Functional images were realigned to the mean echo-planar image (EPI) within a session by estimating the parameters of an optimal rigid body transformation. Functional images were then co-registered to the subject’s T1-weighted anatomical image. Each subject’s anatomical image was spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute T1 template (MNI ICBM-152;  Evans et al., 1993 ). The same spatial normalization transformation applied to the anatomical image was also applied to the functional images. Global scaling was used to eliminate the effects of low frequency noise sources. Functional images were spatially smoothed using an isotropic Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full-width at half maximum. 
 Task-dependent BOLD responses were estimated using a general linear model. The hemodynamic response for each stimulus event was modeled using a finite impulse response (FIR) basis function with a single time bin spanning the two consecutive volumes. The model included four condition-specific explanatory variables ( speech ,  perturbed speech, perturbed non-speech,  and  baseline) . Also included in the model were motion parameters estimated during the realignment step, a high-frequency regressor ([1 −1 1 −1 … ] T ) modeling global intensity differences between the first and second volumes collected each trial, and a linear regressor to account for scanner drift. 
 The model was first estimated within each subject, and contrast-of-interest volumes were generated comparing the appropriate conditional coefficients to assess the four simple main effects and the interaction term with task (speech versus non-speech production) and modulation (perturbation versus no perturbation) as the two factors. Specifically, inferences were based on the five contrasts:  speech – baseline ,  perturbed non-speech – baseline ,  perturbed speech – perturbed non-speech ,  perturbed speech – speech,  and ( perturbed speech – speech) – (perturbed non-speech – baseline) . To assess differences in the effects of balloon position, a second level, two-sample  t -test was performed to compare the  left  and  right balloon cohorts  for the five main contrasts of interest. A false discovery rate (FDR;  Genovese et al., 2002 ) corrected threshold of  p FDR  < 5% was used to asses significance. 
 Direct comparisons between condition-specific brain activations were then performed using a second level, mixed effects analysis across all subjects (collapsing  left  and  right balloon cohorts ). The resulting group statistical parametric maps were thresholded by a corrected significance of  p FDR  < 1%. 
 For visualization/reporting purposes, those voxels surpassing the significant  t  threshold, effect sizes were divided by the mean significant effect ( p  < 0.01, uncorrected) of the  perturbed speech-speech  contrast (the primary contrast of interest) to generate  normalized effect sizes . This normalized effect size demonstrates relative activations between contrasts for voxels that survive a significance threshold. The normalized effect sizes were plotted on a cortical surface representation of the canonical anatomical volume included in the SPM2 package to visualize significant effects for each contrast of interest. 
 In addition to generating statistical parametric maps of the voxel-based results, peak responses were associated with neuroanatomical labels by mapping them to the same set of cortical, subcortical, and cerebellar regions used in region-of-interest (ROI)-based functional analyses described below. Peaks in the  t -statistic maps (peak-to-peak minimum distance = 6 mm) were assigned ROI labels based on a minimum distance function. The function first determines, in a subject-specific manner, the nearest (in Euclidean distance) ROI in the individual subjects’ space for a given peak voxel location in the common coordinate space. Since the nearest region can differ across subjects, this procedure results, for each peak, in a set of candidate nearest regions with size less than or equal to the number of subjects. Then, for each of these candidate regions, we determine the mean Euclidean distance between the peak location and the nearest voxel within that region across all subjects. The candidate region with the minimum average distance across subjects is then associated with the given peak voxel. For each ROI containing a peak response, the voxel location,  t -statistic, and normalized effect of the maximum response are determined. MNI coordinates were converted into Talairach coordinates using an MNI to Talairach transformation detailed in  Lancaster et al. (2007) . 
 
 
 Region of Interest Based Analysis 
 ROI analyses were used to test neuroanatomically-specific  a priori  hypotheses regarding activity in the speech motor control network under conditions in which somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech production. For the present study, BOLD responses were assessed within a set of 39 pre-defined cortical, subcortical, and cerebellar ROIs  1  in each hemisphere. A schematic of the ROIs is shown in  Supplementary Fig. 1 . Tests performed were used to determine which of these regions showed significant effects for each contrast of interest, to test the set of regions for significant laterality effects within each contrast of interest, and to extract data for effective connectivity analysis. 
 The ROI analysis eliminated the need for the non-linear spatial normalization and smoothing steps of the voxel-based analysis; image pre-processing was otherwise identical to that of the voxel-based analysis. Freesurfer image processing software ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu ) was used to segment gray and white matter structures ( Fischl et al., 2002 ) and to reconstruct cortical surfaces from each subject’s anatomical volume ( Dale et al., 1999 ;  Fishl et al., 1999 ). Subcortical ROIs were parcellated according to a training set provided by Freesurfer ( Fischl et al., 2002 ). Cortical and cerebellar regions were parcellated based on a parcellation scheme tailored specifically for speech studies ( Tourville and Guenther, 2003 ) using Freesurfer ( Fischl et al., 2004 ). ROI masks were inspected following Freesurfer classification by an experienced human rater (JAT), and manual edits were made as needed. 
 Analysis of the BOLD responses within each ROI was performed according to the procedure described by  Nieto-Castanon et al. (2003) . Briefly, BOLD responses were averaged across all voxels within each ROI mask, and these mean regional responses for each stimulus event were modeled using a finite impulse response (FIR) basis function with a single time bin spanning the two consecutive volumes. The same set of condition-related regressors used in the voxel-based analyses ( speech ,  perturbed speech, perturbed non-speech,  and  baseline)  were used in the design matrix of the ROI analyses to model the average regional responses. 
 Group level effects were assessed by first computing regional contrasts for each subject. The regional contrasts were then pooled across subjects and individual ROIs were tested for significance using one-sample  t -tests and thresholded at  p FDR  < 5%. Since a voxel-wise FDR correction can typically be more liberal than a region-wise FDR correction (cf.,  Chumbley and Friston, 2009 ) we applied a less conservative threshold of p < 5% corrected for multiple comparisons for the ROI analyses. Paired left and right ROIs were subsequently tested for laterality effects using a paired  t -test. In a first set of laterality tests,  a priori  hypotheses that responses in inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis , inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  and ventral premotor cortex are significantly left-lateralized under normal speech conditions (cf.  Ghosh et al., 2008 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ) were tested. Based on the findings from the  auditory  feedback control study, we also tested the hypothesis that responses in the ventral premotor cortex would become right-lateralized when compensatory responses are induced (cf.  Tourville et al., 2008 ). Significance for the three laterality tests was determined using a threshold of  p  < 5%. Laterality effects for the remaining set of regions were tested using paired  t -tests and thresholded at  p FDR  < 5%. Regional effect sizes for all ROIs were normalized by the mean significant ( p  < 5%) effect of the  perturbed speech-speech  contrast and visualized on a bar plot. 
 
 
 Structural Equation Modeling 
 Structural equation modeling (SEM) was performed to assess inter-regional effective connectivity between five cortical regions hypothesized to be part of the somatosensory feedback control network for speech production (see  Golfinopoulos et al. (2010 ) including bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus,  pars triangularis , ventral premotor cortex, and ventral motor cortex; anatomical boundaries for these ROIs are provided in  Supplementary Table 1  and highlighted in gray in  Supplementary Fig. 1 ). ROI time series data were generated by first determining the regional response for each of the five ROIs in each functional volume. Each time series was limited to those voxels with an effect size in the top 50 th  percentile for that region in the  speech – baseline  contrast (for the number of voxels selected for each region for each subject, see  Supplementary Table 2 ). Regional responses from each functional run were divided into two series, one consisting of the first volume collected in each trial and the other consisting of the second volume collected. The two series were each linearly detrended and then averaged, yielding a single regional response for each trial, subject, and region of interest. These values were grouped by condition within each subject and then concatenated to form a time series containing average trial responses for each condition and region. Outliers (greater than three standard deviations) were removed, and the data were standardized with zero mean and unit variance. 
 Tabulated ROI data for the  speech  and  perturbed speech  conditions were used as input for the structural equation modeling analysis performed with AMOS 7 software ( http://www.spss.com/amos/index.htm ). SEM estimates interregional effective connectivity by minimizing the difference between observed regional  covariances  and those implied by a structural model (cf.,  Büchel and Friston, 1997 ). It was applied here to test whether effective connectivity between bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus and right ventral premotor cortex and inferior frontal gyrus in the hypothesized somatosensory feedback control network (shown in  Figure 4 ) increased when somatosensory feedback was perturbed during speech. Free parameters of the structural model (e.g., path coefficients and residual effects) were estimated by minimizing a maximum likelihood (ML) discrepancy function. To assess the overall fit of the model to the observed data, a chi-square test was performed since the minimum of the ML discrepancy function multiplied by the number of observations minus one is chi-square distributed with (q/2)(q+1)−p degrees of freedom (where p is the number of estimated parameters and q is the number of observed variables;  Büchel and Friston, 1997 ). The objective of this chi-square test is to  confirm  the null hypothesis that the model is correct in the population ( Schlösser et al., 2006 ). However, since the χ 2  test is sensitive to sample size and the distribution of the data, four additional goodness-of-fit indices were also used in the present study: the goodness-of-fit index (GFI), the adjusted goodness-of-fit (AGFI), the root mean square residual (RMR), and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). 
 In order to test for  task-specific  changes in effective connectivity we used a stacked model approach ( Büchel and Friston, 1997 ) comparing a  null model  (in which all free parameters are constrained to be equal across the two conditions) and an  alternative model  (in which path coefficients are permitted to vary between the two conditions). The residual variances were constrained to be equal across the conditions in both the null and alternative models to reduce the number of estimated parameters. A χ 2  difference test was performed in which the χ 2 -value for the alternative model was subtracted from the χ 2 -value of the null model to determine whether the alternative model provides a significantly better fit to the data than does the null model. A significant χ 2 diff  -value (p < 5%) provides evidence that the null model, in which parameters are constrained to be the same for the two conditions, should be rejected, thus providing evidence that the effective connectivity significantly differs across certain paths between the two conditions. In order to determine which path coefficients were statistically significantly different between the two conditions pair-wise comparisons of path coefficients for the two conditions were performed using two-tailed  z -tests. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Responses 
 Although it is not currently possible to measure kinematic data for the articulators inside the MR scanner, kinematic data of a single subject were recorded in a pilot experiment prior to the fMRI experiment to determine whether subjects could compensate for the dynamic jaw perturbation. The results of this pilot indicated that the subject’s average jaw height (averaged across all trials of a particular stimulus) for each stimulus was 1.3–2.4 mm lower during the final vowel on  perturbed speech  trials than on  speech  trials, while the average tongue blade height during the final vowel was nearly identical in the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions (average differences of less than 0.2 mm for all stimuli). These data suggest that the subject compensated for the downward jaw perturbation by moving the tongue upward relative to the jaw in order to achieve the oral cavity constriction necessary for appropriate acoustic production of the final vowel. Increased upward movements of the tongue to accomplish oral constriction in response to unexpected jaw perturbations during speech is consistent with earlier reports of behavioral studies that indicate the ability of speakers to successfully compensate for sudden jaw perturbations (e.g.,  Folkins and Abbs, 1975 ;  Gomi et al., 2002 ;  Ito et al., 2005 ;  Kelso et al., 1984 ;  Shaimain, 1989 ). 
 
 
 Neural Responses 
 
 Effects of balloon placement 
 Before performing direct comparisons between condition-specific brain activations, we assessed differences in the neural responses of the two cohorts of subjects with the balloon positioned on the right and left side of the mouth. No voxels survived the two-sample  t -tests ( p FDR  < 5%) for differences between the left and right balloon cohorts (n left balloon cohort  = 6, n right balloon cohort  = 7) in any of the contrasts of interest ( speech-baseline ,  perturbed non-speech - baseline ,  perturbed speech - perturbed non-speech, perturbed speech - speech, (perturbed speech-speech)-(perturbed non-speech-baseline)) , suggesting that the average brain activation patterns did not significantly depend on the placement of the balloon within the speakers’ mouths. The condition effects described below were based on the group data from both cohorts. 
 
 
 Effects of condition 
 Fig. 2A  presents the normalized group effects of the  speech – baseline  contrast on a cortical surface rendering following a mixed effects analysis ( t  > 4.13, df = 12,  p FDR  < 1%). The highest normalized effect was located in left ventral somatosensory cortex (MNI  xyz  = [−58, −10, 40]; normalized  β  = 4.29; see  Table 1 ). Significant increased effects were also observed in pre-supplementary motor area (preSMA) and supplementary motor area (SMA) and bilaterally in ventral motor cortex and auditory cortical areas along the superior temporal gyrus and within the Sylvian fissure. Subcortically, there were increased effects bilaterally in the putamen, pallidum, and thalamus. In the cerebellum, speech-related effects were revealed bilaterally in lobule VI. 
 The comparison of unexpected somatosensory perturbation in the  absence  of speech with silent observation demonstrated in  Fig. 2B  revealed significant increased bilateral effects along the precentral gyrus ( t  > 4.34, df = 12,  p FDR  < 1%). Compared to the  speech – baseline  contrast, the highest normalized effect size for the  perturbed non-speech – baseline  contrast shifted from left to right hemisphere ventral somatosensory cortex (MNI  xyz  = [62, −8, 36]; normalized  β  = 4.02). Significant increased effects were also evident within SMA and preSMA, bilateral putamen, and right hemisphere thalamus. In the cerebellum, small clusters of increased effects were found within bilateral superior lateral (lobule VI) and left inferior (lobule VIII) regions. 
 Fig. 2C  demonstrates the normalized group effects for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech  ( t  > 4.32, df = 12,  p FDR  < 1%). This contrast characterizes perturbation-related responses in the presence of speech that are not necessarily speech specific. It should be noted that we do not expect or assume that all of the areas involved in somatosensory feedback control would be speech specific (cf.,  Christoffels et al., 2007 ). The maximum normalized effect size for the  perturbed speech – speech  contrast was located in right anterior supramarginal gyrus (MNI  xyz  = [62, −20, 26]; normalized  β  = 2.33). Significant increased effects were noted within preSMA, SMA, and inferior frontal, precentral, and supramarginal gyri. Subcortically, increased effects were observed in thalamus and bilateral inferior posterior cerebellum (lobule VIII). 
 No voxels demonstrated a response that passed a whole-brain corrected significance threshold of  p FDR  < 1% for the  perturbed speech - perturbed non-speech  contrast (characterizing speech-related areas in the presence of a perturbation, that are not necessarily  specific  or  sensitive  to processes involved in somatosensory feedback control). However, the ROI analysis did demonstrate significant increased effects for many of the same regions that showed significant increased effects for the  speech – baseline  contrast. Specifically, for the  perturbed speech - perturbed non-speech  contrast significant increased effects were observed for bilateral ventral motor cortex, SMA, preSMA, and auditory cortical regions along the superior temporal gyrus and within the Sylvian fissure (see  Supplementary Fig. 4 ). Subcortically, significant increased effects were found for right hemisphere putamen and anterior medial cerebellum and bilateral pallidum and thalamus. 
 The interaction in this experimental design [ (perturbed speech - speech ) - ( perturbed non-speech - baseline )] presents the voxels that show a co-dependence between speech production and perturbation. Two clusters of activity for which the effect of perturbation is greater during speech survived a corrected significance threshold ( t  > 7.84, df = 12,  p FDR  < 1%;  Supplementary Fig. 2 ). The clusters were located within right anterior insula (peak MNI  xyz  = [46, 18, −8]; normalized  β  = 1.88) and left superior frontal gyrus (peak MNI  xyz  = [0, 32, 52]; normalized  β  = 1.70). While this contrast is informative, indicating that the significant increased effects observed in anterior insula and left superior frontal gyrus are specific to the  perturbed speech  condition, as noted above, we do not assume that all of the areas involved in somatosensory feedback control would be purely speech specific (cf.,  Christoffels et al., 2007 ). This contrast may also be limited by the fact that it assumes a large amount of task additivity through the use of multiple subtractions, which has been called under question in the past (e.g.,  Sidtis et al., 1999 ). 
 The standard normalization procedure in voxel-based analyses falls short of ensuring alignment of the structural, and presumably functional, regions across even a small subject cohort ( Nieto-Castanon et al., 2003 ). In particular, two adjacent points across the bank of a major sulcus, separated by less than a millimeter in 3-D volume space, may lie several centimeters apart with respect to their distance along the cortical sheet. Isotropic smoothing in volume space ignores this distinction, blurring responses from two potentially different functional regions. The limitation in spatial sensitivity of voxel-based analysis can be overcome by comparing functional responses within like anatomical regions of interest across subjects. We have developed a parcellation scheme that delimits regions of interest for the cerebral cortex and cerebellum based on an individual subject’s neuroanatomical landmarks (See  Supplementary Fig. 1 ;  Tourville and Guenther, 2003 ). This parcellation scheme provides an automatic and standardized method to delineate ROIs that are particularly relevant for neuroimaging studies of speech. We supplemented our voxel-based analyses with region-of interest (ROI) based analyses ( Nieto-Castanon et al., 2003 ). Results from the ROI analysis confirmed our initial hypothesis that the ventral premotor cortex and the inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis  were significantly left-lateralized for speech relative to baseline ( Fig. 3 ;  t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12;  p  < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). Tests of hemispheric differences on the remaining ROIs for the  speech – baseline  contrast yielded a significantly greater left hemisphere effect for the ventral motor cortex and a significantly greater right hemisphere effect for ventral somatosensory cortex, planum temporale, and superior posterior medial cerebellum ( t two-tailed  > 3.28, df = 12,  p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs;  Supplementary Fig. 3 ). Laterality tests for the  perturbed speech – perturbed non-speech  contrast also demonstrated a significantly greater left hemisphere effect for ventral motor cortex ( t two-tailed  > 3.40, df = 12,  p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs;  Supplementary Fig. 4 ). 
 The normalized effect sizes for cortical regions of the  perturbed non-speech – baseline  and  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrasts demonstrated a tendency to be right-lateralized (See  Supplementary Fig. 5  for the results from the  perturbed non-speech  –  baseline  contrast). Initial tests of laterality confirmed that the inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis , inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis,  and ventral premotor cortex were significantly right-lateralized for the  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrast ( t two-tailed  > 2.18, df = 12,  p  < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs; see  Fig. 3 ). Exploratory tests of laterality on the remaining 36 ROIs demonstrated that the planum polare, planum temporale, anterior dorsal and posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus, preSMA, anterior cingulate gyrus, thalamus, and anterior and posterior supramarginal gyrus were significantly right-lateralized ( t two-tailed  > 2.79, df = 12,  p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs;  Supplementary Fig. 6 ). None of the ROIs were significantly left-lateralized in the  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrast. Finally, we assessed whether the 39 ROIs showed a significant interaction between speech and perturbation. None of the 39 ROIs demonstrated statistically significant increases in effects for this interaction (See  Supplementary Fig. 7 ). 
 
 
 Regional interactions 
 Structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to empirically evaluate differences in the functional connectivity between the  speech  and  perturbed speech  conditions for a set of five cortical regions of interest hypothesized to be part of the somatosensory feedback control network for speech. According to the DIVA model, somatosensory error signals in bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus are transformed into compensatory motor commands issued from bilateral ventral motor cortex via connections through right inferior frontal and ventral premotor cortex ( Golfinopoulos et al., 2010 ;  Tourville and Guenther, 2010 ). The increased activity in these areas due to the somatosensory perturbation noted in the  perturbed speech - speech  contrast should therefore be accompanied by increased effective connectivity between bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus and right ventral premotor cortex and right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  (cf., auditory feedback control network characterized by  Tourville et al., 2008 ). To test this prediction, effective connectivity within the network shown in  Figure 4  for the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions was compared. The implied covariance of the model adequately fits the empirical covariance across all conditions (χ 2 uncon  = 3.71, df uncon  = 5,  p uncon  = 0.59) and met all goodness-of-fit criteria (GFI uncon  = 1.00, AGFI uncon  = 1.00, RMR uncon = 0.02, RMSEA uncon  < 0.01). 
 The unconstrained model, in which connection strengths were allowed to vary across the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions, provided a significantly better fit to the data than did the fully constrained null model ( χ 2 diff  = 26.42, df = 10,  p  < 0.01), indicating differences in global effective connectivity when the perturbation was applied during speech as compared to the  speech  condition. Estimates of the path coefficients along with their corresponding standard errors,  z  scores, and  p -values for both the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions are summarized in  Table 2 . The last two columns of the table list the  z  scores and associated  p -values for pair-wise parameter differences between the two conditions. Pair-wise comparisons of the path coefficients demonstrated that positive connection strengths from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right anterior supramarginal gyrus and from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right ventral premotor cortex were significantly greater for  perturbed speech  as compared to  speech . The reciprocal path connections between the right anterior supramarginal gyrus and the right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  were also significantly greater for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . Likewise, the reciprocal path connections between the right ventral premotor cortex and right ventral primary motor cortex were significantly greater for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 In this study we utilized an unexpected perturbation paradigm in order to investigate the neural substrates underlying the somatosensory feedback control of speech. The unpredictability of the perturbation is critical since it prevents subjects from adapting their feedforward commands (or motor programs) over multiple trials to minimize the influence of the perturbation on speech motor output. The dynamic perturbation prompts subjects to rely more directly on the subsystem that monitors somatosensory feedback to determine whether or not it is within the expected range and, when it is not, contribute to the adjustment of speech motor commands to produce the desired speech sound. Voxel-based analysis revealed a peak normalized effect in right anterior supramarginal gyrus for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . Increased activity within right supramarginal gyrus has previously been observed in conditions in which there was a discrepancy between expected and afferent somatosensory feedback ( Baciu et al., 2000 ;  Jenmalm et al., 2006 ;  Naito et al., 2005 ;  Schmitz et al., 2005 ). ROI functional analyses, using  a priori  defined anatomical ROIs, demonstrated that effects in anterior supramarginal gyrus were significant in both hemispheres when somatosensory feedback was unexpectedly perturbed during speech relative to speech, but not when speech was produced under unperturbed conditions relative to baseline. Typically, activity in bilateral supramarginal gyrus is not active during normal speech production (for a review see  Indefrey and Levelt, 2004 ). One possible reason for the lack of activity in this region as predicted by the DIVA model is that under normal (unperturbed) conditions somatosensory feedback control contributes little to the speech of fluent adult speakers, since feedforward speech motor programs for frequently produced syllables are highly tuned over the course of development and thus speakers make few, if any, significant somatosensory errors ( Golfinopoulos et al., 2010 ;  Guenther, 1994 ,  1995 ,  2006 ;  Guenther et al., 2006 ;  Tourville and Guenther 2010 ). Recent evidence substantiating this hypothesis comes from an fMRI study performed by  Blakemore et al. (1998) . The authors demonstrated that activity within bilateral parietal operculum is suppressed during self-generated tactile stimulation as compared to externally produced stimulation. These findings provide support for the theory that an efference copy of motor commands reduces tactile sensation of self-generated stimulation by accurately predicting the sensory consequences of movement ( Blakemore et al., 2000 ). Since this pivotal study, several neuroimaging studies involving speech and non-speech monitoring have demonstrated bilateral engagement of supramarginal gyrus under conditions in which there is a discrepancy between expected and afferent sensory feedback (e.g.,  Downar et al., 2000 ;  Fink et al., 1999 ;  Hashimoto and Sakai, 2003 ). The structural equation modeling analysis of the present study demonstrated a significantly greater influence of left anterior supramarginal gyrus on right anterior supramarginal gyrus when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech relative to speech. The finding that bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus are engaged and functionally coupled under conditions in which there is a mismatch between expected and actual somatosensory feedback during speech provides compelling support to the DIVA model’s prediction that these regions operate together within a larger neural network to influence speech production when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech. 
 In addition to increased right-lateralized supramarginal gyrus activity, we observed increased effects in bilateral inferior posterior cerebellum (lobule VIII) when somatosensory feedback was unexpectedly perturbed during speech relative to speech. Increased activation in this inferior posterior region of the cerebellum along with more superior fields has been associated with non-speech tongue and lip movements ( Grodd et al., 2001 ). Cerebellar lobule VIII has been associated with the timing of bimanual complex movements ( Habas et al., 2004 ;  Habas and Cabanis, 2006 ) and discrete index finger movements, where somatosensory feedback can influence movement transitions ( Habas and Cabanis, 2008 ) as well as for compensatory responses to unexpected execution errors ( Diedrichsen et al., 2005 ). In speech production, increased lobule VIII activation has been associated with the  overt  production of repeated syllables ( Riecker et al., 2005 ,  2006 ), syllable sequences ( Bohland and Guenther, 2006 ), monosyllables ( Ghosh et al., 2008 ), and compensatory responses to shifts in auditory feedback ( Tourville et al., 2008 ), as well as  covert  singing production relative to  covert  speech production ( Callan et al., 2006 ). Although the functional recruitment of cerebellar lobule VIII in speech motor control remains largely under speculation, we suggest that this region may facilitate sensory cortical areas in the monitoring and/or adjustment of articulator movements when sensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech. 
 Recent fMRI studies in our laboratory have demonstrated a leftward asymmetry in both the posterior inferior frontal gyrus and ventral premotor cortex for speech under normal (unperturbed) conditions ( Ghosh et al., 2008 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ). This trend is supported by the  speech-baseline  contrast of the present study, where effects were left-lateralized in the inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis  and ventral premotor cortex. When compared to speech, the unexpected balloon inflation during speech that prompts subjects to adjust their planned articulator trajectories resulted in right-lateralized activity within precentral and inferior frontal gyrus.  Baciu and colleagues (2000)  also reported increased activation within right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  in association with compensatory responses to static perturbations of the lips during the articulation of a vowel that requires lip protrusion. In addition, right inferior frontal gyrus engagement has previously been implicated for conditions in which monitoring demands are increased due to a conflict between sensory expectations and feedback ( Downar et al., 2000 ;  Fink et al., 1999 ;  Naito et al., 2005 ;  Schmitz et al., 2005 ) and when visually observing orofacial movements ( Buccino et al., 2001 ). Collectively, these studies suggest that right inferior frontal gyrus maintains sensorimotor representations and may be involved in the monitoring and/or adjustment of ongoing speech movements. Support for this hypothesis was demonstrated by the structural equation modeling analysis in the present study. Compared to  speech , the  perturbed speech  condition involved a significantly greater  reciprocal  influence between right anterior supramarginal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis . These results suggest that projections between right higher-order somatosensory cortical and inferior frontal regions are critical for distinguishing between  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions and may relay sensory error induced by unexpected somatosensory perturbation to right inferior frontal gyrus to facilitate sensory feedback monitoring and/or the correction of speech movements. 
 The right-lateralized contribution from ventral premotor cortex associated with  perturbed speech  relative to  speech  differentiates our study from the earlier fMRI experiment on somatosensory feedback perturbation during speech in which no lateral premotor cortex activity was reported in association with compensatory responses during speech ( Baciu et al., 2000 ). However, major differences between the study designs including the use of a static somatosensory feedback perturbation in which subjects may have adapted their feedforward motor commands to compensate make it very difficult to interpret the lack of activation in this region in the earlier study. The results of several neuroimaging studies do support our findings of right-lateralized contributions from ventral premotor cortex for the generation of motor responses to unexpected changes in sensory feedback ( Grafton et al., 2008 ;  Houde and Nagarajan, 2007 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ). Findings from the non-human primate literature indicate that ventral premotor cortex receives projections from parietal area 7b ( Cavada and Goldman-Rakic, 1989 ;  Neal et al., 1990 ), a region thought to be the homologous region of human supramarginal gyrus ( Aboitiz and García, 1997 ), and projects to primary motor cortex ( Barbas and Pandya, 1987 ). Projections such as these provide a substrate for sensory error during speech movements to influence speech motor plans (cf.,  Watkins et al., 2008 ). In the present study, structural equation modeling demonstrated a significant increased influence between left anterior supramarginal gyrus and right ventral premotor cortex as well as a significantly greater reciprocal influence between right ventral premotor cortex and right ventral motor cortex for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . Taken together, these results suggest that right-lateralized ventral premotor cortex is well situated to be at the heart of a sensory motor circuit responsible for translating sensory errors into corrective motor commands when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech production. 
 Increased activity of right-lateralized prefrontal and premotor cortices was accompanied by increased bilateral ventral motor cortical activity in the  perturbed speech - speech  contrast. Activity in bilateral ventral motor cortex is critical for speech production (for a review see  Indefrey and Levelt, 2004 ), but is often shown to be left-lateralized during overt speech production (e.g.,  Ghosh et al., 2008 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ). Additional support for this trend comes from the present study in which we found a significantly greater left hemisphere effect for ventral motor cortex in the  speech-baseline  contrast. The ROI functional analyses demonstrated that this left hemisphere asymmetry in ventral motor cortex observed for the  speech-baseline  contrast does not persist for the  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrast. Bilateral (without significant laterality) recruitment of ventral motor cortex has previously been demonstrated for compensatory responses to auditory-feedback-based perturbations during speech ( Tourville et al., 2008 ). Direct evidence for left primary motor cortical involvement during dynamic somatosensory-feedback based perturbations of speech comes from a recent transcranial magnetic stimulation study by  Ito et al. (2005)  implicating the region in upper lip compensatory responses to unexpected jaw perturbations. 
 The  perturbed speech - speech  contrast also demonstrated increased effects in bilateral anterior insula, and right hemisphere anterior cingulate gyrus and pre-supplementary motor area (preSMA). Increased anterior cingulate cortex and bilateral insula recruitment is similar to the pattern of activity observed in a recent fMRI study on verbal self-monitoring ( Christoffels et al., 2007 ).  Christoffels et al. (2007)  propose that speech monitoring may largely rely on non-language specific areas such as the insular and anterior cingulate cortices that have previously been implicated in general performance monitoring (e.g.,  Botvinick et al, 2001 ;  Fiehler et al., 2004 ). In the present study, the peak effect in anterior cingulate cortex (MNI  xyz  = 4 −3 40) was located in the right hemisphere posterior to the vertical plane passing through the anterior commissure (VAC). A second peak (MNI  xyz  = 2 16 22) was found anterior to the VAC. While activity in the more posterior region is generally observed during simple motor tasks and somatosensory stimulation ( Picard and Strick, 1996 ), activity in the anterior region has been implicated in more complex aspects of motor behavior including the monitoring of response errors (for a review see  Ridderinkhof et al., 2004 ).  Christoffels et al. (2007)  propose that projections from bilateral insula to the anterior cingulate facilitate speech monitoring by conveying contextual information about the sensory state of the periphery. This theory suggests that the significant increased effects in bilateral anterior insula and right anterior cingulate gyrus for the  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrast reflect increased monitoring of speech output. An alternative (though not necessarily incompatible) proposal for right inferior frontal (including inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis  and insula) and preSMA activation comes from a recent fMRI study by  Xue et al. (2008)  that implicated these regions in a general (non-language specific) mechanism for inhibitory control.  Xue et al. (2008)  demonstrated that successful  inhibition  of speech and manual motor acts involves increased activation of right inferior frontal regions and preSMA. In light of these recent findings, the increased effects in right inferior frontal and preSMA regions in the  perturbed speech  –  speech  contrast may reflect a common strategy among subjects to inhibit planned jaw movements when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed. It should be noted that the right anterior insula was also implicated in the interaction contrast ( perturbed speech  –  speech ) – ( perturbed non - speech  –  baseline ), indicating that the effects observed in anterior insula show a co-dependence between speech production and perturbation, which is more consistent with the proposal of an increased verbal monitoring role for anterior insula during the  perturbed speech  condition (cf.,  Christoffels et al., 2007 ). However, since the present study did not investigate the neural responses associated with somatosensory error monitoring independently of error correction during speech, it remains difficult to explicitly assign functional roles to the pre-supplementary motor area, insular and anterior cingulate corticies on the basis of this study alone. 
 For more than a century researchers have implicated a role for left posterior inferior frontal and/or ventral premotor regions in the production of speech ( Broca, 1861 ;  Penfield and Rasmussen, 1950 ;  Penfield and Roberts, 1959 ;  Raichle et. al., 1994 ;  Riecker et al., 2000 ;  Sidtis et al., 2003 ;  Xue et al., 2008 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ;  Ghosh et al., 2008 ;  Papoutsi et al., 2009 ). Damage to these regions is often associated with apraxia of speech (e.g.,  Hillis et al., 2004 ;  Robin et al., 2007 ), a speech motor disorder characterized by an inability to properly access speech motor programs in the absence of morphological defect of the speech musculature. A notable finding from the present study was a general greater dependency on right hemisphere inferior frontal and premotor regions when compensation was prompted by the unexpected inflation of the balloon during speech relative to speech. Increased right hemisphere engagement of inferior frontal and/or lateral premotor cortical regions has been associated with conditions in which compensatory responses were prompted by sensory feedback error in other neuroimaging studies of speech (e.g.,  Baciu et al., 2000 ;  Houde and Nagarajan, 2007 ;  Toyomura et al., 2007 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ). We propose that left-lateralized inferior frontal and lateral premotor cortex contributes to speech movements by using well-learned (feedforward) speech motor programs, while right-lateralized inferior frontal and lateral premotor cortex contributes to speech movements by using sensory feedback. Such a theory is consistent with reports from clinical studies that left hemisphere damaged aphasic and apraxia of speech subjects are largely spared in terms of their ability to compensate for somatosensory perturbations during speech ( Baum et al., 1997 ;  Baum, 1999 ;  Jacks, 2008 ). This theory also explains why damage to right hemisphere premotor areas typically does not result in apraxia of speech ( Duffy, 2005 ), since, according to this theory, feedforward speech motor programs are typically maintained in the left hemisphere. 
 Several methodological issues regarding the current study should be acknowledged. First, direct verification of behavioral performance during the scanning session was not possible due to current limitations in technology that prevent the measuring of the kinematics of the articulators inside the MR scanner. In addition, due to a technical malfunction, audio recordings of subjects’ productions inside the scanner were lost, preventing acoustic analysis that could confirm whether subjects’ acoustic responses to the somatosensory perturbation met the acoustic requirements of speech sound targets. It should be noted, however, that interpretation of the data from the present study are not dependent on the subject achieving complete compensation in response to the perturbation; instead it requires only that the somatosensory feedback control network for speech be invoked by the unexpected somatosensory feedback perturbation (i.e. that the somatosensory subsystem detected that the jaw was no longer moving in the normal way and attempted to adjust the kinematics of functionally relevant but unimpeded articulators to respond to the sudden perturbation). Our pilot articulometry results as well as the results of a large number of previous studies have shown the ability of subjects to compensate for jaw perturbations (e.g.,  Folkins and Abbs, 1975 ;  Gay et al., 1981 ;  Gomi et al., 2002 ;  Ito et al., 2005 ;  Kelso et al., 1984 ;  Lane et al, 2005 ;  Lindblom et al., 1979 ;  Nasir and Ostry, 2006 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;  Shaimain, 1989 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ). Moreover, several of these earlier studies have implicated subjects’ use of somatosensory feedback to generate compensatory responses to jaw perturbations (e.g.,  Lindblom et al., 1979 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ;  Nasir and Ostry, 2006 ,  2008 ,  2009 ), lending support to the claim that the somatosensory feedback control network was invoked by the unexpected jaw perturbation in this study. Second, like many earlier studies examining the neural correlates of speech monitoring (e.g.,  Baciu et al., 2000 ;  Fu et al., 2006 ;  Hashimoto and Sakai, 2003 ;  McGuire et al., 1996 ;  Tourville et al., 2008 ;  Toyomura et al., 2007 ) an external stimulus was introduced in the process of investigating the neural bases of somatosensory feedback control. As  Christoffels and colleagues (2007)  have noted, when an external stimulus is introduced it is not entirely clear whether the associated neural findings reflect normal speech monitoring. This is an intriguing technical challenge that, as yet, has not been completely solved in terms of the somatosensory feedback control of speech production. It is worth noting, however, that the highest effect for the  perturbed speech - speech  contrast was considerably more posterior than that for the  perturbed non-speech - baseline  contrast, suggesting that additional mechanisms beyond those directly associated with the somatosensory stimulus are recruited when the stimulus is applied during speech, consistent with our interpretation. Finally, with the current study design, we cannot fully eliminate the possibility that auditory feedback also influenced motor responses during the perturbed feedback condition. Although auditory feedback was largely suppressed since subjects wore ear plugs throughout the experiment, it is possible that subjects still perceived some acoustic effects of the perturbation through residual hearing ability or bone conduction. Indeed, the ROI analysis demonstrated significant effects in right-lateralized planum temporale and in right posterior superior temporal gyrus when somatosensory feedback was unexpectedly perturbed during speech relative to speech production. Increased activity within right posterior superior temporal gyrus was also reported in the earlier somatosensory perturbation experiment in association with compensating for the static lip tube ( Baciu et al., 2000 ). In this earlier study subjects were only instructed to articulate, without voicing, the vowel stimulus, which suggests that activity in right posterior superior temporal gyrus was not directly associated with speakers hearing their own (incorrect) auditory feedback. Further study is necessary to determine whether higher-order auditory cortical activation when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech reflects concomitant auditory feedback control and/or the influence of somatosensory stimulation on auditory association areas (for a review see  Zheng, 2009 ). 
 
 Conclusion 
 The present investigation highlights the recruitment of cerebellar, motor, and fronto-parietal regions and a generally greater contribution from right hemisphere cortical regions for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . These findings augment the currently scant imaging data on the neural substrates underlying somatosensory feedback control during speech. Voxel-based and ROI-based analyses indicated that unexpected perturbation of somatosensory feedback during speech compared to speech is associated with bilateral responses in anterior supramarginal gyrus, with a somewhat larger response in the right hemisphere. This supports the DIVA model prediction that under conditions in which somatosensory feedback is not within the expected range during speech movements, cells within bilateral supramarginal gyrus (the location of the model’s  somatosensory error map ) are highly active ( Golfinopoulos et al. 2010 ;  Guenther, 2006 ;  Guenther et al., 2006 ;  Tourville and Guenther, 2010 ). The contrast of  perturbed speech  with  speech  also revealed increased activity within right-lateralized ventral premotor cortex and inferior frontal gyrus. Structural equation modeling revealed a significant increased influence from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right anterior supramarginal gyrus and from left anterior supramarginal gyrus to right ventral premotor cortex as well as a significant increased reciprocal influence between right ventral premotor cortex and right ventral motor cortex and right anterior supramarginal gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  for  perturbed speech  relative to  speech . These results suggest that bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus, right inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis , right ventral premotor and motor cortices are functionally coupled and contribute to adjustments in speech motor output when somatosensory feedback is unexpectedly perturbed during speech. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 1 
 The parcellation scheme indicating the cortical and cerebellar regions of interest. Dashed lines indicate neuroanatomical boundaries between adjacent regions. The intra-Sylvian region is schematized as an exposed flattened surface as indicated by the red arrow. The detached labeled cerebellum is shown in the lower left and lower right. Highlighted in gray are the right-hemisphere cortical regions included in the structural equation modeling analysis (the anterior supramarginal gyrus from both hemispheres was included in the SEM model). ROI abbreviations: aCGg = anterior cingulate gyrus; aCO = anterior central operculum; adPMC = anterior dorsal premotor cortex; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; Ag = angular gyrus; aINS = anterior insula; aITg = anterior inferior temporal gyrus; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMFg = anterior middle frontal gyrus; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; Amyg = amygdala; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; aTFg = anterior temporal fusiform gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nuclei; dMC = dorsal primary motor cortex; dSC = dorsal somatosensory cortex; FMC = frontal medial cortex; FO = frontal operculum; FOC = fronto-orbital cortex; FP = frontal pole; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; Hip = hippocampus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus,  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus,  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; ITO = inferior temporal occipital gyrus; Lg = lingual gyrus; mdPMC = middle dorsal premotor cortex; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; OC = occipital cortex; Pal = pallidum; pCGg = posterior cingulate gyrus; pCO = posterior central operculum; PCN = precuneus cortex; pdPMC = posterior dorsal premotor cortex; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; PHg = parahippocampal gyrus; pINS = posterior insula; pITg = posterior inferior temporal gyrus; pMFg = posterior middle frontal gyrus; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; pTFg = posterior temporal fusiform gyrus; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Put = putamen; SCC = subcallosal cortex; SFg = superior frontral gyrus; slCB = superior lateral cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; smCB = superior medial cerebellum; SPL = superior parietal lobule; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; Tha = thalamus; TOFg = temporal occipital fusiform gyrus; TP = temporal pole; vMC = ventral primary motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 03 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 2 
 Group maps displaying the normalized effect sizes of voxels that surpassed the threshold (t  (perturbed speech – speech)-(perturbed non-speech – baseline), 12  > 7.84; p FDR  < 1%) and show a co-dependence between speech production and perturbation. BOLD responses are overlaid on the SPM2 single-subject canonical T1 dataset. The anatomical left is on the left side of the coronal image; the y coordinate indicates the anterior-posterior location of the slice in MNI space. The posterior end is located on the left side of the sagittal image; the x coordinate indicates the location of the slice relative to the midline in MNI space. The coronal slice ( left ) presents the peak normalized effect in right anterior insula and the sagittal slice ( right ) demonstrates the peak normalized effect in left superior frontal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 04 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 3 
 Normalized effects are shown for 39 ROIs for the  speech – baseline  contrast. Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p  FDR  < 5%). The p-value in red is provided for the three ROIs for which there were specific laterality hypotheses and demonstrated significant laterality effects in the  speech - baseline  contrast ( Figure 3 ; t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12; p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). The  p-value  in black is provided for the remaining 36 ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects (t two-tailed  > 3.28, df = 12, p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs). Abbreviations: aCO = anterior central operculum; aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; aINS = anterior insula; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nucleus; FO = frontal operculum; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; pINS = posterior insula; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; Tha = thalamus; vMC = ventral motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 05 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 4 
 Normalized effects are shown for 39 ROIs for the  perturbed speech – perturbed non-speech  contrast. Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p FDR  < 5%). The p-value in red is provided for the three ROIs for which there were specific laterality hypotheses and demonstrated significant laterality effects in the  perturbed speech – perturbed non-speech  contrast ( Figure 3 ; t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12; p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). The  p-value  in black is provided for the remaining 36 ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects (t two-tailed  > 3.40, df = 12, p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs). Abbreviations: aCO = anterior central operculum; aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; aINS = anterior insula; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nucleus; FO = frontal operculum; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; pINS = posterior insula; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; Tha = thalamus; vMC = ventral motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 06 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 5 
 Normalized effects are shown for 39 ROIs for the  perturbed non - speech – baseline  contrast. Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p  FDR  < 5%). The p-value in red is provided for the three ROIs for which there were specific laterality hypotheses and demonstrated significant laterality effects in the  perturbed non-speech - baseline  contrast (t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12; p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). The  p-value  in black is provided for the remaining 36 ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects (t two-tailed  > 2.99, df = 12, p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs). Abbreviations: aCO = anterior central operculum; aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; aINS = anterior insula; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nucleus; FO = frontal operculum; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; pINS = posterior insula; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; Tha = thalamus; vMC = ventral motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 07 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 6 
 Normalized effects are shown for 39 ROIs for the  perturbed speech – speech  contrast. Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p  FDR  < 5%). The p-value in red is provided for the three ROIs for which there were specific laterality hypotheses and demonstrated significant laterality effects in the  perturbed speech - speech  contrast ( Figure 3 ; t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12; p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). The  p-value  in black is provided for the remaining 36 ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects (t two-tailed  > 2.79, df = 12, p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs). Abbreviations: aCO = anterior central operculum; aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; aINS = anterior insula; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nucleus; FO = frontal operculum; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; pINS = posterior insula; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; Tha = thalamus; vMC = ventral motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 08 
 
 Supplementary Fig. 7 
 Normalized effects are shown for 39 ROIs for the ( perturbed speech – speech) – (perturbed non-speech – baseline)  contrast. Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p FDR  < 5%). The p-value in red is provided for the three ROIs for which there were specific laterality hypotheses and demonstrated significant laterality effects in the ( perturbed speech – speech) – (perturbed non-speech – baseline)  contrast ( Figure 3 ; t two-tailed  > 2.18; df = 12; p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). The  p-value  in black is provided for the remaining 36 ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects (t two-tailed  > 4.34, df = 12, p FDR  < 5% for tests on 36 ROIs). Abbreviations: aCO = anterior central operculum; aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; adSTs = anterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; aINS = anterior insula; alCB = anterior lateral cerebellum; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aMTg = anterior middle temporal gyrus; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; avSTs = anterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; Caud = caudate; DCN = deep cerebellar nucleus; FO = frontal operculum; Hg = Heschl’s gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis ; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; ipmCB = inferior posterior medial cerebellum; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdSTs = posterior dorsal superior temporal sulcus; pINS = posterior insula; pMTg = posterior middle temporal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; pvSTs = posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; SMA = supplementary motor area; Tha = thalamus; vMC = ventral motor cortex; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figures and Tables 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 A.  The perturbation apparatus. A solenoid-driven air cylinder was used to apply an unanticipated mechanical load to the subject’s jaw. A tubular shaped balloon, pictured on the  left , was custom fashioned to fit comfortably between the molar teeth on one side of the mouth as demonstrated in  B . On perturbed trials, the air cylinder, located in the scanner control room, delivered 4–5 psi to the balloon via a long stiff plastic tube, causing the balloon to inflate to a diameter of about 1 cm within 100 ms. The inflated balloon blocked closure movements of the jaw.  C . Timeline of a single trial in the event-triggered sparse sampling protocol. At the onset of each trial, the visual stimulus appeared and remained onscreen for 3 s (blue rectangle). On perturbed trials, the balloon inflation was triggered after the onset of the trial and remained inflated until the stimulus disappeared from the screen (green). About 1 s after stimulus offset, two whole-brain volumes were acquired (A1 and A2). Data acquisition was timed to cover the peak of the hemodynamic response to speech; the putative hemodynamic response function (HRF) is schematized in red. The next trial started 3 s after data acquisition was complete, resulting in a total trial length of 11 s. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Group maps displaying the normalized effect sizes of voxels that surpassed the threshold (t speech - baseline , 12  > 4.13; t perturbed non-speech - baseline , 12  > 4.34; t perturbed speech - speech , 12  > 4.32; p FDR  < 1%) for ( A )  speech  relative to  baseline , ( B )  perturbed non-speech  relative to  baseline , and ( C)   perturbed speech  relative to  speech . BOLD responses are overlaid on the SPM2 single-subject canonical T1 dataset. Coronal slices through the cerebellum are shown to the right of the lateral cortical surfaces. The anatomical  left  is on the  left  side of each coronal image; the  y  coordinate indicates the anterior-posterior location of each slice in MNI space. In the cortical renderings of the  speech - baseline ,  perturbed non-speech - baseline , and  perturbed speech - speech  contrasts, the highest normalized effect shifts from the left to the right hemisphere and, then, posteriorly into anterior supramarginal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Normalized effects are shown for those ROIs hypothesized to be left-lateralized for speech under normal conditions, but become right-lateralized when compensatory responses are induced: inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis  (IFt), inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis  (IFo), ventral premotor cortex (vPMC). Right and left hemisphere responses are indicated by light and dark bars, respectively. Black bullets adjacent to response bars denote significant ROI level effects (p < 5%). The p-value is provided for those ROIs that demonstrated significant laterality effects for the  speech - baseline  ( left ) and the  perturbed speech - speech  ( right ) contrasts. These initial tests of laterality confirmed that activity within the IFo and vPMC showed a left-over-right asymmetry for the speech network, but along with IFt became significantly right-lateralized for the inferred somatosensory feedback control network (t two-tailed  > 2.18, df = 12, p < 5% for tests on 3 ROIs). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Schematic of the path diagram evaluated by structural equation modeling for the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions. Inter-regional effective connectivity within the network of regions shown was significantly modulated by the jaw perturbation. Path coefficients for all projections shown were significant in both conditions except that from left anterior supramarginal gyrus (aSMg) to right ventral motor cortex (vMC;  perturbed speech  p = 0.60). Pair-wise comparisons of path coefficients in the two conditions revealed significant interactions due to the somatosensory perturbation in the projections that are highlighted in bold. Abbreviations: IFt = inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis ; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Peak voxel responses for the three contrasts listed by anatomical region. 
 
 
 
 
 Region Label 
 
 Speech - Baseline 
 
 
 Perturbed non-speech – Baseline 
 
 
 Perturbed speech - Speech 
 
 
 
 Peak voxel location (x, y, z) 
 T 
 Normalized Effect 
 Peak voxel location 
 T 
 Normalized Effect 
 Peak voxel location 
 T 
 Normalized Effect 
 ROI T 
 ROI Normalized Effect 
 
 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 
 
 
 
 Rolandic Cortex 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 pdPMC 
 (−6, −12, 74) 
 (−7, −19, 69) 
 6.49 
 1.05 
 
 
 
 
 (−50, −6, 38) 
 (−48, −10, 37) 
 8.13 
 0.52 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 vPMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−60, 8, 30) 
 (−57, 3, 31) 
 5.99 
 1.16 
 4.28 
 0.87 
 
 
 
 dMC 
 (−56, −12, 50) 
 (−53, –17, 47) 
 9.05 
 3.46 
 (−44, −14, 62) 
 (−43, −20, 58) 
 5.42 
 0.94 
 (−56, −8, 38) 
 (−53, −12, 36) 
 7.24 
 1.31 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 vMC 
 (−62, −4, 34) 
 (−59, −8, 33) 
 10.65 
 2.89 
 (−62, −2, 36) 
 (−59, −6, 35) 
 9.83 
 2.74 
 (−58, −6, 30) 
 (−55, −10, 29) 
 6.45 
 1.55 
 5.40 
 1.63 
 
 
 
 vSC 
 (−58, −10, 40) 
 (−55, −14, 38) 
 10.66 
 4.29 
 (−58, −10, 42) 
 (−55, −14, 40) 
 11.61 
 3.89 
 (−58, −18, 24) 
 (−55, −20, 23) 
 8.70 
 1.81 
 7.40 
 1.93 
 
 
 
 pCO 
 (−56, −10, 10) 
 (−53, −12, 11) 
 8.05 
 2.43 
 (−46, −10, 22) 
 (−44, −13, 22) 
 6.27 
 1.53 
 (−52, −12, 12) 
 (−49, −14, 13) 
 6.68 
 1.09 
 4.88 
 1.45 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 mdPMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (18, −2, 66) 
 (15, −9, 63) 
 6.62 
 0.86 
 3.95 
 0.75 
 
 
 
 pdPMC 
 (62, −6, 46) 
 (56, −12, 46) 
 6.87 
 2.92 
 (8, −8, 72) 
 (6, −16, 68) 
 5.64 
 1.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 vPMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (62, 16, 32) 
 (56, 10, 35) 
 5.74 
 1.08 
 4.63 
 1.51 
 
 
 
 dMC 
 (46, −12, 42) 
 (41, −17, 41) 
 6.56 
 3.01 
 
 
 
 
 (54, −8, 36) 
 (49, −13, 36) 
 6.61 
 1.03 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 vMC 
 (60, −6, 36) 
 (54, −11, 37) 
 7.36 
 4.00 
 (64, 6, 28) 
 (58, 1, 31) 
 8.90 
 2.13 
 (66, 10, 14) 
 (60, 6, 18) 
 7.88 
 1.40 
 5.16 
 1.61 
 
 
 
 vSC 
 (66, −4, 30) 
 (60, −8, 32) 
 6.73 
 3.97 
 (62, −8, 36) 
 (56, −13, 36) 
 12.06 
 4.02 
 (54, −20, 42) 
 (48, −24, 41) 
 7.03 
 1.26 
 6.18 
 1.76 
 
 
 
 dSC 
 (52, −12, 58) 
 (46, −18, 56) 
 4.54 
 1.78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aCO 
 (44, 6, 6) 
 (40, 3, 11) 
 7.31 
 1.30 
 (44, −4, 12) 
 (40, −7, 15) 
 7.73 
 2.82 
 (46, 0, 18) 
 (41, −4, 21) 
 7.37 
 1.64 
 5.50 
 1.85 
 
 
 
 pCO 
 (48, −12, 22) 
 (43, −15, 23) 
 10.94 
 1.25 
 (48, −10, 18) 
 (43, −13, 20) 
 7.84 
 2.16 
 (46, −10, 16) 
 (41, −13, 18) 
 6.21 
 1.59 
 4.48 
 1.71 
 
 
 Frontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 preSMA 
 (−4, 6, 46) 
 (−5, 0, 46) 
 6.41 
 1.72 
 
 
 
 
 (−4, 8, 56) 
 (−5, 1, 55) 
 5.82 
 0.57 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 SMA 
 (−6, −2, 46) 
 (−7, −8, 45) 
 6.59 
 1.42 
 
 
 
 
 (−6, 0, 54) 
 (−7, −6, 52) 
 4.69 
 0.82 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 aCg 
 (−2, 24, 28) 
 (−3, 18, 31) 
 6.90 
 0.62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 pCg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−10, −24, 44) 
 (−11, −28, 41) 
 4.99 
 0.79 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 adPMC 
 (−8, 4, 76) 
 (−9, −5, 72) 
 5.10 
 1.85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IFo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−52, 12, 2) 
 (−49, 9, 6) 
 6.69 
 1.24 
 3.35 
 0.60 
 
 
 
 FO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−40, 20, 12) 
 (−38, 16, 16) 
 5.00 
 0.63 
 4.13 
 1.12 
 
 
 
 FOC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−32, 18, −14) 
 (−30, 16, −7) 
 4.86 
 0.84 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 pMFg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (52, 14, 46) 
 (47, 7, 47) 
 4.46 
 0.68 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 SFg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (6, 30, 58) 
 (4, 21, 59) 
 7.20 
 1.13 
 3.65 
 0.67 
 
 
 
 preSMA 
 (10, 2, 48) 
 (8, −4, 47) 
 4.40 
 0.94 
 (4, 0, 52) 
 (2, −6, 51) 
 6.27 
 2.32 
 (2, 10, 58) 
 (0, 2, 57) 
 7.46 
 1.03 
 4.83 
 1.05 
 
 
 
 SMA 
 (0, −2, 68) 
 (−2, −10, 65) 
 6.45 
 3.24 
 (2, −4, 60) 
 (0, −11, 57) 
 5.62 
 2.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aCg 
 (2, 20, 36) 
 (0, 14, 38) 
 8.73 
 1.10 
 (2, 8, 40) 
 (0, 2, 41) 
 5.28 
 1.12 
 (6, 2, 40) 
 (4, −3, 40) 
 6.11 
 1.20 
 4.07 
 0.68 
 
 
 
 IFo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (50, 20, 6) 
 (45, 16, 12) 
 5.78 
 1.29 
 4.16 
 1.22 
 
 
 
 IFt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (50, 20, 0) 
 (45, 17, 7) 
 6.05 
 1.54 
 4.74 
 0.93 
 
 
 
 FOC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (42, 20, −12) 
 (38, 18, −4) 
 8.75 
 1.16 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 FP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (12, 50, 48) 
 (10, 41, 52) 
 5.10 
 0.76 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Parietal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 aSMg 
 
 
 
 
 (−64, −22, 30) 
 (−61, −25, 28) 
 13.21 
 2.36 
 (−66, −30, 30) 
 (−63, −32, 27) 
 8.60 
 1.87 
 7.07 
 1.65 
 
 
 
 pSMg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−64, −52, 30) 
 (−61, −53, 25) 
 4.65 
 0.56 
 5.45 
 0.77 
 
 
 
 PO 
 (−46, −38, 26) 
 (−44, −39, 23) 
 8.24 
 1.64 
 (−46, −36, 24) 
 (−44, −37, 22) 
 7.77 
 2.29 
 (−54, −32, 22) 
 (−51, −33, 20) 
 5.09 
 1.39 
 5.43 
 1.77 
 
 
 
 AG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−64, −52, 24) 
 (−61, −52, 20) 
 4.92 
 0.60 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 aSMg 
 
 
 
 
 (60, −22, 26) 
 (54, −25, 26) 
 13.41 
 3.66 
 (62, −20, 26) 
 (56, −23, 26) 
 7.49 
 2.36 
 6.00 
 2.33 
 
 
 
 pSMg 
 
 
 
 
 (56, −32, 28) 
 (50, −34, 27) 
 14.31 
 2.71 
 (68, −38, 34) 
 (61, −40, 32) 
 11.29 
 1.44 
 5.02 
 1.63 
 
 
 
 PO 
 (48, −30, 22) 
 (43, −32, 22) 
 6.88 
 2.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (40, −42, 58) 
 (35, −46, 53) 
 6.33 
 0.66 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 AG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (60, −52, 18) 
 (54, −52, 16) 
 7.10 
 1.04 
 4.25 
 0.89 
 
 
 Temporal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 Hg 
 (−48, −20, 10) 
 (−46, −21, 11) 
 7.38 
 1.91 
 (−42, −18, 6) 
 (−40, −19, 7) 
 6.51 
 1.13 
 (−56, −18, 10) 
 (−53, −19, 11) 
 5.78 
 0.93 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 aSTg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−60, 0, −12) 
 (−56, 0, −8) 
 4.96 
 0.48 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 pSTg 
 (−68, −32, 10) 
 (−64, −32, 9) 
 4.56 
 1.52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PT 
 
 
 
 
 (−56, −42, 22) 
 (−53, −43, 19) 
 7.55 
 0.85 
 (−60, −38, 20) 
 (−57, −39, 18) 
 4.86 
 1.41 
 3.33 
 0.51 
 
 
 
 PP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−60, 4, −6) 
 (−56, 3, −2) 
 4.97 
 0.60 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 MTO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−62, −58, 10) 
 (−59, −56, 7) 
 5.34 
 0.62 
 4.38 
 0.59 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 TP 
 (56, 8, −6) 
 (51, 6, 0) 
 7.00 
 1.46 
 
 
 
 
 (56, 14, −12) 
 (51, 12, −5) 
 5.63 
 0.71 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Hg 
 (48, −20, 10) 
 (43, −22, 12) 
 9.06 
 2.28 
 (42, −24, 14) 
 (38, −26, 15) 
 5.40 
 1.39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 pSTg 
 (68, −22, 2) 
 (62, −23, 5) 
 5.73 
 1.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PT 
 (60, −14, 4) 
 (54, −15, 7) 
 8.77 
 2.02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PP 
 
 
 
 
 (44, −10, −6) 
 (40, −11, −1) 
 8.24 
 1.43 
 (42, −26, 4) 
 (38, −27, 6) 
 5.55 
 0.30 
 3.69 
 1.06 
 
 
 
 MTO 
 
 
 
 
 (58, −58, −2) 
 (53, −56, −2) 
 4.49 
 0.91 
 (54, −58, 8) 
 (49, −57, 7) 
 4.97 
 0.92 
 3.91 
 0.98 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 aINS 
 (−40, −6, 8) 
 (−38, −8, 10) 
 13.70 
 1.02 
 (−38, −4, 14) 
 (−36, −7, 16) 
 11.04 
 2.31 
 (−40, −2, 0) 
 (−38, −3, 3) 
 12.05 
 1.73 
 6.23 
 1.43 
 
 
 
 pINS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (−40, −20, 8) 
 (−38, −21, 9) 
 5.11 
 0.89 
 4.50 
 1.00 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 aINS 
 (36, 4, 4) 
 (32, 1, 9) 
 7.51 
 0.89 
 (46, −2, −2) 
 (42, −4, 3) 
 7.63 
 2.39 
 (44, −2, 4) 
 (40, −4, 8) 
 6.84 
 2.19 
 4.86 
 1.30 
 
 
 
 pINS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (42, −6, −6) 
 (38, −7, −1) 
 5.61 
 1.45 
 4.17 
 0.94 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 amCB, L5 
 (−12, −54, −18) 
 (−12, −50, −17) 
 5.41 
 1.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 splCB, L6 
 (−26, −60, −22) 
 (−25, −52, −20) 
 5.20 
 1.99 
 (−22, −58, −24) 
 (−21, −54, −23) 
 5.12 
 1.36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ipmCB, L8 
 
 
 
 
 (−16, −60, −52) 
 (−15, −53, −48) 
 5.36 
 0.91 
 (−8, −62, −48) 
 (−8, −58, −45) 
 6.10 
 0.76 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 spmCB, L6 
 (18, −56, −18) 
 (16, −52, −17) 
 6.20 
 2.44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 splCB, L6 
 
 
 
 
 (20, −58, −24) 
 (18, −54, −22) 
 4.74 
 1.77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iplCB, L8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (28, −64, −56) 
 (25, −57, −51) 
 4.52 
 0.48 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Subcortical Nuclei 
 
 
 
 Left 
 
 Pal 
 (−22, 0, −6) 
 (−21, −1, −2) 
 8.02 
 1.49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Put 
 (−24, −6, 8) 
 (−23, −8, 10) 
 9.68 
 1.21 
 (−24, 2, −4) 
 (−23, 1, 0) 
 4.55 
 1.18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tha, MD 
 (−12, −18, 8) 
 (−12, −19, 9) 
 7.24 
 1.50 
 
 
 
 
 (−2, −22, 4) 
 (−3, −23, 6) 
 5.07 
 1.11 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Tha, VPM 
 (−14, −20, −2) 
 (−14, −20, 0) 
 6.32 
 1.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 
 Pal 
 (18, 0, 4) 
 (16, −2, 8) 
 8.97 
 0.62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Put 
 (30, −12, 6) 
 (27, −14, 9) 
 9.40 
 0.86 
 (24, 0, −10) 
 (21, −1, −4) 
 5.17 
 1.81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caud 
 (24, −12, 20) 
 (21, −15, 21) 
 5.06 
 0.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tha, MD 
 (10, −12, 10) 
 (8, −14, 12) 
 6.97 
 1.33 
 (12, −12, 10) 
 (10, −14, 12) 
 5.32 
 1.25 
 (10, −18, 12) 
 (8, −20, 13) 
 5.23 
 0.84 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Tha, VPM 
 (18, −22, −2) 
 (16, −22, 1) 
 6.11 
 0.99 
 
 
 
 
 (16, −22, 0) 
 (14, −22, 2) 
 5.04 
 0.60 
 n.s. 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations: aCg = anterior cingulate gyrus; aCO = anterior central operculum; adPMC = anterior dorsal premotor cortex; AG = angular gyrus; aINS = anterior insula; amCB = anterior medial cerebellum; aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; aSTg = anterior superior temporal gyrus; Caud = caudate; dMC = dorsal primary motor cortex; dSC = dorsal somatosensory cortex; FO = frontal operculum; FOC = frontal orbital cortex; FP = frontal pole; Hg = Heschl's gyrus; IFo = inferior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus, pars triangularis; iplCB = inferior posterior lateral cerebellum; L5 = cerebellum lobule V; L6 = cerebellum lobule VI; L8 = cerebellum lobule VIII; MD = mediodorsal thalamic nucleus; mdPMC = middle dorsal premotor cortex; MTO = middle temporal occipital gyrus; Pal = pallidum; pCg = posterior cingulate gyrus; pCO = posterior central operculum; pdPMC = posterior dorsal premotor cortex; pINS = posterior insula; pMFg = posterior middle frontal gyrus; PO = parietal operculum; PP = planum polare; preSMA = pre-supplementary motor area; pSMg = posterior supramarginal gyrus; pSTg = posterior superior temporal gyrus; PT = planum temporale; Put = putamen; SFg = superior frontal gyrus; SMA = supplementary motor area; SPL = superior parietal lobule; splCB = superior posterior lateral cerebellum; spmCB = superior posterior medial cerebellum; Tha = thalamus; TP = temporal pole; vMC = ventral primary motor cortex; VPM = ventral posterior thalamic nucleus; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vSC = ventral somatosensory cortex. n.s. = not significant. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Effective connectivity determined by structural equation modeling of the network shown in  Fig. 4  for the  perturbed speech  and  speech  conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Network Path 
 
 Speech 
 
 
 
 Perturbed speech 
 
 
 
 Perturbed speech - Speech 
 
 
 
 
 Path coefficient 
 Standard error 
 Z 
 P 
 Path coefficient 
 Standard error 
 Z 
 P 
 Z 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 Left aSMg→Right aSMg 
 1.00 
 0.02 
 42.38 
 < 0.001 
 1.12 
 0.05 
 21.25 
 < 0.001 
 2.18 
 <.05 
 
 
 Left aSMg →Right vPMC 
 0.25 
 0.02 
 10.60 
 < 0.001 
 0.42 
 0.06 
 7.08 
 < 0.001 
 2.75 
 <.05 
 
 
 Left aSMg →Right vMC 
 0.11 
 0.03 
 3.60 
 < 0.001 
 0.04 
 0.07 
 0.52 
 > 0.05 
 −0.94 
 0.35 
 
 
 Right aSMg→RightvMC 
 0.33 
 0.03 
 11.12 
 < 0.001 
 0.16 
 0.06 
 2.63 
 0.009 
 −2.53 
 <.05 
 
 
 Right aSMg→Right vPMC 
 0.36 
 0.03 
 12.39 
 < 0.001 
 0.30 
 0.06 
 5.22 
 < 0.001 
 −1.05 
 0.29 
 
 
 Right aSMg→Right IFt 
 0.78 
 0.02 
 35.34 
 < 0.001 
 0.88 
 0.05 
 19.55 
 < 0.001 
 2.09 
 <.05 
 
 
 Right IFt→Right aSMg 
 −0.41 
 0.03 
 −13.92 
 < 0.001 
 −0.52 
 0.05 
 −9.79 
 < 0.001 
 −2.16 
 <.05 
 
 
 Right IFt→Right vPMC 
 0.38 
 0.02 
 20.62 
 < 0.001 
 0.39 
 0.05 
 8.26 
 < 0.001 
 0.22 
 0.83 
 
 
 Right vPMC→Right vMC 
 0.36 
 0.05 
 7.15 
 < 0.001 
 0.64 
 0.08 
 7.99 
 < 0.001 
 3.49 
 <.05 
 
 
 Right vMC→Right vPMC 
 −0.15 
 0.05 
 −3.24 
 0.001 
 −0.27 
 0.06 
 −4.29 
 < 0.001 
 −1.98 
 <.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 Significant increases in effective connectivity due to the somatosensory perturbation were found in connection strengths from left aSMg to right aSMg, from left aSMg to right vPMC, from right aSMg to right IFt, from right IFt to right aSMg, from right vPMC to right vMC, and from right vMC to Right vPMC. Abbreviations: aSMg = anterior supramarginal gyrus; IFt = inferior frontal gyrus pars triangularis; vPMC = ventral premotor cortex; vMC = ventral motor cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by the National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders (R01 DC02852, F. Guenther PI) and by CELEST, an NSF Science of Learning Center (NSF SMA-0835976). Imaging was made possible with support from the National Center for Research Resources grant P41RR14075 and the MIND Institute. The authors would like to thank Joseph Perkell, Mark Tiede, Kevin Reilly, Oren Civier, Bruce Fischl, Julie Goodman, Lawrence Wald and the anonymous reviewers for their time and consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abbs 
 JH 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 1984 
 Control of complex motor gestures: Orofacial muscle responses to load perturbation of lip during speech 
 J Neurophysiol 
 51 
 705 
 723 
 6716120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aboitiz 
 F 
 
 
 García 
 V 
 
 
 1997 
 The evolutionary origin of the language areas in the human brain. A neuroanatomical perspective 
 Brain Res Rev 
 25 
 381 
 396 
 9495565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Au Duong 
 MV 
 
 
 Boulanouar 
 K 
 
 
 Audoin 
 B 
 
 
 Treseras 
 S 
 
 
 Ibarrola 
 D 
 
 
 Malikova 
 I 
 
 
 Confort-Gouny 
 S 
 
 
 Celsis 
 P 
 
 
 Pelletier 
 J 
 
 
 Cozzone 
 PJ 
 
 
 Ranjeva 
 JP 
 
 
 2005 
 Modulation of effective connectivity inside the working memory network in patients at the earliest stage of multiple sclerosis 
 NeuroImage 
 24 
 533 
 538 
 15627595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baciu 
 M 
 
 
 Abry 
 C 
 
 
 Segebarth 
 C 
 
 
 2000 
 Equivalence motrice et dominance hémisphérique. Le cas de la voyelle (u). Étude IRMf 
 Actes JEP 
 23 
 213 
 216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barbas 
 H 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1987 
 Architecture and frontal cortical connections of the premotor cortex (area 6) in the rhesus monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 256 
 211 
 28 
 3558879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baum 
 SR 
 
 
 McFarland 
 DH 
 
 
 Diab 
 M 
 
 
 1996 
 Compensation to articulatory perturbation: Perceptual data 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 99 
 3791 
 3794 
 8655810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baum 
 SR 
 
 
 Kim 
 JA 
 
 
 Katz 
 WF 
 
 
 1997 
 Compensation for Jaw Fixation by Aphasic Patients 
 Brain Lang 
 56 
 354 
 376 
 9070417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baum 
 SR 
 
 
 1999 
 Compensation for jaw fixation by aphasic patients under conditions of increased articulatory demands: a follow-up study 
 Aphasiology 
 13 
 513 
 527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belin 
 P 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 R 
 
 
 Hoge 
 R 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Pike 
 B 
 
 
 1999 
 Event-Related fMRI of the auditory cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 10 
 417 
 429 
 10493900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Shaker 
 R 
 
 
 1999 
 Event-related fMRI of tasks involving brief motion 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 7 
 106 
 114 
 9950068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 1998 
 Central cancellation of self-produced tickle sensation 
 Nat Neurosci 
 1 
 635 
 640 
 10196573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 D 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 2000 
 Why can’t you tickle yourself? 
 NeuroReport 
 11 
 11 
 R11 
 R16 
 10943682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bohland 
 JW 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2006 
 An fMRI investigation of syllable sequence production 
 NeuroImage 
 32 
 821 
 841 
 16730195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 M 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 Barch 
 D 
 
 
 Carter 
 C 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 2001 
 Conflict monitoring and cognitive control 
 Psychol Rev 
 108 
 624 
 652 
 11488380 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Broca 
 P 
 
 
 1861 
 Remarques sur la siège de la faculté de la parole articulée, suivies d’une observation d’aphémie perte de parole 
 Bull Soc Anat 
 36 
 330 
 357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 Fogassi 
 L 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 Seitz 
 RJ 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Freund 
 H-J 
 
 
 2001 
 Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 13 
 400 
 404 
 11168545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Modulation of connectivity in visual pathways by attention: cortical interactions evaluated with structural equation modeling and fMRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 7 
 768 
 778 
 9408041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Callan 
 DE 
 
 
 Tsytsarev 
 V 
 
 
 Hanakawa 
 T 
 
 
 Callan 
 AM 
 
 
 Katsuhara 
 M 
 
 
 Fukuyama 
 H 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Song and speech: brain regions involved with perception and covert production 
 NeuroImage 
 31 
 1327 
 42 
 16546406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cavada 
 C 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1989 
 Posterior parietal cortex in rhesus monkey: II. Evidence for segregated corticocortical networks linking sensory and limbic areas with the frontal lobe 
 J Comp Neurol 
 287 
 422 
 445 
 2477406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christoffels 
 IK 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 Schiller 
 NO 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural correlates of verbal feedback processing: An fMRI study employing overt speech 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 868 
 879 
 17266104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chumbley 
 JR 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2009 
 False discovery rate revisited: FDR and topological inference using Gaussian random fields 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 62 
 70 
 18603449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 Hashambhoy 
 Y 
 
 
 Rane 
 T 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural correlates of reach errors 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 9919 
 9931 
 16251440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downar 
 J 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 Mikulis 
 DJ 
 
 
 Davis 
 KD 
 
 
 2000 
 A multimodal cortical network for the detection of changes in the sensory environment 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 277 
 283 
 10700261 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duffy 
 JR 
 
 
 2005 
 Motor speech disorders: substrates, differential diagnosis, and management 
 2 
 St. Louis (MO) 
 Elsevier 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Mills 
 SR 
 
 
 Brown 
 ED 
 
 
 Kelly 
 RL 
 
 
 Peters 
 TM 
 
 
 1993 
 3D statistical neuroanatomical models from 305 MRI volumes 
 Proc IEEE Nucl Sci Symp Med Imag 
 3 
 1813 
 1817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiehler 
 K 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural correlates of error detection and error correction, is there a common neuroanatomical substrate? 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 9 
 3081 
 3087 
 15182316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Marshall 
 JC 
 
 
 Halligan 
 PW 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1999 
 The neural consequences of conflict between intention and the senses 
 Brain 
 122 
 497 
 512 
 10094258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Dieterich 
 M 
 
 
 Haselgrove 
 C 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Killiany 
 R 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 D 
 
 
 Klaveness 
 S 
 
 
 Montillo 
 A 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Rosen 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2002 
 Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 33 
 341 
 355 
 11832223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical surface-based analysis II. Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 195 
 207 
 9931269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 Segonne 
 F 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Seidman 
 LJ 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 J 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 D 
 
 
 Caviness 
 V 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Rosen 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2004 
 Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 14 
 11 
 22 
 14654453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folkins 
 JW 
 
 
 Abbs 
 JH 
 
 
 1975 
 Lip and jaw motor control during speech: Responses to resistive loading of the jaw 
 J Speech Lang Hear Res 
 18 
 207 
 220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folkins 
 JW 
 
 
 Zimmerman 
 GN 
 
 
 1982 
 Lip and jaw interaction during speech: Responses to perturbation of lower-lip movement prior to bilabial closure 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 71 
 1225 
 1233 
 7085994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fu 
 CH 
 
 
 Vythelingum 
 GN 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Amaro 
 E 
 Jr 
 
 
 Andrew 
 CM 
 
 
 Yágüez 
 L 
 
 
 van Haren 
 NE 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 K 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 2006 
 An fMRI study of verbal self-monitoring: neural correlates of auditory verbal feedback 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 969 
 77 
 16195470 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gay 
 T 
 
 
 Lindblom 
 B 
 
 
 Lubker 
 J 
 
 
 1981 
 Production of bite-block vowels: Acoustic equivalence by selective compensation 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 69 
 802 
 810 
 7240561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 C 
 
 
 Lazar 
 N 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in neuroimaging using the false discovery rate 
 NeuroImage 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghosh 
 SS 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2008 
 A neuroimaging study of premotor lateralization and cerebellar involvement in the production of phonemes and syllables 
 J Speech Lang Hear Res 
 51 
 1183 
 1202 
 18664692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Golfinopoulos 
 E 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2010 
 The integration of large-scale neural network modeling and functional brain imaging in speech motor control 
 NeuroImage 
 52 
 862 
 874 
 19837177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gonçalves 
 MS 
 
 
 Hall 
 DA 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 Haggard 
 MP 
 
 
 2001 
 Can meaningful effective connectivities be obtained between auditory cortical regions? 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 1353 
 1360 
 11707091 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gomi 
 H 
 
 
 Ito 
 T 
 
 
 Murano 
 EZ 
 
 
 Honda 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Compensatory articulation during bilabial fricative production by regulating muscle stiffness 
 J Phon 
 30 
 261 
 279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 Abbs 
 JH 
 
 
 1985 
 Dynamic control of the perioral system during speech: kinematic analyses of autogenic and nonautogenic sensorimotor processes 
 J Neurophysiol 
 54 
 418 
 432 
 4031995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 P 
 
 
 Horn 
 JV 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural substrates of visuomotor learning based on improved feedback control and prediction 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 1383 
 1395 
 18032069 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Sutton 
 J 
 
 
 Couldwell 
 W 
 
 
 Lew 
 M 
 
 
 Waters 
 C 
 
 
 1994 
 Network analysis of motor system connectivity in Parkinson’s disease: modulation of thalamocortical interactions after pallidotomy 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2 
 45 
 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Hulsmann 
 E 
 
 
 Lotze 
 M 
 
 
 Wildgruber 
 D 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Sensorimotor mapping of the human cerebellum: fMRI evidence of somatotopic organization 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 13 
 55 
 73 
 11346886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 1994 
 A neural network model of speech acquisition and motor equivalent speech production 
 Biol Cybern 
 72 
 43 
 53 
 7880914 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 1995 
 Speech sound acquisition, coarticulation, and rate effects in a neural network model of speech production 
 Psychol Rev 
 102 
 594 
 621 
 7624456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2006 
 Cortical interactions underlying the production of speech sounds 
 J Commun Disord 
 5 
 350 
 365 
 16887139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 Ghosh 
 SS 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural modeling and imaging of the cortical interactions underlying syllable production 
 Brain Lang 
 96 
 280 
 301 
 16040108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 Vladusich 
 T 
 
 
 2010 
 A neural theory of speech acquisition and production 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Habas 
 C 
 
 
 Axelrad 
 H 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 TH 
 
 
 Cabanis 
 EA 
 
 
 2004 
 Specific neocerebellar activation during out-of-phase bimanual movements 
 NeuroReport 
 15 
 595 
 599 
 15094459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Habas 
 C 
 
 
 Cabanis 
 EA 
 
 
 2006 
 Cortical areas functionally linked with the cerebellar second homunculus during out-of-phase bimanual movements 
 Neuroradiology 
 48 
 273 
 279 
 16465531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Habas 
 C 
 
 
 Cabanis 
 EA 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural correlates of simple unimanual discrete and continuous movements: a functional imaging study at 3 T 
 Neuroradiology 
 50 
 367 
 375 
 18172628 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hall 
 DA 
 
 
 Haggard 
 MP 
 
 
 Akeroyd 
 MA 
 
 
 Palmer 
 AR 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 AQ 
 
 
 Elliot 
 MR 
 
 
 Gurney 
 EM 
 
 
 Bowtell 
 RW 
 
 
 1999 
 ‘Sparse’ temporal sampling in auditory fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 7 
 213 
 223 
 10194620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hashimoto 
 Y 
 
 
 Sakai 
 KL 
 
 
 2003 
 Brain activations during conscious self-monitoring of speech production with delayed auditory feedback: an fMRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 20 
 22 
 28 
 12953303 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hillis 
 AE 
 
 
 Work 
 M 
 
 
 Barker 
 PB 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 MA 
 
 
 Breese 
 EL 
 
 
 Maurer 
 K 
 
 
 2004 
 Re-examining the brain regions crucial for orchestrating speech articulation 
 Brain 
 127 
 Pt. 7 
 1479 
 1487 
 15090478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Furey 
 M 
 
 
 Salerno 
 JA 
 
 
 Schapiro 
 MB 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 SI 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 1995 
 Network analysis of PET-mapped visual pathways in Alzheimer type dementia 
 NeuroReport 
 6 
 2287 
 2292 
 8747138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houde 
 JF 
 
 
 Nagarajan 
 SS 
 
 
 2007 
 How is auditory feedback processed during speaking? Program of the 154th Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America 
 Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 
 122 
 5 Pt 2 
 New Orleans, Louisiana 
 3087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indefrey 
 P 
 
 
 Levelt 
 WJ 
 
 
 2004 
 The spatial and temporal signatures of word production components 
 Cognition 
 92 
 101 
 144 
 15037128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ito 
 T 
 
 
 Kimura 
 T 
 
 
 Gomi 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 The motor cortex is involved in reflexive compensatory adjustment of speech articulation 
 NeuroReport 
 16 
 1791 
 1794 
 16237328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jacks 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Bite Block Vowel Production in Apraxia of Speech 
 J Speech Lang Hear Res 
 51 
 898 
 913 
 18658060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenmalm 
 P 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 C 
 
 
 Forssberg 
 H 
 
 
 Ehrsson 
 HH 
 
 
 2006 
 Lighter or heavier than predicted: neural correlates of corrective mechanisms during erroneously programmed lifts 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 9015 
 9021 
 16943559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelso 
 JAS 
 
 
 Tuller 
 B 
 
 
 Vatikiotis-Bateson 
 E 
 
 
 Fowler 
 CA 
 
 
 1984 
 Functionally specific articulatory cooperation following jaw perturbations during speech: evidence for coordinative structures 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 10 
 812 
 832 
 6239907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Tordesillas-Gutierrez 
 D 
 
 
 Martinez 
 M 
 
 
 Salinas 
 F 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2007 
 Bias between MNI and Talairach coordinates analyzed using the ICBM-152 brain template 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 1194 
 1205 
 17266101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 H 
 
 
 Denny 
 M 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 Matthies 
 ML 
 
 
 Menard 
 L 
 
 
 Perkell 
 JS 
 
 
 Stockmann 
 E 
 
 
 Tiede 
 M 
 
 
 Vick 
 J 
 
 
 Zandipour 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Effects of bite blocks and hearing status on vowel production 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 118 
 1636 
 1646 
 16240823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lindblom 
 B 
 
 
 Lubker 
 J 
 
 
 Gay 
 T 
 
 
 1979 
 Formant frequencies of some fixed-mandible vowels and a model of speech motor programming by predictive simulation 
 J Phonetics 
 7 
 147 
 161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McFarland 
 DH 
 
 
 Baum 
 SR 
 
 
 1995 
 Incomplete compensation to articulatory perturbation 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 97 
 1865 
 1873 
 7699168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 Silbersweig 
 DA 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 1996 
 Functional neuroanatomy of verbal self-monitoring 
 Brain 
 119 
 907 
 917 
 8673501 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Naito 
 E 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Choi 
 HJ 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 S 
 
 
 Geyer 
 S 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Ehrsson 
 HH 
 
 
 2005 
 Dominance of the right hemisphere and role of area 2 in human kinesthesia 
 J Neurophysiol 
 93 
 1020 
 1034 
 15385595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nasir 
 SM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Somatosensory precision in speech production 
 Curr Biol 
 16 
 1918 
 1923 
 17027488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nasir 
 SM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Speech motor learning in profoundly deaf adults 
 Nat Neurosci 
 11 
 1217 
 1222 
 18794839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nasir 
 SM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Auditory plasticity and speech motor learning 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 106 
 20470 
 20475 
 19884506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neal 
 JW 
 
 
 Pearson 
 RC 
 
 
 Powell 
 TP 
 
 
 1990 
 The ipsilateral cortico-cortical connections of area 7 with the frontal lobe in the monkey 
 Brain Res 
 509 
 31 
 40 
 1689604 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nieto-Castanon 
 A 
 
 
 Ghosh 
 SS 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2003 
 Region of interest based analysis of functional imaging data 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 1303 
 1316 
 12948689 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papoutsi 
 M 
 
 
 de Zwart 
 JA 
 
 
 Jansma 
 JM 
 
 
 Pickering 
 MJ 
 
 
 Bednar 
 JA 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 From Phonemes to Articulatory Codes: An fMRI Study of the Role of Broca’s Area in Speech Production 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 9 
 2156 
 2165 
 19181696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penfield 
 W 
 
 
 Rasmussen 
 T 
 
 
 1950 
 The cerebral cortex of man 
 A clinical study of localization of function 
 Macmillan 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penfield 
 W 
 
 
 Roberts 
 L 
 
 
 1959 
 Speech and Brain Mechanisms 
 Princeton University Press 
 Princeton 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penny 
 WD 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Modelling functional integration: a comparison of structural equation and dynamic causal models 
 NeuroImage 
 23 
 S264 
 S274 
 15501096 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 1996 
 Motor areas of the medial wall: a review of their location and functional activation 
 Cereb Cortex 
 6 
 3 
 342 
 353 
 8670662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 M 
 
 
 Fiez 
 J 
 
 
 Videen 
 T 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 A 
 
 
 Pardo 
 J 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Petersen 
 S 
 
 
 1994 
 Practice-related changes in human brain functional anatomy during nonmotor learning 
 Cereb Cortex 
 4 
 8 
 26 
 8180494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control 
 Science 
 306 
 443 
 447 
 15486290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riecker 
 A 
 
 
 Ackermann 
 H 
 
 
 Wildgruber 
 D 
 
 
 Dogil 
 G 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 2000 
 Opposite hemispheric lateralization effects during speaking and singing at motor cortex, insula and cerebellum 
 NeuroReport 
 11 
 1997 
 2000 
 10884059 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riecker 
 A 
 
 
 Kassubek 
 J 
 
 
 Gröschel 
 K 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Ackermann 
 H 
 
 
 2006 
 The cerebral control of speech tempo: opposite relationship between speaking rate and BOLD signal changes at striatal and cerebellar structures 
 NeuroImage 
 29 
 46 
 53 
 16085428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riecker 
 A 
 
 
 Mathiak 
 K 
 
 
 Wildgruber 
 D 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Hertrich 
 I 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Ackermann 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 fMRI reveals two distinct cerebral networks subserving speech motor control 
 Neurology 
 64 
 700 
 706 
 15728295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robin 
 DA 
 
 
 Jacks 
 A 
 
 
 Ramage 
 AE 
 
 
 
 
 Ingham 
 RJ 
 
 
 2007 
 The neural substrates of apraxia of speech as uncovered by brain imaging: a critical review 
 Neuroimaging in communication sciences and disorders 
 San Diego, CA 
 Plural Publishing Inc 
 129 
 154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 J 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 R 
 
 
 Lees 
 A 
 
 
 Passingham 
 R 
 
 
 2002 
 Attention to action in Parkinson’s disease: impaired effective connectivity among frontal cortical regions 
 Brain 
 125 
 276 
 289 
 11844728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlösser 
 RG 
 
 
 Gesierich 
 T 
 
 
 Kaufmann 
 B 
 
 
 Vucurevic 
 G 
 
 
 Hunsche 
 S 
 
 
 Gawehn 
 J 
 
 
 Stoeter 
 P 
 
 
 2003 
 Altered effective connectivity during working memory performance in schizophrenia: a study with fMRI and structural equation modeling 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 751 
 763 
 12880804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlösser 
 RG 
 
 
 Wagner 
 G 
 
 
 Sauer 
 H 
 
 
 2006 
 Assessing the working memory network: studies with functional magnetic resonance imaging and structural equation modeling 
 Neuroscience 
 139 
 91 
 103 
 16324797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 C 
 
 
 Jenmalm 
 P 
 
 
 Ehrsson 
 HH 
 
 
 Forssberg 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 Brain Activity During Predictable and Unpredictable Weight Changes When Lifting Objects 
 J Neurophysiol 
 93 
 1498 
 1509 
 15385599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaiman 
 S 
 
 
 1989 
 Kinematic and electromyographic responses to perturbation of the jaw 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 86 
 78 
 88 
 2754110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sidtis 
 JJ 
 
 
 Strother 
 SC 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 Rottenberg 
 DA 
 
 
 1999 
 Are brain functions really additive? 
 NeuroImage 
 5 
 490 
 496 
 10329288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sidtis 
 JJ 
 
 
 Strother 
 SC 
 
 
 Rottenberg 
 DA 
 
 
 2003 
 Predicting performance from functional imaging data: methods matter 
 NeuroImage 
 20 
 615 
 624 
 14568439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 S 
 
 
 Shiller 
 DM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Somatosensory basis of speech production 
 Nature 
 423 
 866 
 869 
 12815431 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2003 
 A cortical and cerebellar parcellation system for speech studies 
 Tech Rep CAS/CNS-03-022 
 Boston University 
 Boston, MA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2010 
 The DIVA model: A neural theory of speech acquisition and production 
 Lang Cognitive Proc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tourville 
 JA 
 
 
 Reilly 
 KJ 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural mechanisms underlying auditory feedback control of speech 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 1429 
 1443 
 18035557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toyomura 
 A 
 
 
 Koyama 
 S 
 
 
 Miyamaoto 
 T 
 
 
 Terao 
 A 
 
 
 Omori 
 T 
 
 
 Murohashi 
 H 
 
 
 Kuriki 
 S 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural correlates of auditory feedback control in human 
 Neuroscience 
 146 
 499 
 503 
 17395381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Davis 
 S 
 
 
 Howell 
 P 
 
 
 2008 
 Structural and functional abnormalities of the motor system in developmental stuttering 
 Brain 
 131 
 50 
 59 
 17928317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2008 
 Common Neural Substrates for Inhibition of Spoken and Manual Responses 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1923 
 1932 
 18245044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yang 
 Y 
 
 
 Engelien 
 A 
 
 
 Engelien 
 W 
 
 
 Xu 
 S 
 
 
 Stern 
 E 
 
 
 Silbersweig 
 DA 
 
 
 2000 
 A silent event-related functional MRI technique for brain activation studies without interference of scanner acoustic noise 
 Magn Reson Med 
 43 
 185 
 190 
 10680681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zheng 
 ZZ 
 
 
 2009 
 The functional specialization of the planum temporale 
 J Neurophysiol 
 102 
 3079 
 3081 
 19776362 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 The following set of speech-related cortical and subcortical ROIs was utilized based on a review of neurophysiological and imaging studies of speech processing ( Tourville and Guenther, 2003 ): inferior frontal gyrus  pars opercularis , inferior frontal gyrus  pars triangularis,  frontal operculum, ventral premotor cortex, anterior and posterior central operculum, ventral motor cortex, ventral somatosensory cortex, anterior and posterior supramarginal gyrus, parietal operculum, anterior cingulate gyrus, pre-supplementary motor area, supplementary motor area, anterior and posterior insula, Heschl’s gyrus, planum polare, planum temporale, anterior and posterior superior temporal gyrus, anterior and posterior middle temporal gyrus, middle temporal occipital gyrus, anterior dorsal, anterior ventral, posterior dorsal, and posterior ventral superior temporal sulcus, anterior medial cerebellum, anterior lateral cerebellum, superior posterior medial cerebellum, superior posterior lateral cerebellum, inferior posterior medial cerebellum, inferior posterior lateral cerebellum, thalamus, caudate, putamen, and pallidum. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
