
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9419065 
 21028 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 Human brain mapping 
 1065-9471 
 1097-0193 
 
 
 21246667 
 3117906 
 10.1002/hbm.21159 
 NIHMS249006 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Distinct representations of subtraction and multiplication in the neural systems for numerosity and language 
 
 
 
 
 Prado 
 Jérôme 
 
 
 
 
 Mutreja 
 Rachna 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Hongchuan 
 
 
 
 
 Mehta 
 Rucha 
 
 
 
 
 Desroches 
 Amy S. 
 
 
 
 
 Minas 
 Jennifer E. 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 James R. 
 
 
 Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA 
 
 
 Address correspondence to: Jérôme Prado ( jerome-prado@northwestern.edu ) or James Booth ( j-booth@northwestern.edu ), Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA, Phone: 847-467-5647, Fax: 847-491-4975 
 
 
 29 
 10 
 2010 
 
 
 18 
 1 
 2011 
 
 
 11 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 11 
 2011 
 
 32 
 11 
 1932 
 1947 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 It has been proposed that recent cultural inventions such as symbolic arithmetic recycle evolutionary older neural mechanisms. A central assumption of this hypothesis is that the degree to which a pre-existing mechanism is recycled depends upon the degree of similarity between its initial function and the novel task. To test this assumption, we investigated whether the brain region involved in magnitude comparison in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), localized by a numerosity comparison task, is recruited to a greater degree by arithmetic problems that involve number comparison (single-digit subtractions) than by problems that involve retrieving facts from memory (single-digit multiplications). Our results confirmed that subtractions are associated with greater activity in the IPS than multiplications, whereas multiplications elicit greater activity than subtractions in regions involved in verbal processing including the middle temporal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus that were localized by a phonological processing task. Pattern analyses further indicated that the neural mechanisms more active for subtraction than multiplication in the IPS overlap with those involved in numerosity comparison, and that the strength of this overlap predicts inter-individual performance in the subtraction task. These findings provide novel evidence that elementary arithmetic relies on the co-option of evolutionary older neural circuits. 
 
 
 multiplication 
 subtraction 
 numerosity 
 neural recycling 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 Perhaps one of the most remarkable features of the human brain is its ability to learn and represent abstract symbols. For example, children quickly learn to associate numerical quantities with Arabic numerals and are expected to master elementary arithmetic by the age of 10 ( Geary, 2000 ). It has been recently proposed that arithmetic learning involves the “recycling” of evolutionary older neural circuits dedicated to numerosity processing ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). This claim builds upon research showing that preverbal children and many animal species possess an intuition for comparing and manipulating numerical quantities ( Cantlon, Platt, & Brannon, 2009 ;  Dehaene, 1997 ). Here we investigate whether the neural system supporting this ability is utilized when adults perform elementary arithmetic tasks. 
 A critical assumption of the recycling hypothesis is that the degree to which a pre-existing neural mechanism is recycled depends upon the degree of similarity between its initial function and the novel task ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). For instance, several studies have demonstrated that neurons in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) are activated when human and non-human primates compare symbolic and non-symbolic numerosities ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Castelli, Glaser, & Butterworth, 2006 ;  Holloway, Price, & Ansari, 2010 ;  Nieder & Dehaene, 2009 ;  Pinel, Dehaene, Riviere, & LeBihan, 2001 ;  Pinel, Piazza, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2004 ;  Prado, Noveck, & Van Der Henst, 2010 ). The neuronal recycling hypothesis predicts that these neurons are more likely to be utilized by arithmetic tasks that involve number comparison (e.g., single-digit subtraction) than by arithmetic tasks that rely on the retrieval of facts from memory (e.g., single-digit multiplication). In line with this idea, neuroimaging studies have noted activity in the IPS during subtraction tasks ( Chochon, Cohen, van de Moortele, & Dehaene, 1999 ;  Fehr, Code, & Herrmann, 2007 ;  Kawashima et al., 2004 ;  Lee, 2000 ;  Piazza et al. 2007 ;  Schmithorst & Brown, 2004 ;  Simon, Mangin, Cohen, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2002 ). Multiplication tasks, however, have been shown to engage left temporo-parietal regions typically linked to semantic processing in language ( Chochon et al., 1999 ;  Delazer et al., 2003 ;  Ischebeck, Zamarian, Egger, Schocke, & Delazer, 2007 ;  Jost, Khader, Burke, Bien, & Rosler, 2009 ;  Lee, 2000 ;  Schmithorst & Brown, 2004 ;  Zhou et al., 2007 ), indicating that performing single-digit multiplications may be more associated with retrieving semantic knowledge from memory (e.g., multiplication tables) than with processing numerical quantities per se. Therefore, in keeping with the recycling hypothesis, the neuroimaging literature suggests that subtractions make use of numerosity comparison mechanisms in the IPS, whereas multiplications activate left temporo-parietal areas typically involved in the retrieval of semantic information during language processing ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). 
 Most such evidence, however, is indirect. With the exception of  Piazza et al. (2007) , who found an overlap between the activations associated with subtraction and numerosity processing in the IPS, no study that investigated the neural correlates of subtraction and multiplication has employed independent tasks to localize the brain regions involved in numerosity and language processing on a subject-by-subject basis. This is problematic because the locations of the brain regions involved in numerosity and language processing are variable from subject to subject ( Pinel et al., 2007 ). The absence of localizer tasks in previous studies makes it difficult to know whether there is an actual overlap between the brain systems underlying numerosity comparison and subtraction, and between the brain regions underlying language processing and multiplication. Moreover, even if there were more evidence for such overlapping activations, this would not necessarily indicate shared neural processing ( Downing, Wiggett, & Peelen, 2007 ;  Peelen, Wiggett, & Downing, 2006 ). Indeed, a given region may show enhanced activity in two different tasks because these tasks engage two intertwined but functionally independent neural correlates in this region ( Peelen & Downing, 2007 ). As suggested by  Peelen and Downing (2007) , one way to potentially show that overlapping activations stem from the same activated neural correlates is to provide evidence for a significant voxel-by-voxel correlation between the patterns of brain activity elicited by two tasks. At this point, the lack of direct evidence for shared neural processing between subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks undermines the neuronal recycling hypothesis. 
 The goal of the present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study is to provide more direct evidence for the recycling hypothesis in the domain of mental arithmetic. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that numerosity comparison mechanisms in the IPS are recruited to a greater degree by subtraction than multiplication problems, while regions underlying lexico-semantic processing in the left temporo-parietal cortex are recruited to a greater degree by multiplication than subtraction problems. To this end, we localized the brain regions involved in numerosity comparison and verbal processing in each study participant using independent tasks. Within these regions-of-interests (ROIs), we then compared the average activity evoked by the evaluation of single-digit subtractions to the activity elicited by single-digit multiplications. Finally, to test whether overlapping activations stemmed from the same activated neural correlates or from intertwined correlates, we determined the voxel-by-voxel correlations between the patterns of activity associated with (1) numerosity comparison and subtraction (vs. multiplication) and (2) verbal processing and multiplication (vs. subtraction) within each relevant ROI. 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Thirty-three healthy adults from the Chicago community participated in the study. All were right-handed, graduated from high school, and had no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. Three participants were excluded from the analyses because their error rates in at least one of the tasks were above 30%. Four additional participants were excluded due to excessive movement (i.e., greater than 3mm) in the scanner. The remaining 26 participants (10 males) were aged between 19 and 30 years (mean age: 25 years). All experimental procedures were approved by the Northwestern University Institutional Review Board. Participants were compensated $20 per hour for their time. 
 
 
 Tasks 
 Participants performed 4 different tasks in the scanner: a subtraction task, a multiplication task, a numerosity comparison task (localizer task), and a phonological processing task (localizer task) ( Fig. 1 ). 
 
 Subtraction task 
 In each trial of the subtraction task, participants were asked to evaluate the answer of a single-digit subtraction problem. Based on the existing literature, we selected 12 “easy” and 12 “hard” problems ( J. I. Campbell & Xue, 2001 ;  Levine, Jordan, & Huttenlocher, 1992 ;  Seyler, Kirk, & Ashcraft, 2003 ;  Siegler, 1989 ). In easy problems, there was a small difference between the first and second term of the subtraction (regardless of the first term size) (e.g., 3 - 2). Hard problems had a large first term and a large difference between the first and second terms of the subtraction (e.g., 9 - 4). Each problem was repeated twice with a true answer (e.g., 8 − 2 = 6) and once with a false answer, yielding 72 trials total. False answers were constructed by adding 1 or 2 to the correct answer (e.g., 8 − 2 = 7), or by subtracting 1 from the correct answer (e.g., 8 − 5 = 2). Problems involving 0 (e.g., 3 – 0; 3 – 3), 1 as second term (e.g., 3 – 1) and ties (e.g., 6 – 3) were not included in the main experiment but were used to familiarize the subjects to the task, such that different stimuli were used in the practice and in the scanning sessions. Twelve problems with a correct answer and twelve problems with a false answer were included in the practice session. 
 
 
 Multiplication task 
 In each trial of the multiplication task, participants were asked to evaluate the answer of a single-digit multiplication problem. Similar to the subtraction task, we selected 12 “easy” and 12 “hard” problems based on the literature ( Ashcraft, 1992 ;  J. I. Campbell & Xue, 2001 ;  Cooney, Swanson, & Ladd, 1988 ;  De Brauwer, Verguts, & Fias, 2006 ;  Siegler, 1988 ;  Stazyk, Ashcraft, & Hamann, 1982 ). In easy problems, the two operands were smaller than or equal to 5 (e.g., 3 × 4). In hard problems, both operands were larger than 5 (e.g., 6 × 7). Each problem was repeated twice with a true answer (e.g., 3 × 4 = 12) and once with a false answer, yielding 72 trials total. False answers corresponded to the answer that would be obtained by adding or subtracting 1 to the first operand (e.g., 3 × 5 = 20 or 3 × 5 = 10). Problems involving 0 (e.g., 3 × 0), 1 as second operand (e.g., 3 × 1) and ties (e.g., 3 × 3) were not included in the main experiment but were used in the practice session. Twelve problems with a correct answer and twelve problems with a false answer were included in the practice session. 
 
 
 Numerosity comparison task (localizer task) 
 In each trial of the numerosity comparison task, participants were asked to decide which of two visually presented dot arrays were composed of the larger number of dots. The numerical comparison involved a 12:36 ratio (i.e., 12 dots vs. 36 dots; 24 trials), a 18:36 ratio (i.e., 18 dots vs. 36 dots; 24 trials), or a 24:36 ratio (i.e., 24 dots vs. 36 dots; 24 trials). Six different dot sizes were used. To ensure that participants’ judgments were based on differences in numerosity rather than cumulative surface area, the distribution of dot sizes was biased towards smaller dots in large arrays and bigger dots in small arrays. However, totally equating the cumulative surface area between small and large arrays by entirely biasing the distribution of single dot sizes (100% bias) would have made it possible for the subjects to use single dot sizes as a cue for their judgments. Therefore, we found a trade-off (50% bias) between equating as much as possible (1) the cumulative surface areas and (2) the distributions of single dot sizes in each pair. Twelve trials of each condition were presented in the practice session. Different stimuli were used in the practice and in the scanning sessions. 
 
 
 Phonological processing task (localizer task) 
 In each trial of the phonological processing task, participants were asked to decide whether two visually presented words rhymed or not. To ensure that judgments were not based solely on orthographic similarities between words, orthography and phonology were manipulated independently. That is, the two words could have similar orthography and similar phonology (e.g., dime–lime; 12 trials), similar orthography but different phonology (e.g., pint–mint; 12 trials), different orthography but similar phonology (e.g., jazz–has; 12 trials) or different orthography and different phonology (e.g., press–list; 12 trials). We also included a perceptual control condition in which two symbol strings were presented on the screen instead of words (12 trials). Participants had to determine whether the symbol strings matched (the symbols matched in half of the trials). Twelve trials of each condition were presented in the practice session. Different sets of stimuli were used in the practice and in the scanning sessions. 
 
 
 
 Experimental procedure 
 Stimulus timing was identical in all tasks. A trial started with the presentation of a first stimulus (S1: subtraction, multiplication, dot array or word, depending on the task) for 800ms, followed by a blank screen for 200ms. A second stimulus (S2: subtraction answer, multiplication answer, dot array or word, depending on the task) was then presented for 800ms, followed by a red fixation square for 200ms. Variable periods of fixation (ranging from 2600ms to 3400ms) were added after each trial. Additionally, we included 24 null trials in the arithmetic and numerosity comparison tasks, and 12 null trials in the phonological processing task. In these trials, a black square was presented for the same stimulus duration as in the experimental conditions and participants were asked to press a button when the black square turned red. 
 Participants practiced the four tasks before entering into the scanner. In the scanner, each task (except the phonological processing task) was decomposed in 2 functional runs of about 4 min each. The phonological processing task was administered in one single run lasting approximately 7 minutes. The order of the tasks was fully counterbalanced across participants. The timing and order of trial presentation within each run was optimized for estimation efficiency using optseq2 ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/optseq/ ) ( Dale, 1999 ). Behavioral responses were recorded using an MR-compatible keypad placed below the right hand. Visual stimuli were generated using E-prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) and projected onto a translucent screen that was viewed by the participants through a mirror attached to the head-coil. 
 
 
 Data Acquisition 
 Images were collected using a Siemens 3T TIM Trio MRI scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) at CAMRI, Northwestern University’s Center for Advanced MRI. The fMRI blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal was measured with a susceptibility weighted single-shot echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence. The following parameters were used: TE = 20 ms, flip angle = 80s, matrix size = 128 × 120, field of view = 220 × 206.25 mm, slice thickness = 3 mm (.48 mm gap), number of slices = 32, TR = 2000 ms. 
 Before functional image acquisition, a high resolution T1 weighted 3D structural image was acquired for each subject (TR = 1570 ms, TE = 3.36 ms, matrix size = 256 × 256, field of view = 240 mm, slice thickness = 1 mm, number of slices = 160). 
 
 
 fMRI Data Analysis 
 
 Preprocessing 
 Data analysis was performed using SPM5 (Statistical Parametric Mapping) ( www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). The first six images of each run were discarded to allow for T1 equilibration effects. The remaining functional images were corrected for slice acquisition delays, spatially realigned to the first image of the first run to correct for head movements, co-registered with the segmented anatomical image, normalized to the standard T1 Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template volume (normalized voxel size, 2 × 2 × 4 mm 3 ), and spatially smoothed with a Gaussian filter equal to twice the voxel size (4 × 4 × 8 mm 3  full width at half maximum). 
 
 
 Processing 
 Event-related statistical analysis was performed according to the general linear model ( Josephs, Turner, & Friston, 1997 ). Trials in which an incorrect response was recorded were excluded from the analyses (i.e., were not included in the statistical model). Activation was modeled as epochs with onsets time-locked to the presentation of the first stimulus and with a duration matched to the length of the trial (2 seconds). For the arithmetic tasks, both hits (i.e., correct responses in problems with a true answer) and correct rejections (i.e., correct responses in problems with a false answer) were included in the model, but only hits were considered of interest in the behavioral and fMRI analyses. All epochs were convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function. The time series data were high-pass filtered (1/128 Hz), and serial correlations were corrected using an autoregressive AR (1) model. 
 
 
 ROIs analyses 
 For each subject, we calculated two voxelwise contrasts, one for each of the two localizer tasks. First, we identified the brain regions in which activity was modulated by the ratio between dot arrays in the numerosity comparison task (i.e., contrast 24:36 vs. 12:36). Second, we identified the regions that showed greater activity associated with word pairs than symbol strings in the phonological processing task. These contrasts were then submitted to one-sample t-tests across all participants. The resulting statistical maps were thresholded for significance (using a voxelwise height threshold of p < 0.005 and a cluster extent threshold of 20 contiguous voxels) in order to determine the average (i.e., group) coordinates of (1) the region of the IPS involved in numerosity processing and (2) the region of the left temporo-parietal cortex involved in verbal (i.e., phonological) processing. In the left temporo-parietal cortex, the region involved in verbal processing was localized in the middle temporal gyrus (MTG). Because the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) was also significantly activated in the contrast word pairs than symbol strings, an IFG ROI was also included in the subsequent analyses. 
 We then identified the precise coordinates of these 3 regions in each individual participant. To this end, we identified the most active voxel within a 12mm sphere centered on the group coordinates of the respective region. In other words, we identified in each subject the voxel that exhibited the maximal effect of numerical ratio in the IPS, and the voxel that showed the greatest activation in the contrast word pairs vs. symbol strings in the left MTG and IFG. The IPS region-of-interest (ROI) was defined as the 50 most active voxels within a 8mm sphere around these individual coordinates. The left MTG and IFG ROIs were defined as the 50 most active voxels within a 12mm sphere around these individual coordinates. A slightly smaller search space was used for the IPS than for the left MTG and IFG to account for the fact that the parietal neurons involved in numerosity processing are typically located in a restricted area in the fundus of the horizontal part of the IPS ( Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003 ;  Simon et al., 2002 ), whereas the neuronal correlates of verbal processing are more distributed within the left inferior frontal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus ( Vigneau et al., 2006 ). Note, however, that the number of voxels in the three regions is strictly identical. In each participant, we calculated the average activity for each trial type within each ROI by averaging the fMRI signal across the 50 voxels within that ROI. Unless otherwise noted, two-tailed p values were reported. P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. 
 
 
 Correlation Analyses 
 For each ROI and each subject, we measured the voxel-by-voxel correlation between the pattern of brain activity associated with a localizer task and the pattern of brain activity associated with the arithmetic problems (see  Fig. 4A  for an overview of the method). For example, we extracted a t value for each voxel in the right IPS reflecting how much this voxel was sensitive to the ratio difference between dot arrays (i.e., contrast 24:36 vs. 12:36). We then extracted a t value for each voxel in the right IPS reflecting how much this voxel was more active in subtraction than multiplication problems (i.e., contrast subtraction vs. multiplication). Finally, we correlated these two sets of t values to determine the extent to which the pattern of brain activity associated with numerosity processing was related to the pattern of brain activity associated with subtraction problems (with respect to multiplication problems) in the IPS. We used a similar method for correlating verbal processing with multiplication (vs. subtraction) problems in the left MTG and IFG. In these regions, we correlated the t values reflecting how much each voxel was involved in the contrast word pairs vs. symbol strings with the t values reflecting how much each voxel was more active during multiplication than during subtraction problems. These correlations were Fisher transformed and averaged across participants. We then tested whether the average correlations were significantly above 0 with one-sample t-tests ( Downing et al., 2007 ;  Peelen et al., 2006 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Overall behavior 
 We first analyzed the behavioral performance associated with arithmetic problems in the scanner. Error rates and reaction times for correct responses were submitted to repeated measures ANOVAs with the factors Arithmetic problem (subtraction, multiplication) and Difficulty (easy, hard). For both error rates and reaction times, these ANOVAs revealed a main effect of Difficulty (error rates: F 1,25 =37.75, p<0.001; reaction times: F 1,25 =23.81, p<0.001), a main effect of Arithmetic problem (error rates: F 1,25 =6.33, p<0.05; reaction times: F 1,25 =6.6, p<0.05) and an interaction of Arithmetic problem X Difficulty (error rates: F 1,25 =16.39, p<0.001; reaction times: F 1,25 =5.67, p<0.05). Post-hoc tests (Fisher’s least significant difference [LSD] procedure) revealed that hard problems were associated with higher error rates and longer reaction times than easy problems in both multiplication (error rates: 10% vs. 1%, p<0.001; reaction times: 929 ms vs. 785 ms, p<0.001) and subtraction tasks (error rates: 5% vs. 2%, p<0.05; reaction times: 832 ms vs. 761 ms, p<0.01). This confirms that the difficulty manipulation was effective within each type of arithmetic problem, even though the difficulty effect was larger in multiplication (error rates: 9%; reaction times: 144 ms) than in subtraction problems (error rates: 3%; reaction times: 71 ms). 
 We then analyzed the behavioral performance associated with the localizer tasks. In the numerosity processing task, error rates and reaction times decreased as numerosity ratio increased (error rates: 12:36, 4%; 18:36, 4%, 24:36, 9%, F 2,50 =7.31, p<0.01; reaction times: 12:36, 947 ms; 18:36, 979 ms, 24:36, 1028 ms, F 2,50 =11.39, p<0.001). Such an improvement in behavioral performance as the numerical ratio between two quantities decreases (termed the distance effect) is a well-known behavioral effect in the literature ( Moyer & Bayer, 1976 ). In the phonological processing task, error rates were lower when participants evaluated word pairs than when they evaluated symbol strings (error rates: 7% vs. 15%, t 25 =3.03, p<0.01) but no difference was observed in terms of reaction times (1131 ms vs. 1129 ms, t 25 =0.08, p=0.94). 
 
 
 FMRI 
 
 Numerosity comparison activates the right IPS 
 Number processing neurons in the IPS are highly sensitive to variations in the ratio between quantities in quantity comparison tasks ( Nieder & Dehaene, 2009 ). Specifically, activity of this region increases as the numerical ratio between two quantities increases ( Pinel et al., 2001 ;  Prado et al., 2010 ). The goal of the numerosity processing task was to localize the area of the IPS containing such neurons in each study participant. First, we investigated, across all participants, which brain regions showed greater activity for a 24:36 ratio than a 12:36 ratio during numerosity comparisons. As predicted, we found such a pattern of activity in the right IPS (Brodmann area, BA, 40) (MNI coordinates: x=40, y=−40, z=44) ( Fig. 2A , Left). Additionally, we found more activity for the 24:36 ratio than the 12:36 ratio in a few other regions typically involved in effortful cognitive processes and working-memory (anterior cingulate cortex, medial frontal gyrus and left inferior frontal cortex;  Ridderinkhof et al., 2004 ), and visuo-spatial processing (right precuneus;  Cavanna et al., 2006 ) ( Table 1 ). Second, a mask centered on the coordinates of the right IPS region (our a priori hypothesis) was used to identify the precise location of the voxels the most involved in numerosity comparison in each participant (see Methods and  Fig. 2A , Right). As expected, activity in the right IPS increased with numerical ratio in the numerosity processing task (i.e., a neural distance effect) ( Fig. 3A , Left). These results confirm that the right IPS is sensitive to numerosity comparison. This ROI is thus appropriate for testing our hypotheses about the role of numerosity comparison processes in subtraction problems. 
 
 
 Phonological processing activates the left MTG and left IFG 
 The goal of the phonological comparison task was to localize the regions of the left temporo-parietal and inferior frontal cortices involved in verbal processing in each participant. As for the numerosity comparison task, we first defined the regions more active during phonological processing (i.e., deciding whether two words rhyme) than perceptual matching (i.e., deciding whether two symbol strings match) across all participants ( Fig. 2B , Left). As anticipated, we found this pattern of activity in the left temporal and inferior frontal cortices, as well as in regions involved in performance monitoring (medial frontal gyrus,  Ridderinkhof et al., 2004 ) and memory retrieval (left parahippocampal gyrus;  Prince, 2005 ) ( Table 1 ). In the left temporo-parietal cortex, enhanced activity was found at the level of the left MTG (BA 21) (MNI coordinates: x=−48, y=−44, z=−4). In the left inferior frontal cortex, more activity for words than symbol strings was observed in both BA 44 (MNI coordinates: x=−52, y=14, z=16) and BA 45 (MNI coordinates: x=−44, y=18, z=20). Previous research on left hemisphere stroke patients has suggested an overlap between the neuroanatomical correlates of verbal and arithmetic processing in BA 45 ( Baldo & Dronkers, 2007 ). We thus used a mask of the left IFG centered on the BA 45 coordinates determined above to identify the precise location of the voxels the most involved in verbal processing in each participant (see Methods and  Fig. 2B , Right). Similarly, we used a mask centered on the coordinates of the left MTG region defined in the group analysis to identify the precise location of the voxels the most involved in verbal processing in each participant (see Methods and  Fig. 2B , Right). As expected, activity in the left MTG and left IFG was greater for Words than Symbols in the phonological processing task ( Fig. 3B and 3C , Left). In both the left MTG and left IFG, there was also greater activity when word pairs with conflicting phonological and orthographic information (e.g., pint–mint, jazz–has) were compared to word pairs with non-conflicting phonological and orthographic information (e.g., dime–lime, press–list) (MTG: t(25)=2.30, p<0.05; IFG: t(25)=2.52, p<0.05). This suggests a greater reliance on the verbal processing network in conflicting than non-conflicting conditions. Overall, these results confirm that the left MTG and IFG are involved in verbal processing and indicate that these ROIs are appropriate for testing our hypotheses about the role of verbal processing in multiplication problems. 
 
 
 Right IPS and left MTG are differentially activated during subtraction and multiplication problems 
 We hypothesized that numerosity processing mechanisms in the IPS are recruited to a greater degree for subtraction than multiplication problems, whereas verbal mechanisms in the left temporo-parietal cortex are activated a greater degree during multiplication than subtraction problems. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the variations of brain activity associated with arithmetic problems within the IPS and MTG ROIs defined in the localizer tasks. We conducted a repeated measures ANOVA with the factors Arithmetic problem (subtraction, multiplication), Difficulty (easy, hard) and Region (right IPS, left MTG) on brain activity. This ANOVA revealed a significant interaction of Arithmetic problem X Region, F 1,25 =6.80, p=0.015. Post-hoc tests (Fisher’s LSD procedure) showed that easy and hard subtraction problems were associated with greater activity than corresponding multiplication problems in the right IPS (easy problems: p<0.001; hard problems: p<0.001) ( Fig. 3A , Right), while easy and hard multiplication problems were associated with greater activity than corresponding subtraction problems in the left MTG (easy problems: p<0.01; hard problems: p<0.05) ( Fig. 3B , Right). Therefore, in line with our hypothesis, we found that the region of the IPS involved in numerosity comparison is recruited to a greater extent by subtraction than multiplication problems, whereas the region of the left MTG involved in verbal processing is recruited to a greater extent by multiplication than subtraction problems. 
 These results were confirmed by a whole-brain voxelwise analysis (conducted at a threshold of p<0.001 uncorrected) contrasting the two types of arithmetic problems. First, the contrast of subtraction vs. multiplication (collapsed across difficulty) revealed significant activation of the right IPS (MNI coordinates: x=42, y=−38, z=30; BA 40) (see  Supporting Information Fig. 1A  and  Supporting Information Table 1 ). Second, the contrast of multiplication vs. subtraction (collapsed across difficulty) revealed activation of the left MTG (MNI coordinates: x=−56, y=−30, z=−8; BA 21) (see  Supporting Information Fig. 1B  and  Supporting Information Table 1 ). Interestingly, a conjunction analysis of the contrast of subtraction vs. multiplication and the contrast of 24:36 ratio vs. 12:36 ratio in the numerosity task (each map thresholded at p<0.001 uncorrected) further revealed a significant overlap of activity in the right IPS (MNI coordinates: x=40, y=−40, z=44) (see  Supporting Information Fig. 2 ). However, inconsistent with our ROI results, a conjunction analysis of the contrast of multiplication vs. subtraction and the contrast of words vs. symbols (each map thresholded at p<0.001 uncorrected) did not reveal any overlap of activation in the MTG. This highlights the fact that selecting ROIs on an individual basis may be a more powerful approach than performing a whole-brain conjunction analysis and can reveal effects that would otherwise go unnoticed by averaging the whole-brain patterns of activation across subjects ( Saxe et al., 2006 ). 
 
 
 The left IFG is activated during hard multiplication problems 
 Although most research has implicated regions of the left temporoparietal cortex in the verbal retrieval of arithmetic facts ( Chochon et al., 1999 ;  Delazer et al., 2003 ;  Ischebeck et al., 2007 ;  Jost et al., 2009 ;  Lee, 2000 ;  Schmithorst & Brown, 2004 ;  Zhou et al., 2007 ), some studies have also suggested a role for the left IFG in mental arithmetic ( Baldo & Dronkers, 2007 ;  Jost et al., 2009 ;  Schmithorst & Brown, 2004 ;  Simon et al., 2002 ;  Stanescu-Cosson et al., 2000 ;  Zhou et al., 2007 ). To investigate the role of the left IFG in our tasks, we analyzed the variations of brain activity associated with arithmetic problems within the left IFG ROI defined in the phonological processing task. In the left IFG, a repeated measures ANOVA with the factors of Arithmetic problem (subtraction, multiplication) and Difficulty (easy, hard) revealed a main effect of Difficulty, F 1, 2 5 =14.675, p=.00076, and an interaction of Arithmetic problem X Difficulty, F 1,25 =10.784, p=.00302 ( Fig. 3C , Right). Post-hoc tests (Fisher’s LSD) revealed that hard multiplication problems elicited more activity in the left IFG than any other problems. That is, hard multiplication problems were associated with more activity than easy multiplication problems (p<0.001), hard subtraction problems (p<0.001) and easy subtraction problems (p<0.001). In sum, unlike the left MTG, the left IFG is sensitive to both the type (subtraction vs. multiplication) and difficulty (easy vs. hard) of arithmetic problems. 
 Importantly, these ROI results in the left IFG were confirmed by a voxelwise analysis (p<0.001 voxelwise). Indeed, a whole-brain interaction analysis between Arithmetic problem (subtraction, multiplication) and Difficulty (easy, hard) (p<0.001 uncorrected) revealed enhanced activity in the left IFG (MNI coordinates: x=−42, y=20, z=24), as well as in the bilateral insula (MNI coordinates: Left, x=−38, y=20, z=−8; Right, x=42, y=20, z=−8) and bilateral posterior parietal cortex (MNI coordinates: Left, x=−40, y=−50, z=48; Right, x=32, y=−62, z=48). Therefore, whole-brain analyses confirmed that the left IFG was sensitive to both the type and difficulty of arithmetic problems. 
 
 
 Subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks engage overlapping neural correlates in the right IPS 
 The results reported above demonstrate that the IPS region involved in numerosity processing is more active in subtraction than in multiplication tasks. However, it is unclear whether numerosity processing and subtraction tasks involve overlapping neural correlates or intertwined but functionally separate correlates in the IPS. To distinguish between these possibilities, we measured the strength of the voxel-by-voxel correlation between numerosity comparison (i.e., contrast 24:36 ratio vs. 12:36 ratio) and subtraction (i.e., contrast subtraction vs. multiplication) in the right IPS of each participant (see Methods). We reasoned that, if the neural correlates involved in numerosity comparison are also engaged during subtraction problems, then the voxels that are the most active in the numerosity processing task should be the most active in the subtraction task (relative to the multiplication task). In other words, we should observe a positive correlation between the pattern of activity associated with numerosity comparison and the pattern of activity associated with subtraction (vs. multiplication) in the IPS. In line with this hypothesis, we found a significant positive correlation between the voxelwise pattern associated with the contrast 24:36 vs. 12:36 and the pattern elicited by the contrast subtraction vs. multiplication in both easy and hard problems (easy: t(25)=2.21, p<0.05; hard: t(25)=2.14, p<0.05) ( Fig. 4B , Left). This result suggests that the neural mechanisms more active for subtraction than multiplication in the IPS overlap with those underlying numerosity comparison. 
 
 
 Multiplication and phonological processing tasks engage qualitatively different neural correlates in the left MTG and IFG 
 In the present study, we show that the region of the left MTG involved in phonological processing is more engaged during multiplication than subtraction problems. If phonological processing and multiplication tasks engage overlapping neural correlates in the left MTG, then there should be a positive voxelwise correlation between the patterns of brain activity elicited by the contrast of word pairs vs. symbol strings and the pattern elicited by the contrast of multiplication vs. subtraction in the left MTG (see above and Methods). Across all participants, we did not found any relationship between the voxelwise pattern associated with these contrasts in easy (t(25)= −1.32, p=0.2) and in hard problems (t(25)= −0.18, p=0.86) ( Fig 4B , Middle). This result suggests that the neural mechanisms more active for multiplication than subtraction in the MTG are qualitatively different than those involved in verbal processing. 
 Finally, we did not find any relationship between the contrasts of word pairs vs. symbol strings and multiplication vs. subtraction in the left IFG (easy: t(25)=0.56, p=0.58; hard: t(25)=0.95, p=0.35) ( Fig 4B , Right). Therefore, the greater activation observed during hard multiplication problems than hard subtraction problems is likely to originate from qualitatively different neural correlates than those involved in phonological processing in the left IFG. 
 
 
 Greater overlap between subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks in the right IPS is associated with enhanced behavioral performance 
 The present results suggest that subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks engage overlapping neural correlates in the right IPS. To assess the behavioral significance of this overlap, we tested whether there was a relationship between the individual mean reaction time in the subtraction task and the strength of the correlation between the contrasts subtraction vs. multiplication and 24:36 vs. 12:36 ratio in the right IPS. Although no relationship was observed between strength of correlation and reaction time in easy problems (r=0.15, p=0.46), we observed a significant negative relationship in hard problems (r=0.41, p<0.05) ( Fig. 5 ). In other words, the stronger the overlap between the neural correlates involved in numerosity comparison and those more active in hard subtraction than hard multiplication, the faster these problems were evaluated by the subjects. Interestingly, no relationship was observed between overall amount of activity in the right IPS for subtraction (vs. multiplication) and individual reaction time in easy or hard subtraction problems (easy problems: r=−0.06, p=0.76; hard problems: r=−0.0006, p=1). Therefore, the degree to which the neural mechanisms involved in numerosity processing are engaged during subtraction problems, but not the amount of overall activity associated with these problems, is predictive of individual behavior in this task. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The goal of the present experiment was to test the hypothesis that arithmetic tasks that rely on number comparison (e.g., single-digit subtraction) make use of an evolutionary older neural system involved in numerosity comparison, while arithmetic tasks that rely on the retrieval of mathematical facts activate a brain system involved in semantic processing in language ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ;  Dehaene, Molko, Cohen, & Wilson, 2004 ). In the present experiment, we localized the brain regions underlying numerosity and verbal processing in each study participant. Consistent with our hypothesis, we found a double-dissociation between the brain regions underlying subtraction and multiplication tasks. Overall, the brain region involved in numerosity processing in the IPS exhibited greater activity during subtraction than multiplication problems, whereas the brain regions involved in verbal processing in the left MTG and IFG exhibited greater activity during multiplication than subtraction problems. Analyses of the underlying patterns of activity further revealed that the neural mechanisms underlying numerosity processing in the IPS overlapped with those dissociating between subtraction and multiplication, and that the strength of this overlap was associated with better behavioral performance. These findings provide evidence for a neuronal recycling view of elementary arithmetic. 
 The main finding from the numerosity comparison localizer task was that activity in the right IPS is modulated by the numerical ratio between non-symbolic numerosities. There is overwhelming evidence suggesting that the IPS plays a central role in numerical cognition, and that activity in this region is sensitive to the ratio between quantities ( Pinel et al., 2001 ;  Pinel et al., 2004 ;  Prado et al., 2010 ). In humans, neuroimaging studies have observed activity in the IPS during symbolic and non-symbolic magnitude comparison tasks ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Castelli et al., 2006 ;  Holloway et al., 2010 ;  Nieder & Dehaene, 2009 ;  Pinel et al., 2001 ;  Pinel et al., 2004 ;  Prado et al., 2010 ), simple and complex arithmetic tasks ( Chochon et al., 1999 ;  Delazer et al., 2003 ;  Fehr et al., 2007 ;  Ischebeck et al., 2007 ;  Jost et al., 2009 ;  Kawashima et al., 2004 ;  Lee, 2000 ;  Schmithorst & Brown, 2004 ;  Simon et al., 2002 ;  Zhou et al., 2007 ), and when numerical stimuli are compared to non-numerical stimuli ( Eger, Sterzer, Russ, Giraud, & Kleinschmidt, 2003 ;  Le Clec et al., 2000 ;  Thioux, Pesenti, Costes, De Volder, & Seron, 2005 ). Animal electrophysiological studies suggest that neurons encoding numerical quantities are present in the fundus of the monkey’s IPS ( Nieder & Dehaene, 2009 ) and may constitute an evolutionary precursor for the neural system underlying symbolic arithmetic in humans ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). In keeping with previous studies, our finding that activity in the IPS depends upon the numerical ratio between dot arrays in the numerosity comparison task highlights the crucial role of this region in quantity processing. 
 In the present study, we demonstrate that the region of the IPS involved in numerosity comparison is recruited to a greater extent by subtraction than multiplication problems. Although they did not use independent localizer tasks to identify the numerosity processing mechanisms in the IPS, previous studies have also found greater activity in the IPS for subtraction than multiplication tasks ( Chochon et al., 1999 ;  Lee, 2000 ). It has been argued that single-digit multiplications, unlike single-digit subtractions, are learned through rote processes and may thus rely on verbal memory ( Dehaene et al., 2003 ). As suggested by  Dehaene et al. (2003) , the differential involvement of the IPS in subtraction and multiplication tasks may thus reflect the fact that single-digit subtractions require more extensive number comparison and quantity manipulation processes than single-digit multiplications. In line with this idea, studies have shown that lesions of the parietal cortex can be associated with impaired performance in both subtraction and magnitude processing tasks but relatively preserved performance in multiplication tasks ( Dehaene & Cohen, 1997 ;  Delazer & Benke, 1997 ). In sum, our study extends and complements the findings of prior neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies by showing that the same brain region involved in numerosity processing in the IPS is also engaged during a subtraction task in healthy adults. 
 Importantly, the results of our pattern analyses further demonstrate a significant relationship between the pattern of activity associated with numerosity comparison and subtraction (relative to multiplication) in the right IPS. This suggests an overlap between the neural mechanisms involved in numerosity comparison and those more engaged in subtraction than multiplication in the right IPS. This is consistent with the recently proposed neuronal recycling hypothesis of mental arithmetic ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). This model argues that, over the course of the development, evolutionary older neural circuits dedicated to numerosity comparison are co-opted (or recycled) by novel arithmetic tasks ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). According to this claim, a significant fraction of these circuits are used when adults perform arithmetic operations involving quantity manipulation, such as subtraction. In the present study, we not only show a significant overlap between the neural correlates of numerosity comparison and subtraction (relative to multiplication) in the right IPS but also demonstrate that the strength of this overlap predicts how efficiently the subtraction problems are processed on an individual basis. Specifically, the more the neural mechanisms that dissociate between subtraction and multiplication in the IPS make use of the neural mechanisms underlying numerosity processing, the faster the subjects correctly evaluate the answer of subtraction problems. It should be noted, however, that this relationship was only reliable for the hardest subtraction problems in our task. It is probable that solving easy subtraction problems (e.g., 3-2) does not tax quantity manipulation processes as much as harder problems (e.g., 9-4). Therefore, inter-individual variations in the strength of the overlap between subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks in the IPS are less predictive of task performance in easy than in hard subtraction problems. Nevertheless, we show that the neural mechanisms involved in numerosity processing are utilized when subjects evaluate relatively hard subtraction problems, in line with recent models suggesting that such neural recyling is a fundamental principle of brain organization ( Anderson, in press ). 
 The main finding from the phonological processing localizer task was that reading visually-presented words to access their phonology is linked to activation of the left temporo-parietal cortex (i.e., at the level of the MTG) and IFG. This result essentially replicates previous findings from our laboratory ( Bitan et al., 2007 ). It is also consistent with a wealth of literature wherein both left MTG and IFG have been shown to play central roles in language processing. On the one hand, it has been argued that left temporo-parietal regions such as the MTG are associated with the long-term storage of lexico-semantic information ( Blumenfeld, Booth, & Burman, 2006 ;  Booth et al., 2002 ;  Fiebach, Friederici, Muller, & von Cramon, 2002 ;  Frost et al., 2005 ;  Rossell, Price, & Nobre, 2003 ;  Simos et al., 2002 ). The activation of the left MTG in our task is thus consistent with the idea that the presentation of familiar words automatically activates the semantic system, even in a task not explicitly requiring comprehension ( Macleod, 1991 ;  Van Orden, Johnston, & Hale, 1998 ). On the other hand, the left IFG is believed to be involved in the effortful control and retrieval of semantic and phonological knowledge ( Bookheimer, 2002 ), a process that is likely to be required in our task where participants have to ignore the spelling of words to access their phonology. Consistent with this idea, there was greater activity in this area when word pairs had conflicting (e.g., pint–mint, jazz–has) than non-conflicting (e.g., dime–lime, press–list) phonological and orthographic information. In sum, the activation of the left MTG and IFG during our verbal processing localizer task is in line with prior research. 
 In the region of the left MTG activated during the phonology processing task, we found more activity when participants evaluated multiplication than subtraction problems. This differential activity was present for both easy and hard problems. To our knowledge, our study is the first to show that the same region of the left MTG is involved in verbal processing and multiplication tasks in healthy adults. Nevertheless, neuroimaging and neuropsychological literature have long suggested a link between multiplication and language processing in humans. For example, neuroimaging studies have shown enhanced activity in the left temporo-parietal cortex when multiplications are compared to subtractions ( Lee, 2000 ), additions ( Zhou et al., 2007 ), number comparison ( Chochon et al., 1999 ), and various control tasks ( Fulbright et al., 2000 ;  Gruber, Indefrey, Steinmetz, & Kleinschmidt, 2001 ;  Jost et al., 2009 ). In a recent series of learning studies, Delazer and colleagues ( Zamarian, Ischebeck, & Delazer, 2009 ) further demonstrated that multiplication-related activity in the left temporo-parietal cortex is dependent upon participants’ expertise: the more arithmetic facts are stored in declarative memory, the greater the activation of the left temporo-parietal cortex. It should be noted, however, that the peaks of activation reported in these learning studies typically lie in the left angular gyrus. These peaks are thus more dorsal than the left MTG region found in the present study. The present study focuses on the left MTG because this region was reliably activated in our phonological processing task, whereas the left angular gyrus was not. Therefore, our study provides novel evidence that, not only the left angular gyrus, but also the left MTG is engaged in mental arithmetic. Future studies employing a verbal localizer task that would reliably activate the left angular gyrus might investigate its precise role in arithmetic processing. Previous neuroimaging studies suggest that activity in the left MTG during word processing tasks (at a location close to the coordinates reported in the current study) reflects the level of semantic association between pairs of words ( Chou et al., 2006 ;  Chou, Chen, Wu, & Booth, 2009 ). Therefore, in the present study, the greater activity observed for multiplication than subtraction problems in the left MTG suggests that this region might house the semantic associations between multiplication problems and their solutions (but not between subtraction problems and their solutions). This is in keeping with most cognitive models of mental arithmetic that assume associative relationships between multiplication problems and their solutions ( Ashcraft, 1992 ;  J. I. D. Campbell, 1995 ;  Dehaene & Cohen, 1995 ;  McCloskey & Lindemann, 1992 ;  Siegler, 1988 ;  Verguts, Fias, & Stevens, 2005 ). 
 In contrast with the results obtained in the left MTG, activity in the region of the left IFG involved the verbal processing task was sensitive to both arithmetic problem (multiplication vs. subtraction) and problem difficulty (easy vs. hard). That is, hard multiplication problems (involving large operands) elicited greater activity in this region than any other type of problems (easy multiplication, hard subtraction and easy subtraction). As indicated earlier, the left IFG is often thought to be involved in the effortful control and retrieval of semantic knowledge ( Bookheimer, 2002 ). Specifically,  Badre & Wagner (2007)  have proposed that the region of the left IFG from which our ROI was defined (i.e., BA 45) is critical for selecting between active representations. In line with this idea, activity in BA 45 typically increases when searching among conceptual representations becomes harder, for example when participants decide whether words with low semantic associations have related meanings ( Chou et al., 2009 ). We speculate that the enhanced activity observed in the left IFG during hard multiplication problems reflects the recruitment of similar control and retrieval processes. That is, because the association between multiplication problems and their correct solution (and thus the activation of the associated representation in the temporo-parietal cortex) is likely to be weaker in hard than in easy problems, hard problems are likely to engage control and retrieval processes to a greater extent than easy problems. In fact, most cognitive models of mental arithmetic posit that the associative strength between problems and correct response decreases as the operand size increases, an effect believed to be responsible for the lower rates of behavioral performance associated with large problems ( Ashcraft, 1992 ;  J. I. D. Campbell, 1995 ;  Dehaene & Cohen, 1995 ;  McCloskey & Lindemann, 1992 ;  Siegler, 1988 ;  Verguts et al., 2005 ). This may be due to the fact that large problems are less frequently encountered than small problems ( Ashcraft, 1992 ), are more difficult to solve by back-up strategies ( Siegler, 1988 ), or are more likely to include a solution with a decade and unit digits inconsistent with the decade and unit digits of closely related operands ( Verguts et al., 2005 ). Although our results do not allow us to disentangle between these possibilities, they are consistent with the idea that control processes are needed when a multiplication problem is not strongly associated with a correct answer, as it is the case for problems with large operands. 
 Even though we found that multiplication problems are associated with more activity than corresponding subtraction problems in the left MTG (for both easy and hard problems) and IFG (only for hard problems), we did not find any significant relationship between the pattern of brain activity associated with verbal processing and multiplication (relative to subtraction) in either the left MTG or the left IFG. This suggests that the neural mechanisms engaged in our phonological processing task do not overlap with the neural mechanisms more engaged in multiplication than subtraction in these regions ( Peelen & Downing, 2007 ). On the one hand, these results (especially in the left MTG) seem inconsistent with the idea that multiplication facts are stored as pure verbal sequences in the semantic system, as proposed by the triple-code model ( Dehaene & Cohen, 1995 ). Rather, this dissociation between the brain patterns underlying verbal processing and multiplication (relative to subtraction) in the MTG is in line with models arguing that multiplication facts are represented as non-verbal associative knowledge in the semantic system ( Ashcraft, 1992 ;  J. I. D. Campbell, 1995 ;  McCloskey & Lindemann, 1992 ) ( Zamarian, Karner, Benke, Donnemiller, & Delazer, 2006 ). This finding is consistent with the idea that semantic knowledge is distributed and modular in the brain ( Martin & Chao, 2001 ). It is also in keeping with neuropsychological findings that show that patients with semantic dementia may exhibit severely impaired knowledge of word meanings but intact numerical knowledge such as multiplication facts ( Zamarian et al., 2006 ). On the other hand, retrieving the meaning of words was irrelevant in our phonological processing task. Studies have provided evidence that the presentation of familiar words automatically activates the semantic system ( Macleod, 1991 ;  Van Orden, Johnston, & Hale, 1998 ). However, it is possible that this automatic activation of the semantic system was too weak to observe a reliable relationship between verbal processing and multiplication (vs. subtraction) in the left MTG. This is consistent with findings showing lower activation of the left MTG in phonological than semantic processing tasks ( Gold, Balota, Kirchhoff, & Buckner, 2005 ;  Gold & Buckner, 2002 ). Future studies might investigate the degree of overlap between verbal processing and multiplication in tasks requiring an explicit processing of the semantic aspects of words. 
 In conclusion, the present findings make several important contributions to the literature on the neural bases of mental arithmetic. To our knowledge, they provide compelling evidence that the same regions involved in numerosity and verbal processing are involved in performing subtraction and multiplication, respectively. Together with recent findings ( Knops, Thirion, Hubbard, Michel, & Dehaene, 2009 ), the overlap between the subtraction and numerosity comparison tasks obtained in the present study supports the idea that recent cultural inventions such as symbolic arithmetic rely on evolutionary older neural structures ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ). By showing that multiplication problems relies more on regions involved in verbal processing, our results also lend support for cognitive theories arguing in favor of dissociation between the neural processes subserving mental arithmetic ( Dehaene & Cohen, 1995 ). It is difficult, however, to draw a firm conclusion on whether the overlap between the multiplication and phonological processing tasks in the left MTG provides evidence for the neuronal recycling hypothesis. First, pattern analyses suggest that multiplication and phonological processing do not engage the same neural mechanisms in the left MTG. Second, the phonological processing task is essentially a reading task. Because reading makes use of neuronal recycling itself ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2007 ), testing the degree of overlap between multiplication and phonological processing might not provide a definite test of the neuronal recycling hypotheses. More generally, our findings highlight the importance of using both localizer tasks and pattern analyses techniques when testing models that posit shared neural processes between tasks, such as the neuronal recycling hypothesis. 
 
 
 
 Figures and Table 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Illustration of the experimental tasks. In all tasks, two stimuli were sequentially presented for 800 ms. The inter-stimuli interval was 200 ms. (A) In each trial of the subtraction task, participants were asked to evaluate the answer of a single-digit subtraction. Problems were either easy (e.g., 3-2) or hard (e.g., 9-4). (B) In each trial of the multiplication task, participants were asked to evaluate the answer of a single-digit multiplication. Problems were either easy (e.g., 3×4) or hard (e.g., 6×7). (C) In each trial of the numerosity comparison task, participants were asked to decide which of two dot arrays had the largest number of dots. The numerical comparison involved a 12:36 ratio (i.e., 12 dots vs. 36 dots), a 18:36 ratio (i.e., 18 dots vs. 36 dots), or a 24:36 ratio (i.e., 24 dots vs. 36 dots). (D) In each trial of the phonological processing task, participant decided whether two visually presented words rhymed or not, or whether two perceptual strings matched or not (control condition). Orthography and phonology of words were manipulated independently. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Locations of the regions of interests (ROIs) localized in the numerosity comparison and phonological processing tasks. (A) Across all subjects, greater activity as numerical ratio increased in the numerosity comparison task was observed in the right intraparietal sulcus (IPS) (Left). A mask of this region was used to define the center the IPS ROI for each subject. The locations of these subject-specific ROIs are shown on a 3D rendering of the MNI-normalized anatomical brain (Right). (B) Across all subjects, there was more activity in both left MTG and IFG when word pairs were compared to perceptual strings in the verbal processing task (Left). A mask of each of these regions was used to define the center the MTG and IFG ROIs for each subject. The locations of these subject-specific ROIs are shown on a 3D rendering of the MNI-normalized anatomical brain (Right). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Variations of activity associated with the localizer and arithmetic tasks in the subject-specific regions of interest (ROIs). (A) In the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) ROI, there was greater activity as the numerical ratio between dot arrays increased in the numerosity comparison task (left), and more activity during subtraction than multiplication problems in the arithmetic tasks (right).. (B) In the middle temporal gyrus (MTG) ROI, there was more activity for word pairs than perceptual strings in the verbal processing task (left), and more activity during multiplication than subtraction problems in the arithmetic tasks (right). (C) In the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) ROI, there was more activity for word pairs than perceptual strings in the verbal processing task (left), and more activity in hard than in easy multiplication problems in the arithmetic tasks (right). *** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, n.s. p > 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Pattern analyses. (A) Overview of the voxel-by-voxel correlation method. For each subject and each region-of-interest (ROI), the pattern of brain activation associated with a given localizer task was correlated with the pattern of brain activation associated with a test contrast. In this example, the pattern associated with the test contrast 1 (left) is highly correlated with the pattern associated with the localizer contrast (middle), while the pattern associated with the test contrast 2 (right) is weakly (or negatively) correlated with the pattern associated with the localizer contrast. (B) In the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) ROI, the pattern of activity associated with the contrast subtraction vs. multiplication was correlated with the pattern associated with the contrast 24:36 vs. 12:36 in the numerosity comparison task for both easy and hard problems. In the left middle temporal gyrus (MTG) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), however, no relationship was observed between the pattern of activity associated with the contrast multiplication vs. subtraction and the pattern associated with the contrast word pairs vs. symbol strings in the verbal processing task. * p < 0.05, n.s. p > 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 The strength of the overlap between the neural correlates of subtraction (vs. multiplication) and numerosity comparison in the right intraparietal sulcus (IPS) predicts inter-individual performance on hard subtraction problems. Specifically, there was a negative relationship between the individual mean reaction time in hard problems of the subtraction task and the strength of the correlation between the contrasts subtraction vs. multiplication and 24:36 vs. 12:36. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brain regions activated in the localizer tasks 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical location 
 ~ BA 
 MNI coordinates 
 Z-score 
 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 Y 
 
 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Numerosity comparison (24:36 > 12:36) 
 
 
 
 R. Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 48 
 34 
 20 
 4.45 
 
 
 R. Cingulate Gyrus 
 32 
 10 
 20 
 40 
 4.3 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 8 
 2 
 20 
 52 
 4.02 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 −30 
 26 
 −16 
 4.12 
 
 
 R. Intraparietal Sulcus 
 40 
 40 
 −40 
 44 
 3.82 
 
 
 R. Precuneus 
 19/7 
 30 
 −64 
 40 
 3.68 
 
 
 R. Insula 
 13 
 46 
 8 
 16 
 3.62 
 
 
 
 Phonological processing (Words > Symbols) 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 −46 
 30 
 −8 
 5.15 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 44 
 −52 
 14 
 16 
 3.85 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 −44 
 18 
 20 
 3.25 
 
 
 L. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 −2 
 52 
 24 
 3.6 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 2 
 58 
 20 
 3.26 
 
 
 L. Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 −48 
 −44 
 −4 
 3.31 
 
 
 L. Posterior Cingulate 
 29 
 −4 
 −52 
 12 
 4.13 
 
 
 L. Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 28 
 −18 
 −14 
 −20 
 3.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes. L., left; R. right; ~ BA, approximate Brodmann Area; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (HD059177) to James R. Booth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 ML 
 
 
 (in press) 
 Neural re-use as a fundamental organizational principle of the brain 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Dhital 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Age-related changes in the activation of the intraparietal sulcus during nonsymbolic magnitude processing: an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 18 
 11 
 1820 
 1828 
 17069473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 1992 
 Cognitive arithmetic: a review of data and theory 
 Cognition and Instruction 
 44 
 1–2 
 75 
 106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 13 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baldo 
 JV 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural correlates of arithmetic and language comprehension: a common substrate? 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2 
 229 
 235 
 16997333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bitan 
 T 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Chou 
 TL 
 
 
 Lu 
 D 
 
 
 Cone 
 NE 
 
 
 Cao 
 F 
 
 
 
 2007 
 The interaction between orthographic and phonological information in children: an fMRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 9 
 880 
 891 
 17133384 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blumenfeld 
 HK 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 2006 
 Differential prefrontal-temporal neural correlates of semantic processing in children 
 Brain Lang 
 99 
 3 
 226 
 235 
 16098571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional MRI of language: new approaches to understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 25 
 151 
 188 
 12052907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Meyer 
 JR 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2002 
 Modality independence of word comprehension 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 16 
 4 
 251 
 261 
 12112766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JI 
 
 
 Xue 
 Q 
 
 
 2001 
 Cognitive arithmetic across cultures 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 130 
 2 
 299 
 315 
 11409105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 1995 
 Mechanisms of simple addition and multiplication: A modified network-interference theory and simulation 
 Mathematical Cognition 
 1 
 121 
 164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cantlon 
 JF 
 
 
 Platt 
 ML 
 
 
 Brannon 
 EM 
 
 
 2009 
 Beyond the number domain 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 13 
 2 
 83 
 91 
 19131268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Castelli 
 F 
 
 
 Glaser 
 DE 
 
 
 Butterworth 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Discrete and analogue quantity processing in the parietal lobe: a functional MRI study 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 12 
 4693 
 4698 
 16537401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cavanna 
 AE 
 
 
 Trimble 
 MR 
 
 
 2006 
 The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates 
 Brain 
 129 
 564 
 583 
 16399806 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chochon 
 F 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 van de Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 1999 
 Differential contributions of the left and right inferior parietal lobules to number processing 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 11 
 6 
 617 
 630 
 10601743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chou 
 TL 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Bitan 
 T 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Bigio 
 JD 
 
 
 Cone 
 NE 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Developmental and skill effects on the neural correlates of semantic processing to visually presented words 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 27 
 11 
 915 
 924 
 16575838 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chou 
 TL 
 
 
 Chen 
 CW 
 
 
 Wu 
 MY 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 2009 
 The role of inferior frontal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule in semantic processing of Chinese characters 
 Exp Brain Res 
 198 
 4 
 465 
 475 
 19618170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooney 
 JB 
 
 
 Swanson 
 HL 
 
 
 Ladd 
 SF 
 
 
 1988 
 Acquisition of mental multiplication skill: Evidence for the transition between counting and retrieval strategies 
 Cognition and Instruction 
 5 
 323 
 345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 8 
 2–3 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Brauwer 
 J 
 
 
 Verguts 
 T 
 
 
 Fias 
 W 
 
 
 2006 
 The representation of multiplication facts: developmental changes in the problem size, five, and tie effects 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 94 
 1 
 43 
 56 
 16376370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 1997 
 The Number Sense 
 Oxford 
 Oxford Univ. Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 1995 
 Towards an anatomical and functional model of number processing 
 Mathematical Cognition 
 1 
 83 
 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 1997 
 Cerebral pathways for calculation: double dissociation between rote verbal and quantitative knowledge of arithmetic 
 Cortex 
 33 
 2 
 219 
 250 
 9220256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Cultural recycling of cortical maps 
 Neuron 
 56 
 2 
 384 
 398 
 17964253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Molko 
 N 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Wilson 
 AJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Arithmetic and the brain 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 14 
 2 
 218 
 224 
 15082328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Piazza 
 M 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 2003 
 Three parietal circuits for number processing 
 Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 3/4/5/6 
 487 
 506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 Benke 
 T 
 
 
 1997 
 Arithmetic facts without meaning 
 Cortex 
 33 
 4 
 697 
 710 
 9444471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 Domahs 
 F 
 
 
 Bartha 
 L 
 
 
 Brenneis 
 C 
 
 
 Lochy 
 A 
 
 
 Trieb 
 T 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Learning complex arithmetic--an fMRI study 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 18 
 1 
 76 
 88 
 14659499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 Wiggett 
 AJ 
 
 
 Peelen 
 MV 
 
 
 2007 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of overlapping lateral occipitotemporal activations using multi-voxel pattern analysis 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 1 
 226 
 233 
 17202490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eger 
 E 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 Russ 
 MO 
 
 
 Giraud 
 AL 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 A supramodal number representation in human intraparietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 37 
 4 
 719 
 725 
 12597867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fehr 
 T 
 
 
 Code 
 C 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Common brain regions underlying different arithmetic operations as revealed by conjunct fMRI-BOLD activation 
 Brain Res 
 1172 
 93 
 102 
 17822681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Muller 
 K 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2002 
 fMRI evidence for dual routes to the mental lexicon in visual word recognition 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 14 
 1 
 11 
 23 
 11798383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Moore 
 DL 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 
 2005 
 A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of the tradeoff between semantics and phonology in reading aloud 
 Neuroreport 
 16 
 6 
 621 
 624 
 15812320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Molfese 
 DL 
 
 
 Stevens 
 AA 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Lacadie 
 CM 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 2000 
 Cerebral activation during multiplication: a functional MR imaging study of number processing 
 AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
 21 
 6 
 1048 
 1054 
 10871012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 2000 
 From infancy to adulthood: the development of numerical abilities 
 Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 9 
 Suppl 2 
 II11 
 16 
 11138899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 BT 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Kirchhoff 
 BA 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2005 
 Common and dissociable activation patterns associated with controlled semantic and phonological processing: evidence from FMRI adaptation 
 Cereb Cortex 
 15 
 9 
 1438 
 1450 
 15647526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 BT 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2002 
 Common prefrontal regions coactivate with dissociable posterior regions during controlled semantic and phonological tasks 
 Neuron 
 35 
 4 
 803 
 812 
 12194878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gruber 
 O 
 
 
 Indefrey 
 P 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 2001 
 Dissociating neural correlates of cognitive components in mental calculation 
 Cereb Cortex 
 11 
 4 
 350 
 359 
 11278198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holloway 
 ID 
 
 
 Price 
 GR 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 2010 
 Common and segregated neural pathways for the processing of symbolic and nonsymbolic numerical magnitude: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 1 
 1006 
 1017 
 19666127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ischebeck 
 A 
 
 
 Zamarian 
 L 
 
 
 Egger 
 K 
 
 
 Schocke 
 M 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Imaging early practice effects in arithmetic 
 Neuroimage 
 36 
 3 
 993 
 1003 
 17490893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 1997 
 Event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 5 
 4 
 217 
 327 
 20408217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jost 
 K 
 
 
 Khader 
 P 
 
 
 Burke 
 M 
 
 
 Bien 
 S 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 2009 
 Dissociating the solution processes of small, large, and zero multiplications by means of fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 46 
 1 
 308 
 318 
 19457376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Taira 
 M 
 
 
 Okita 
 K 
 
 
 Inoue 
 K 
 
 
 Tajima 
 N 
 
 
 Yoshida 
 H 
 
 
 
 2004 
 A functional MRI study of simple arithmetic--a comparison between children and adults 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 18 
 3 
 227 
 233 
 14741309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knops 
 A 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 Hubbard 
 EM 
 
 
 Michel 
 V 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Recruitment of an area involved in eye movements during mental arithmetic 
 Science 
 324 
 5934 
 1583 
 1585 
 19423779 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Le Clec 
 HG 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Mehler 
 J 
 
 
 Dupoux 
 E 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Distinct cortical areas for names of numbers and body parts independent of language and input modality 
 Neuroimage 
 12 
 4 
 381 
 391 
 10988032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 KM 
 
 
 2000 
 Cortical areas differentially involved in multiplication and subtraction: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study and correlation with a case of selective acalculia 
 Ann Neurol 
 48 
 4 
 657 
 661 
 11026450 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levine 
 SC 
 
 
 Jordan 
 NC 
 
 
 Huttenlocher 
 J 
 
 
 1992 
 Development of calculation abilities in young children 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 53 
 1 
 72 
 103 
 1545190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macleod 
 CM 
 
 
 1991 
 Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: an integrative review 
 Psychol Bull 
 109 
 163 
 203 
 2034749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Chao 
 LL 
 
 
 2001 
 Semantic memory and the brain: structure and processes 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 11 
 2 
 194 
 201 
 11301239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCloskey 
 M 
 
 
 Lindemann 
 AM 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 1992 
 Mathnet: Preliminary results from a distributed model of arithmetic fact retrieval 
 The nature and origins of mathematical skills 
 365 
 409 
 Amsterdam 
 Elsevier 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moyer 
 RS 
 
 
 Bayer 
 RH 
 
 
 1976 
 Mental comparison and the symbolic distance effect 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 8 
 2 
 228 
 246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nieder 
 A 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Representation of number in the brain 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 32 
 185 
 208 
 19400715 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peelen 
 MV 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 2007 
 Using multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data to interpret overlapping functional activations 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 1 
 4 
 5 
 17129747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peelen 
 MV 
 
 
 Wiggett 
 AJ 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 2006 
 Patterns of fMRI activity dissociate overlapping functional brain areas that respond to biological motion 
 Neuron 
 49 
 6 
 815 
 822 
 16543130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Piazza 
 M 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2007 
 A magnitude code common to numerosities and number symbols in human intraparietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 53 
 2 
 293 
 305 
 17224409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Riviere 
 D 
 
 
 LeBihan 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 Modulation of parietal activation by semantic distance in a number comparison task 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 5 
 1013 
 1026 
 11697933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Piazza 
 M 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Distributed and overlapping cerebral representations of number, size, and luminance during comparative judgments 
 Neuron 
 41 
 6 
 983 
 993 
 15046729 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 Meriaux 
 S 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Serres 
 J 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Fast reproducible identification and large-scale databasing of individual functional cognitive networks 
 BMC Neurosci 
 8 
 91 
 17973998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prado 
 J 
 
 
 Noveck 
 IA 
 
 
 Van Der Henst 
 JB 
 
 
 2010 
 Overlapping and distinct neural representations of numbers and verbal transitive series 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 3 
 720 
 729 
 19605520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural correlates of relational memory: successful encoding and retrieval of semantic and perceptual associations 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 1203 
 1210 
 15689557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 van den Wildenberg 
 WP 
 
 
 Segalowitz 
 SJ 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2004 
 Neurocognitive mechanisms of cognitive control: the role of prefrontal cortex in action selection, response inhibition, performance monitoring, and reward-based learning 
 Brain Cogn 
 56 
 129 
 140 
 15518930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossell 
 SL 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 2003 
 The anatomy and time course of semantic priming investigated by fMRI and ERPs 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 5 
 550 
 564 
 12638581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2006 
 Divide and conquer: a defense of functional localizers 
 NeuroImage 
 30 
 1088 
 1096 
 16635578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Brown 
 RD 
 
 
 2004 
 Empirical validation of the triple-code model of numerical processing for complex math operations using functional MRI and group Independent Component Analysis of the mental addition and subtraction of fractions 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 3 
 1414 
 1420 
 15219612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seyler 
 DJ 
 
 
 Kirk 
 EP 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 2003 
 Elementary subtraction 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 29 
 6 
 1339 
 1352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegler 
 RS 
 
 
 1988 
 Strategy choice procedures and the development of multiplication skill 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 117 
 3 
 258 
 275 
 2971762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegler 
 RS 
 
 
 1989 
 Hazards of mental chonometry: An example from children’s subtraction 
 Educational Psychology 
 81 
 497 
 506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 O 
 
 
 Mangin 
 JF 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Topographical layout of hand, eye, calculation, and language-related areas in the human parietal lobe 
 Neuron 
 33 
 3 
 475 
 487 
 11832233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simos 
 PG 
 
 
 Breier 
 JI 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Foorman 
 BR 
 
 
 Castillo 
 EM 
 
 
 Papanicolaou 
 AC 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain mechanisms for reading words and pseudowords: an integrated approach 
 Cereb Cortex 
 12 
 3 
 297 
 305 
 11839603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stanescu-Cosson 
 R 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 van De Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2000 
 Understanding dissociations in dyscalculia: a brain imaging study of the impact of number size on the cerebral networks for exact and approximate calculation 
 Brain 
 123 
 Pt 11 
 2240 
 2255 
 11050024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stazyk 
 EH 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 Hamann 
 MS 
 
 
 1982 
 A network approach to simple mental multiplication 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 8 
 320 
 335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thioux 
 M 
 
 
 Pesenti 
 M 
 
 
 Costes 
 N 
 
 
 De Volder 
 A 
 
 
 Seron 
 X 
 
 
 2005 
 Task-independent semantic activation for numbers and animals 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 24 
 2 
 284 
 290 
 15993766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Orden 
 GC 
 
 
 Johnston 
 JC 
 
 
 Hale 
 BL 
 
 
 1998 
 Word identification in reading proceeds from spelling to sound to meaning 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 14 
 371 
 386 
 2969938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verguts 
 T 
 
 
 Fias 
 W 
 
 
 Stevens 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 A model of exact small-number representation 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 12 
 1 
 66 
 80 
 15945201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Beaucousin 
 V 
 
 
 Herve 
 PY 
 
 
 Duffau 
 H 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Houde 
 O 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: phonology, semantics, and sentence processing 
 Neuroimage 
 30 
 4 
 1414 
 1432 
 16413796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zamarian 
 L 
 
 
 Ischebeck 
 A 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Neuroscience of learning arithmetic--evidence from brain imaging studies 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 33 
 6 
 909 
 925 
 19428500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zamarian 
 L 
 
 
 Karner 
 E 
 
 
 Benke 
 T 
 
 
 Donnemiller 
 E 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Knowing 7 x 8, but not the meaning of ‘elephant’: evidence for the dissociation between numerical and non-numerical semantic knowledge 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 10 
 1708 
 1723 
 16697429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhou 
 X 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Dong 
 Q 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Qiao 
 S 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociated brain organization for single-digit addition and multiplication 
 Neuroimage 
 35 
 2 
 871 
 880 
 17292628 
 
 
 
 
