
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 21530556 
 3277954 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.04.008 
 NIHMS289937 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Where did I put that? Patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment demonstrate widespread reductions in activity during the encoding of ecologically relevant object-location associations 
 
 
 
 
 Hampstead 
 Benjamin M. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Stringer 
 Anthony Y. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 b 
 c 
 
 
 
 Stilla 
 Randall F. 
 
 M.S. 
 d 
 
 
 
 Amaraneni 
 Akshay 
 
 B.S. 
 b 
 
 
 
 Sathian 
 K. 
 
 M.D., Ph.D. 
 a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
 
 
 a  Rehabilitation R&D Center of Excellence, Atlanta VAMC, Decatur, Georgia 
 b  Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 
 c  Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 
 d  Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 
 
 Corresponding Author: Benjamin M. Hampstead, Ph.D. 1441 Clifton Rd NE Room 150 Atlanta, GA 30087 404-712-5667 (office) 404-712-1652 (fax)  bhampst@emory.edu 
 
 
 27 
 4 
 2011 
 
 
 15 
 4 
 2011 
 
 
 7 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 7 
 2012 
 
 49 
 9 
 2349 
 2361 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Remembering the location of objects in the environment is both important in everyday life and difficult for patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), a clinical precursor to Alzheimer’s disease. To test the hypothesis that memory impairment for object location in aMCI reflects hippocampal dysfunction, we used an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm to compare patients with aMCI and healthy elderly controls (HEC) as they encoded 90 ecologically-relevant object-location associations (OLAs). Two additional OLAs, repeated a total of 45 times, served as control stimuli. Memory for these OLAs was assessed following a 1-hour delay. The groups were well matched on demographics and brain volumetrics. Behaviorally, HEC remembered significantly more OLAs than did aMCI patients. Activity differences were assessed by contrasting activation for successfully encoded novel stimuli vs. repeated stimuli. The HEC demonstrated activity within object-related (ventral visual stream), spatial location-related (dorsal visual stream), and feature binding-related cortical regions (hippocampus and other memory-related regions) as well as in frontal cortex and associated subcortical structures. Activity in most of these regions correlated with memory test performance. Although the aMCI patients demonstrated a similar activation pattern, the HEC showed significantly greater activity within each of these regions. Memory test performance in aMCI patients, in contrast to the HEC, was correlated with activity in regions involved in sensorimotor processing. We conclude that aMCI patients demonstrate widespread cerebral dysfunction, not limited to the hippocampus, and rely on encoding-related mechanisms that differ substantially from healthy individuals. 
 
 
 Learning 
 memory 
 associative memory 
 object-location associations 
 Alzheimer’s disease 
 aging 
 hippocampus 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Aging : NIA 
 P50 AG025688-06 || AG 
 
 
 National Institute on Aging : NIA 
 P50 AG025688-05 || AG 
 
 
 National Eye Institute : NEI 
 K24 EY017332-04 || EY 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) is widely considered a transitional stage between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) ( Petersen, 2004 ;  Petersen et al., 2009 ). aMCI is characterized by deficient explicit learning and memory, which is attributed to the characteristic disease pathology within the hippocampus and other medial temporal regions ( Braak et al., 1999 ). Identifying patients with aMCI allows for earlier treatment and, ideally, maintenance of a higher quality of life. 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has revealed evidence of both structural and functional changes in the brains of aMCI patients. Structurally, medial temporal lobe and hippocampal atrophy have been associated with memory impairment ( Loewenstein et al., 2009 ) and progression to AD ( Apostolova et al., 2010a ;  Apostolova et al., 2010b ). Although some degree of hippocampal atrophy occurs with age, patients with aMCI and AD show greater change in the anterior portions of the hippocampus relative to healthy elderly ( Frisoni et al., 2008 ;  Hämäläinen et al., 2007 ). More widespread cortical atrophy has also been identified in aMCI ( Whitwell et al., 2007 ) and even suggested as a “fingerprint” of impending AD ( Dickerson et al., 2009 ). Thus, the location and degree of atrophy can be considered a measure of disease severity and may hold some predictive utility; however, it could be argued that individuals demonstrating atrophic change have already progressed to the point that current interventions will be minimally effective. 
 
 1.1 Functional MRI (fMRI) differences in encoding between healthy elderly, aMCI, and AD 
 fMRI provides a proxy measure of neuronal functioning and, as a result, may be particularly useful in identifying patients at risk of developing AD even before atrophy is apparent. Here we limit our discussion to fMRI paradigms of memory encoding since this is the focus of the current study. A recent quantitative meta-analysis of event-related fMRI data in healthy young subjects revealed consistent activity within the parahippocampal gyrus and anterior hippocampus, prefrontal cortex (both dorsolateral and ventrolateral), fusiform gyrus and neighboring occipitotemporal regions, intraparietal sulcus, and superior parietal lobule during trials when stimuli were successfully encoded ( Spaniol et al., 2009 ). This pattern changes dramatically by the time patients have progressed to AD: another quantitative meta-analysis found that patients with early AD demonstrate significantly less activity during encoding than healthy controls within a number of regions involved in memory (hippocampi, posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus), attention, and executive functioning (right insula, superior parietal lobule, inferior and middle frontal gyri, precentral gyrus) ( Schwindt & Black, 2009 ). aMCI patients generally demonstrate reduced cortical activity relative to healthy elderly, especially within the frontal and parietal cortices ( Machulda et al., 2009 ;  Mandzia, McAndrews, Grady, Graham, & Black, 2009 ). Interestingly, however, AD patients were more likely than healthy elderly to demonstrate activity within some prefrontal (e.g. ventrolateral) and inferior occipitotemporal regions (e.g. fusiform gyrus) ( Schwindt & Black, 2009 ). Similar frontal increases have also been reported in aMCI ( Celone et al., 2006 ;  Clement, Belleville, & Mellah, 2010 ) and AD ( Grady et al., 2003 ) and have been posited to be compensatory in nature. 
 The patterns of medial temporal lobe activity, especially within the hippocampus, vary widely across the spectrum from normal to AD and between different reports. For example, aMCI patients have been reported to demonstrate hypoactivation ( Johnson et al., 2004 ;  Machulda et al., 2009 ;  Machulda et al., 2003 ;  Petrella et al., 2007 ), equivalent ( Petrella et al., 2006 ;  Trivedi et al., 2008 ), and even hyperactivation relative to healthy elderly ( Celone et al., 2006 ;  Dickerson et al., 2005 ;  Hämäläinen, et al., 2007 ,  Kircher et al., 2007 ). Such variability led Dickerson and colleagues to propose a model whereby less impaired patients demonstrate hyperactivation whereas more impaired patients demonstrate hypoactivation ( Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ). Consistent with this notion, increased hippocampal activity was predictive of clinical decline over a 2-year follow-up period ( O’Brien et al., 2010 ) and the rate and severity of decline over a 4+ year timeframe ( Miller et al., 2008 ). Thus, fMRI appears sensitive to changes that occur as patients progress from healthy through aMCI to AD. The most sensitive fMRI memory paradigm will, theoretically, be one mediated by regions that are affected during the earliest phases of AD pathology. 
 
 
 1.2 Neural correlates of associative memory 
 The hippocampus appears to play a vital role in forming inter-item associations ( Mayes, Montaldi, & Migo, 2007 ) and, as a result, associative memory paradigms may be especially sensitive to functional changes within the hippocampus and other related memory areas. In fact, patients with aMCI demonstrate greater associative than item memory impairment ( Troyer et al., 2008 ). The anterior portions of the hippocampus appear especially vital for successful performance on associative memory tasks ( Chua, Schacter, Rand-Giovannetti, & Sperling, 2007 ). As noted above, the anterior hippocampus demonstrates early structural atrophy in aMCI and AD ( Frisoni, et al., 2008 ;  Hämäläinen, et al., 2007 ). Perhaps not surprisingly then, face-name associations are among the most commonly used associative memory paradigms in patients with aMCI ( Celone et al., 2006 ;  Dickerson, et al., 2005 ;  Petrella et al., 2007 ;  Sperling et al., 2003 ). For these reasons, we developed a face-name association task to examine the behavioral ( Hampstead, Sathian, Moore, Nalisnick, & Stringer, 2008 ) and fMRI changes ( Hampstead et al., 2011 ) associated with cognitive rehabilitation in patients with aMCI. In order to extend our memory rehabilitation work to other types of information, we developed a novel memory paradigm using object-location associations (OLAs) (described below). 
 Clinically, patients frequently complain of misplacing objects in their everyday life, which highlights the ecological relevance of OLA paradigms.  Postma and colleagues (2008)  proposed three specific processes that are necessary for successfully remembering OLAs. First, the identity of the object is determined via processing in the inferior temporal lobe. The relationship between object identification and ventral occipito-temporal cortex, part of the ventral visual stream, was established by  Mishkin, Ungerleider, and Macko (1983)  and later supported by functional neuroimaging work (e.g.  Haxby et al., 1991 ). 
 Next in Postma et al.’s model, the spatial location is processed by the posterior parietal cortex with prefrontal and hippocampal contributions. The parietal cortex is known to be critical for visuospatial functioning, especially within the right hemisphere, as was demonstrated in early lesion studies ( Newcombe and Russell, 1969 ). This spatial processing pathway was also described by  Mishkin et al. (1983)  and is generally referred to as the dorsal visual stream. In regard to the prefrontal contributions,  Postma et al. (2008)  cite the possible importance of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The right hemisphere is believed to play a role in the processing of coordinate positional knowledge whereas the left is believed to mediate categorical spatial knowledge. Additionally, the DLPFC plays an important role in working memory, which is likely used as an individual mentally holds and, possibly, manipulates information about the object and its location during the encoding and/or retrieval process. Consistent with this notion,  Sommer et al. (2005)  found that encoding-related activity in the right DLPFC was significantly related to subsequent memory test performance in healthy young subjects. Interestingly, the right DLPFC (and specifically the middle frontal gyrus – MFG) was found to be more active in patients with AD relative to healthy elderly in a recent meta-analysis ( Schwindt and Black, 2009 ). Thus, activity in this region may be especially important to consider in regard to both behavioral performance and disease severity. 
 Finally, the object and location are bound into a long-lasting memory by the hippocampus ( Postma et al., 2008 ). Interestingly,  Mishkin et al. (1983)  initially posited that the hippocampus may reintegrate the object and spatial information and “…enable the rapid memorization of the particular locations occupied by particular objects” (p 417). Hippocampal contributions may not be limited to binding, however, given the established role of the hippocampus in spatial memory ( Bird & Burgess, 2008 ). Consistent with this OLA model, several fMRI studies with healthy young subjects have revealed activity within inferior and medial temporal cortex (including the hippocampus), extrastriate, superior parietal (including the precuneus), and inferior frontal cortical regions ( Frings et al., 2006 ;  Ramsoy et al., 2009 ;  Sommer, Rose, Glascher, Wolbers, & Buchel, 2005a ;  Sommer, Rose, Weiller, & Buchel, 2005b ). As noted above, many of these same regions are affected in aMCI and AD. 
 We are not aware of any previous fMRI research on OLAs in patients with aMCI. Behaviorally, explicit memory for OLAs is impaired in patients with aMCI and AD ( Kessels, Feijen, & Postma, 2005 ;  Kessels, Rijken, Banningh, Van Schuylenborgh-Van Es, & Rikkert, 2010 ). Interestingly, however, implicit memory for the location of objects is relatively preserved in AD patients ( Kessels et al., 2005 ). Such findings are consistent with the view that OLAs can be encoded both effortfully and automatically ( Postma, et al., 2008 ). Therefore, we constructed our OLA memory test so that it relies more on recollection than mere familiarity (see description below). 
 
 
 1.3 The current study 
 The current fMRI study assessed the behavioral and neural differences in the encoding of OLAs using an ecologically-oriented paradigm in healthy elderly and patients with aMCI. Given the model proposed by  Postma et al. (2008) , we predicted that all participants would show increased activity within the ventral and dorsal visual pathways, which presumably relate to object and spatial processing, respectively. Because learning and memory are the primary deficits associated with aMCI, we did not necessarily expect between-group differences within these regions. We predicted, however, that healthy elderly would, on average, demonstrate greater hippocampal activity than the aMCI. Given the heterogeneous nature of aMCI, we were especially interested in the relationship between the magnitude of hippocampal activity, performance on the OLA task, and measures of disease severity, with the expectation that less impaired patients would demonstrate hyperactivation relative to more impaired patients ( Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ). We examined these predictions using both standard contrast maps and correlation maps relating fMRI activity to performance, in order to clarify the regions associated with successful encoding of the stimuli. 
 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 A total of 34 right-handed participants completed this study. Eighteen patients with aMCI were recruited from the Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Emory University, including the Emory University Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC). Each patient had been diagnosed with aMCI according to Petersen’s criteria ( Petersen, 2004 ) at a consensus conference that included neurologists, neuropsychologists, geriatricians, and other key clinical staff. Specifically, the patients (or caregivers) reported memory decline, demonstrated evidence of objective memory impairment within the context of generally preserved global cognitive functioning, and were largely independent in activities of daily living. Sixteen healthy elderly controls (HEC) were recruited from the ADRC longitudinal registry or surrounding community. HEC were free of subjective and objective memory impairments and were independent in activities of daily living. General exclusion criteria included a history of neurologic disease (e.g. dementia, stroke, epilepsy, traumatic brain injury), psychiatric disorders (e.g. severe depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia), and current or past alcohol or drug abuse. The Institutional Review Board of Emory University and the Research and Development Committee of the Atlanta VAMC approved the study. All participants gave written informed consent. 
 As noted, all patients had been previously diagnosed with aMCI. However, in order to ensure patients had not progressed to dementia or reverted to normal, all participants completed a brief neuropsychological screening protocol within approximately one month before fMRI scanning. This protocol also ensured the HEC were not demonstrating significant memory deficits. The protocol consisted of the Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) ( Folstein, 1975 ), the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) ( Randolph, 1998 ), the Trail Making Test, the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) ( Yesavage et al., 1983 ), and the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) ( Pfeffer et al., 1982 ). Group demographic and neuropsychological data are shown in  Table 1 . These groups were very similar according to age, education, and overall cognitive functioning (MMSE). As expected, aMCI patients demonstrated significant learning and memory deficits relative to HEC on the RBANS. There were also significant differences between HEC and aMCI on the Language Index, due to reduced semantic fluency in the aMCI patients (z= −0.92) relative to the HEC (z= +0.24), but consistent with the pattern of cognitive deficits expected in AD. Although the aMCI patients had relatively more difficulty in daily functioning than the HEC, their scores on the FAQ were within the range typical of aMCI patients as opposed to those with dementia ( Steenland et al., 2008 ). Such mild “inconveniences” in daily functioning are described in Petersen’s diagnostic criteria and are likely related to the memory impairment ( Petersen, 2004 ). Thus, the overall neurocognitive profile of our aMCI group is consistent with individuals who are likely to convert to AD ( Petersen, 2004 ). 
 
 
 2.2 Volumetric analyses 
 As noted above, cerebral atrophy is commonly observed in aMCI; such atrophy may affect the BOLD signal in patients with AD ( Johnson et al., 2000 ). There appears to be a relationship between hippocampal atrophy and the magnitude of BOLD signal change in aMCI ( Dickerson, et al., 2005 ;  Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ). Thus, volumetric differences between aMCI patients and HEC could affect data analysis and subsequent interpretation. Therefore, we obtained volumetric measurements from high-resolution anatomic images (see acquisition parameters below) for all participants using an FDA-approved, commercially available program (NeuroQuant®). This program was previously validated against a computer-aided manual segmentation procedure and was also found sensitive to volumetric changes in mild AD ( Brewer, Magda, Airriess, & Smith, 2009 ). Based on the known patterns of cortical (including medial temporal) atrophy in aMCI, we selected the three available medial temporal lobe regions (hippocampus, amygdala, inferior lateral ventricles) as well as measures of overall cerebral integrity (total cortical gray matter, lateral ventricles). We used the percent of intracranial volume values for each region since this method reduces measurement variability more than other commonly used methods ( Gold & Squire, 2005 ). These values can be seen in  Table 1 ; importantly, there were no significant differences between the groups. 
 
 
 2.3 Stimuli 
 Associative memory paradigms are dependent on the medial temporal lobes ( Mayes, et al., 2007 ) and sensitive to impairments in aMCI ( Petrella et al., 2007 ;  Troyer et al., 2008 ). Therefore, we are particularly interested in using such paradigms for assessing the efficacy of cognitive rehabilitation ( Hampstead et al., 2011 ;  Hampstead et al., 2008 ). Our approach is based on a recently published cognitive rehabilitation program ( Stringer, 2007 ). However, this requires the paradigms to be more ecologically oriented than those used in many fMRI studies. For example, previous OLA studies have required patients to remember line drawings within a grid ( de Rover et al., 2008 ;  Gould et al., 2003 ;  Ramsoy et al., 2009 ;  Sommer et al., 2005 ), which has very little real-world application. Therefore, we developed an OLA paradigm similar to one used by Kessels and colleagues ( Kessels et al., 2005 ). We used a computerized 3-dimensional design program ( www.Plan3d.com ) in order to more closely control the features of each room. We created two lists of 9 rooms (bathroom, bedroom, dining, garage, kitchen, laundry, living, office, recreational) and then identified 5 locations within each room that were reasonably spaced from one another. These locations spread the entire width and, to the extent possible, the height of each room (e.g. floor, shelves, tables, cabinets). 
 For the objects, we used an internet-based database to identify objects that were highly concrete, familiar, and imageable ( http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/mrcdatabase/mrc2.html ). The values for these variables range from 100 (least) – 700 (most); we chose only objects with values >400 and names that were 3 – 10 letters in length. From this initial list (over 160 objects), we selected 90 objects that could feasibly be found in at least 2 rooms within the home. These 90 objects were all quite concrete (mean: 588.3 (SD 36.6)), familiar (mean: 550.5 (SD 47.4)), imageable (mean: 576.3 (SD 39.1)), and common in American English (words per million mean: 31.5 (SD 85.9);  http://subtlexus.lexique.org ;  Brysbaert & New, 2009 ). 
 We then assigned 5 objects to one of the rooms in which they were likely to be found. Although some degree of semantic association existed between the objects and the room, this was necessary to create an ecologically sound task. Additionally, pilot testing suggested that unrelated items appeared to create an “oddball” effect, which could have increased the salience of the association and made it easier to encode (e.g. a shovel in the kitchen). Importantly, each object was pseudorandomly placed into one of the locations within each room such that any object could have reasonably appeared in any of the 5 target locations in that room; this was designed to limit the ability of implicit or semantic associations to influence OLA memory. 
 In the present report, the 90 OLAs are referred to as the “Novel associations” hereafter. We also developed two rooms (kitchen, bathroom) with one object in each room that are referred to as the “Repeated associations”, which allowed us to control for basic perceptual processes during scanning ( Hampstead et al., 2011 ;  Sperling, et al., 2003 ). 
 
 
 2.4 fMRI procedures 
 
 2.4.1 Imaging parameters 
 MR scans were performed on a Siemens Trio 3T MRI scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA), using a 12-channel head coil. For blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast, T2*-weighted functional images were acquired using a single-shot, gradient-recalled, echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) 2000 ms, echo time (TE) 30 ms, field of view (FOV) 220 mm, flip angle (FA) 90°, 29 axial slices of 4 mm thickness, in-plane resolution 3.4×3.4 mm, and in-plane matrix 64×64. High-resolution anatomic images were acquired using a 3D MPRAGE sequence (TR 2300 ms, TE 3.9 ms, TI 1100 ms, FA 8°) consisting of 176 sagittal slices of 1 mm thickness (FOV 256 mm, in-plane resolution 1×1 mm, in-plane matrix 256×256). Once the scanner achieved magnetic stabilization for each run, it triggered the computer running Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems Inc., Albany, California) in order to synchronize stimulation and scan acquisition. Participants were given MRI-compatible glasses that matched their refractive prescription, if necessary. 
 
 
 2.4.2 fMRI paradigm 
 During fMRI scanning, we defined a trial as an entire 6 s active period within which, an object was first displayed for 2s to ensure patients accurately perceived it; immediately followed for 4s by the object in its location ( Figure 1 ). Both portions of the trial were included in fMRI analysis because we wanted to examine the entire set of cognitive processes involved in OLAs (i.e. one must be aware of the object as well as its location). We did not attempt to tease apart object-specific responses and responses to OLAs and hence elected to use a “slow” event-related design without jitter. Each run consisted of 18 novel and 9 repeated trials. Trials were separated by an 8 s inter-stimulus interval. Six 10-s baseline periods were randomly distributed throughout each run in order to allow for signal normalization. Thus, each of the 5 functional runs was 7′ 18″ in length. Participants were instructed to remember the location of each object. A response was not required since these participants were enrolled in a larger study involving mnemonic strategy training and an orthogonal task could have impeded their use of such strategies. Subsequent memory was assessed after a 1-hour delay during a separate retrieval scan (see below). The MRI technologist (RFS) entered the room between functional runs to ensure the patient was awake and tolerating the scanning environment. One additional aMCI patient (i.e. the 19 th  aMCI patient) was excluded from the study for falling asleep. No problems were encountered for any other participant. After completing the encoding fMRI session, participants were removed from the scanner for a 1-hour break. They were then returned to the scanner for a retrieval session (the results of which will be reported separately) during which they were required to identify the location of a given object from among 3 choices. Each of the 3 choices was an actual target location within the room, which was designed to limit responding using familiarity-based processing, in favor of more recollection-based processing. 
 
 
 2.4.3 Imaging data analysis 
 Image processing and analysis were performed using BrainVoyager QX v2.2 (Brain Innovation, Maastricht, The Netherlands). Functional runs were motion-corrected in real time using Siemens 3D-PACE (prospective acquisition motion correction). For each subject, the functional images were realigned to the first image of the series. Images were pre-processed using trilinear-sinc interpolation for intra-session alignment of functional volumes, sinc interpolation for slice scan time correction, and high-pass temporal filtering to 2 cycles/run to remove slow drifts in the data. They were then co-registered with anatomic images and transformed into Talairach space ( Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ). For group analysis, transformed data were spatially smoothed with an isotropic Gaussian kernel (full-width half-maximum = 4 mm) and normalized across runs and subjects using the z-baseline normalization option in BrainVoyager, which uses data where the predictor values are at or near zero (the default of ≤0.1 was used). 
 We categorized the Novel associations as those that were either correctly or incorrectly encoded, based on their subsequent recognition, and only included trials that were correctly encoded in the contrast analyses. This helped minimize concerns that activation differences between HEC and aMCI might be due simply to differences in performance. We performed 2 pairwise contrasts using random effects, general linear models (GLMs):  1)  Within-group Novel > Repeated contrast for correct Novel trials using a significance threshold of p<.05, corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) method (q<.05) (Genovese et al., 2002);  2)  Between-group differences for the Novel > Repeated contrast (HEC > MCI; MCI > HEC). For these interaction contrasts, a mask was created using all activated voxels within any condition relative to baseline in either group (uncorrected p<0.05). Correction for multiple comparisons within the mask (corrected p<0.05) was achieved by imposing a cluster-volume threshold for contiguous voxels passing a voxel-wise significance threshold of p<0.05, using a 3D extension (implemented in Brain Voyager QX) of the 2D Monte Carlo simulation procedure ( Forman et al., 1995 ). The results of these analyses will be referred to as the contrast maps hereafter. 
 In many studies (as in the current one), aMCI represents a rather heterogeneous group of patients who range from very mildly impaired (i.e. closer to “normal”) to more advanced (i.e. closer to AD). Thus, while the preceding contrast-based analyses can be expected to reveal activations occurring in all (or nearly all) participants, in one condition versus another, the results may not fully reflect the continuum demonstrated in aMCI. In contrast, a correlation analysis examines voxels whose activity is significantly related to a metric of interest; e.g. performance on the OLA memory test in the current study. Such an approach may provide additional insight into the neural correlates of successful performance and how this pattern differs between groups. Therefore, we also computed correlation maps to identify voxels whose activation magnitudes (represented by the beta weights for all Novel trials > Fixation) were significantly related to OLA memory test performance within each group. We set an uncorrected p<.05 threshold, which resulted in threshold r-values of .47 (aMCI) and .5 (HEC) – both medium - large effect sizes ( Cohen, 1992 ), and then used the cluster-correction method described in the preceding paragraph to correct for multiple correlation tests. These analyses were implemented using the ANCOVA module in BrainVoyager and will be referred to as the correlation maps hereafter. 
 To more accurately display the patterns of cortical activity, we used the moving-target group-averaging approach of the cortex-based alignment procedure within BrainVoyager to create an averaged cortical surface using 32 of our 34 participants (16 HEC, 16 aMCI; 2 aMCI participants could not be included due to poor segmentation of the parenchyma and meninges). This procedure aligns corresponding sulci and gyri across subjects’ brains and allows for a more accurate depiction of group-based cortical activity ( Goebel, Esposito, & Formisano, 2006 ). This averaged brain is used in  Figures 2  and  4  and served as the basis for the localization of cortical activity in  Table 2  and  Supplementary Tables 1–4 . Activity not depicted by the averaged brain (e.g. subcortical activity) was localized on a Talairach-normalized brain using an MRI atlas ( Duvernoy, 1999 ). 
 
 
 
 2.5 Hippocampal regions of interest (ROIs) 
 Previous research has suggested that greater encoding-related hippocampal activity is related to both performance and hippocampal volume but may be modulated by disease severity ( Dickerson, et al., 2005 ;  Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ). Therefore, we obtained a representative measure of hippocampal activity (described below) that could be directly examined in relation to severity. To accurately localize hippocampal ROIs, which were constrained to be no larger than 125 mm 3  (5×5×5 mm cube), we created an average 3D volume using each participant’s anatomic scan via the “average vmr” function in BrainVoyager. We then overlaid the between-group Novel > Repeated contrast (described in Section 2.4.3) and identified ROIs within the anterior/head, body, and posterior/tail portions of both the left and right hippocampus (the areas listed in  Table 2 ). The relative position of each ROI (i.e. anterior, body, posterior) was verified using established anatomical landmarks ( Malykhin et al., 2007 ;  Pruessner et al., 2000 ). From each ROI, we extracted the subject-specific beta-weights, which are the regressor coefficients used to generate the activation map and calculated using the percent signal change normalization of data (across runs and subjects). We then averaged the beta-weights from each of these 3 areas for each side of the hippocampus, which resulted in an average value for the left hippocampus and one for the right hippocampus. Although this averaging process may negate significant correlations within any individual hippocampal subregion, we felt such averages would provide a reasonable measure of overall hippocampal activity. Such average values were also more analogous to the available hippocampal volumes. The average left and right values were used in subsequent correlational analyses with measures of disease severity (see next paragraph), performed using SPSS 18.0. 
 Since the most appropriate method for assessing disease severity in aMCI is unclear, we examined two measures: 1) hippocampal volumes (left and right, correlated with average hippocampal beta weight on the corresponding side), which have been associated with hippocampal activity (e.g.  Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ), memory impairment ( Loewenstein et al., 2009 ), and progression to AD ( Apostolova et al., 2010a ;  Apostolova et al., 2010b ). 2) Clinically-based measures have long been used to assess disease severity and may be particularly useful in examining patterns of hyper- and hypo-activation (e.g.  Dickerson et al., 2005 ;  Clement et al., 2010 ). Therefore, we included the RBANS Total Score as a measure of global functioning. 
 
 
 2.6 Relation of disease severity to activity in neocortical areas 
 Neocortical areas, especially in prefrontal cortex, may be especially important for learning and remembering OLAs ( Postma et al., 2008 ;  Sommer et al., 2005 ); however, the ability to activate some of these areas may also be modulated by disease severity (or global functioning in the HEC). Thus, we computed correlation maps to identify voxels whose activation magnitudes were significantly related to the RBANS Total Score within each group (as in Section 2.4.3). 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral findings 
 HEC remembered significantly more Novel OLAs than did aMCI patients ( Table 1 ). However, the groups performed similarly on the Repeated stimuli and had similar reaction times for both the Novel and Repeated stimuli. As noted above, we only included the correctly encoded Novel trials in the contrast-based fMRI analyses. 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI findings within groups 
 
 3.2.1 HEC 
 For the Novel > Repeated contrast, HEC demonstrated widespread, largely bilateral, cortical activity within both the ventral (inferior temporal gyrus (ITG), parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), collateral sulcus, fusiform gyrus (FG)) and dorsal visual streams (superior parietal lobule (SPL), intraparietal sulcus (IPS)) and in the medial parietal lobe (dorsal precuneus) ( Figure 2a ;  Supplementary Table 1 ). Activations were also evident in several frontal cortical regions (orbital gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), inferior frontal sulcus (IFS), middle frontal gyrus (MFG), superior frontal sulcus (SFS), superior frontal gyrus (SFG)), including around the central sulcus (precentral sulcus (preCS), precentral gyrus (preCG), postcentral sulcus (postCS)). The HEC demonstrated activity throughout the entire anteroposterior length of the hippocampus bilaterally ( Figure 3 ) as well as several other medial temporal cortical regions (e.g. perirhinal and entorhinal cortex), the amygdala and other subcortical structures. 
 The correlation analysis in HEC revealed that activity in areas of the ventral and dorsal visual streams, the prefrontal cortex, and the hippocampus was positively related to performance on the OLA memory test ( Figure 4a ). This pattern of results was, overall, quite consistent with those of the contrast-based analysis (described in the previous paragraph). Specifically, overlap between these maps was evident in cortex of the FG, PHG, and collateral sulcus of the ventral visual stream and within the SPL of the dorsal visual stream (see also  Supplementary Table 2 ). The dorsal precuneus, right IFS, left hippocampal body, and bilateral posterior hippocampus were also common to both maps ( Figure 5 ). The right MFG was evident in both maps but in adjoining regions. Foci unique to the correlation map were apparent within the head of the caudate, septal nuclei, postCG, along the parieto-occipital fissure, and in the cuneus. 
 
 
 3.2.2 aMCI 
 For the Novel > Repeated contrast ( Figure 2b ;  Supplementary Table 3 ), the aMCI patients demonstrated cortical activations within most of the same regions of the ventral (ITG, PHG, collateral sulcus, FG) and dorsal visual stream (SPL, IPS) as the HEC. Activations were also evident in some regions of the frontal cortex (IFG, IFS, SFS, SFG) and around the central sulcus (preCS, preCG). Hippocampal activity was restricted to the posterior portion (bilaterally). Relatively circumscribed activity was also found in some subcortical structures (portions of the thalamus and right amygdala). 
 Within the aMCI patients, significant positive relationships were found between OLA memory test performance and activity in the left PHG of the ventral visual stream as well as areas around the central sulcus (bilaterally) ( Figure 4b ;  Supplementary Table 4 ). No areas of correlated activity were evident in the dorsal visual stream. However, activity in the left hippocampus and certain other memory regions (right mamillary body, bilateral dorsal medial thalamus) was positively related to memory test performance ( Figure 5 ). Overall, there was virtually no overlap between the correlational and the contrast-based analyses (described in the preceding paragraph). 
 
 
 
 3.3 Differences between groups 
 The pattern of activity in  Figure 2c  is strikingly similar to the N>R contrast within each group ( Figure 2a & b ) but indicates that the HEC group demonstrated significantly more activity in each region than did the aMCI group (see also  Table 2 ). Specifically, HEC demonstrated greater cortical activity within both the ventral (ITG, PHG, collateral sulcus, FG) and dorsal (SPL, IPS) visual streams as well as a number of frontal areas (orbital gyrus, IFG, IFS, MFG, SFS, SFG), and dorsal precuneus. Differences were also evident in the hippocampus and other memory-related areas (perirhinal cortex, PCC, RSP, thalamus) as well as in a number of subcortical structures ( Figure 3 ).  Figure 2c  also revealed relatively greater activity in the aMCI patients compared to HEC within the mid-precuneus and left temporoparietal junction (SMG, angular gyrus). However, the BOLD signal time courses within these regions were negative in both groups, so the observed differences reflect a less negative signal (or less deactivation) in the aMCI. This is consistent with previous research that aMCI patients demonstrate less deactivation in several regions that deactivate during externally-based task performance (i.e. areas associated with the default mode network) ( Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008 ). 
 Overlaying the correlation maps revealed considerable differences between the groups, the most notable of which was the near absence of correlations within most regions of the ventral and dorsal visual streams in aMCI patients ( Figure 4c ). The aMCI patients seemed to rely on areas around the central sulcus and some subcortical structures (thalamus, superior colliculi) to a greater extent than the HEC. However, both groups demonstrated activity in the left hippocampus and right mamillary body as well as some portions of the inferior occipital cortex. 
 
 
 3.4 Hippocampal activation and disease severity 
 Overall, the HEC demonstrated positive and statistically significant relationships between the average right hippocampal beta-weight and both right hippocampal volume and RBANS Total Score ( Figure 6 ). Thus, greater activity in the right hippocampus was associated with larger (right) hippocampal volume and higher RBANS Total Score. No significant relationships were evident with the average left hippocampal beta-weight. Within the aMCI patients, none of the correlations reached statistical significance. 
 
 
 3.5 Neocortical activity and disease severity 
 Activity in several areas of the prefrontal cortex were significantly positively related to the RBANS Total Score in the HEC ( Supplementary Table 5 ) including the anterior SFG and MFG, SFS, IFG, and anterior cingulate cortex. However, there was little, if any, overlap between these regions and those identified via the contrast and correlation maps. No activity correlated with the RBANS Total Score survived correction in the aMCI. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 OLAs are ecologically relevant and dependent on medial temporal lobe regions, especially the hippocampus ( Mayes et al., 2007 ;  Postma et al., 2008 ), that are affected early in the course of MCI and AD ( Apostolova, et al., 2010b ). To our knowledge, the current study is the first to examine the neural correlates of OLA in patients with aMCI. Behaviorally, HEC remembered significantly more OLAs than did the aMCI patients, which is consistent with previous research ( Kessels et al., 2010 ). 
 Importantly, the overall pattern of contrast-based findings in the HEC is consistent with a meta-analytic review of successfully encoded stimuli in event-related paradigms ( Spaniol et al., 2009 ); supporting our OLA paradigm as a measure of learning and memory. Similarly, the HEC group and, to a lesser extent, the aMCI group demonstrated activity patterns that were generally consistent with OLA studies in healthy young participants ( Sommer et al., 2005a ;  Sommer et al., 2005b ). We discuss our findings within the context of  Postma et al.’s (2008)  three-part model of OLA memory, which specifically involves object perception, spatial location perception, and the binding of these features. Although discussed separately, these processes are presumably interactive and complementary. 
 
 4.1 Ventral and dorsal visual stream activity 
 Consistent with expectations, both groups demonstrated activity within the ventral occipito-temporal cortex bilaterally, especially the fusiform gyrus (FG), collateral sulcus, and parahippocampal gyrus (PHG). However, the HEC demonstrated significantly greater activity than the aMCI patients in each of these areas ( Figure 2c ;  Table 2 ). Memory test performance was positively correlated with activity in these regions in the HEC group but only with the left PHG in the aMCI group. These regions are known to play a critical role in object perception and naming ( Chouinard & Goodale, 2010 ;  Spiridon, Fischl, & Kanwisher, 2006 ), which suggests that HEC were more effectively processing the objects. 
 The role of the PHG is likely multifaceted since it has been associated with processing scenes (i.e. the parahippocampal place area) ( Spiridon et al., 2006 ) as well as memory for such information ( Hayes, Nadel, & Ryan, 2007 ). The contrast-based maps revealed bilateral PHG activity in both groups, the magnitude of which was significantly greater in the HEC. Further, memory test performance was significantly related to bilateral PHG activity in the HEC but only the left PHG in the aMCI patients. Thus, the most significant between-group difference appears to be in the right PHG. A previous study found that encoding of objects relative to locations was stronger in the left than the right PHG ( Ramsoy et al., 2009 ). This hemispheric difference is potentially significant because the right hemisphere is posited to mediate processing of coordinate positions of objects within the environment whereas the left hemisphere processes categorical positions within a specific region of the environment (e.g. upper left corner of a room) ( Postma et al., 2008 ). Regions in the dorsal visual stream would presumably be especially critical in this localization process, so it is perhaps not surprising that the HEC demonstrated significantly greater activity within the SPL, dorsal precuneus, and IPS compared to the aMCI patients. Further, bilateral activity in both the SPL and precuneus was positively related to memory test performance in the HEC group whereas no such relationship was evident in the aMCI group. Thus, the HEC appear to have had the benefit of both categorical and coordinate processing that was mediated by the PHG and areas within the dorsal visual stream (as well as the frontal cortex as described below) whereas the aMCI may have been restricted to just a categorical approach (mediated by only the left PHG). 
 
 
 4.2 Hippocampal activity 
 The hippocampus is critical for forming inter-item associations ( Mayes, et al., 2007 ) and specifically for binding the object and spatial features of OLAs ( Postma et al., 2008 ). Consistent with such expectations, the HEC demonstrated significantly greater activity throughout multiple regions of both the left and right hippocampi compared to the aMCI group; results that are consonant with several previous studies of reduced activity in aMCI patients relative to controls ( Johnson et al., 2004 ;  Machulda et al., 2009 ;  Machulda et al., 2003 ;  Petrella et al., 2007 ). The aMCI patients also demonstrated significantly less activity in several regions that are known to play a role in learning and memory, including the anterior and dorsal medial thalamic nuclei, the perirhinal cortex, and the posterior cingulate and retrosplenial cortices (including the ventral precuneus). However, the correlation map revealed that aMCI patients performed better on the OLA memory test as activity increased within portions of the left hippocampus, right mamillary body, and dorsal medial thalamic nuclei. This finding may reflect the heterogeneous nature of aMCI as better-performing patients were still able to utilize these regions. Despite such findings, however, the patients demonstrated a more restricted pattern of correlated activity within memory-related regions compared to the HEC. Thus, these results suggest that the memory deficits exhibited by aMCI patients result from widespread dysfunction of regions that are both functionally and structurally connected to the hippocampus. 
 As discussed above, aMCI generally comprises a rather heterogeneous group of patients and the variability observed in previous neuroimaging studies led to the proposal that less impaired patients demonstrate hyperactivation whereas more impaired patients demonstrate hypoactivation ( Dickerson & Sperling, 2008 ). We did not find any evidence of hyperactivation in our aMCI patients as the magnitude of activity was consistently below that of HEC with similarly sized hippocampi. Further, average hippocampal activity was unrelated to either measure of disease severity in the aMCI group. Conversely, the average magnitude of activity within the right hippocampus was positively correlated with both hippocampal volume and RBANS Total Score in the HEC. Average left hippocampal activity was unrelated to such measures. These findings lend additional support to the notion that HEC were able to utilize coordinate spatial processing to a much greater extent than the aMCI. 
 We should note that methodological differences may explain the apparently conflicting results of previous and our current findings. We used the magnitude of BOLD signal change within small regions of the hippocampus whereas Dickerson and colleagues assessed the extent of hippocampal activity (i.e. number of voxels demonstrating activity) within the entire hippocampus ( Dickerson, et al., 2005 ). Their “very mild” MCI group was psychometrically equivalent with the controls, to the point that the mean performance on the California Verbal Learning Test was actually slightly (albeit non-significantly) better in the MCI. Conversely, our aMCI patients demonstrated significant learning and memory deficits relative to the HEC; a difference that may also explain the discrepant results. Other groups have observed hyperactivation using the magnitude of activity within a hippocampal ROI ( Hämäläinen et al., 2007 ). However, the aMCI patients in that study appeared, on the whole, slightly more impaired than ours based on the MMSE (25.6 ± 3.1 vs. ours 26.7 ± 2.3; Cohen’s d = 0.4). Thus, a greater proportion of their aMCI patients may have been considered “more advanced”. Conversely, another study found hyperactivity in the left hippocampus during a word encoding task in aMCI patients who appear to be psychometrically equivalent or slightly less impaired than our patients ( Kircher et al., 2007 ). Thus, the reasons for these discrepant findings remain unclear. It seems critical that future studies should employ similar methodological techniques and provide at least basic psychometric and volumetric data in order to clarify the ambiguity surrounding this issue. 
 
 
 4.3 Frontal cortical activity 
 The HEC demonstrated significantly greater activity within several regions of frontal cortex bilaterally relative to the aMCI. Further, activity in several of these regions also correlated with OLA memory test performance in the HEC but not the aMCI. The frontal cortex is known to play a role during memory encoding ( Spaniol et al., 2009 ) and has been specifically associated with the use of mnemonic strategies that facilitate encoding ( Kondo et al., 2005 ). Frontal regions, especially those in the right DLPFC, have been proposed to play a role in coordinate spatial processing and spatial working memory ( Postma et al., 2008 ) and thus may be involved in learning/remembering OLAs. Thus, activity in the right IFS and MFG may have been particularly beneficial for the HEC, especially within the context of greater dorsal visual stream and right PHG activity. Together, our results suggest that these regions may have facilitated the use of coordinate spatial processing, but that this right-hemispheric function gradually diminishes as an individual progresses to aMCI. Future studies could employ connectivity analyses to examine differences in network function between HEC and aMCI. The prefrontal regions involved in the OLA task were seemingly unrelated to RBANS Total Score in either group but different patterns may emerge if more sensitive measures of frontal lobe functioning are used. 
 As opposed to the prefrontal correlations with OLA performance found in HEC, the correlation map revealed that such correlations in the aMCI tended to be focused around the central sulcus, areas that are active during object and tool perception and naming tasks, likely reflecting the sensorimotor aspects of their use ( Chouinard & Goodale, 2010 ). Thus, aMCI patients may have been relying on such sensorimotor processing during the encoding trials at the expense of more location-specific information. The previously noted differences in both the ventral and dorsal visual stream activity further support such a conclusion. Given the importance of the frontal lobes during the learning process, it is noteworthy that we previously demonstrated significantly increased activity within a number of lateral and medial frontal cortical regions following mnemonic strategy training in patients with aMCI ( Hampstead et al., 2011 ). 
 
 
 4.4 Limitations 
 Almost by definition, aMCI represents a heterogeneous group of patients whose cognitive deficits range from very mild (i.e. closer to “normal”) to severe (i.e. closer to AD). Recognizing this heterogeneity, we attempted to address potential confounding factors in a number of ways. First, we obtained a well-characterized neuropsychological profile for the aMCI and HEC participants at the time they enrolled in the study. The aMCI group demonstrated impaired learning, memory, and semantic fluency; a pattern consistent with individuals likely to develop AD ( Petersen, 2004 ). Second, we compared medial temporal and global measures of brain volume, which revealed the groups to be volumetrically similar. This is especially important since a number of studies have documented cerebral atrophy in patients with aMCI ( Apostolova et al., 2010b ;  Loewenstein et al., 2009 ;  Whitwell et al., 2007 ) and because atrophy may affect the BOLD signal ( Johnson et al., 2000 ). Thirdly, we used cortex-based alignment ( Goebel et al., 2006 ) in order to more accurately localize cortical activity. Fourthly, we used standard contrast maps to examine the patterns of activity associated with only successfully encoded stimuli so as to avoid potential performance-based confounds. Finally, because such contrast maps indicate group averages and may not reflect the heterogeneity of the population, we also used correlation maps to identify the specific regions associated with performance in each group. 
 Despite our attempts, we recognize that additional information would be helpful in both characterizing patients and identifying those most likely to progress to AD. In our ongoing studies, we are attempting to obtain APOE status, cerebrospinal fluid measures of beta-amyloid, and  in vivo  measures of cerebral beta-amyloid using Pittsburgh Imaging Compound-B ( Klunk et al., 2004 ) since previous studies have demonstrated that the presence of these factors can alter fMRI activity ( Hedden et al., 2009 ;  Kukolja, Thiel, Eggermann, Zerres, & Fink, 2010 ;  Sperling, et al., 2009 ). Unfortunately, such information was not available for most participants in the current study. It is also important to note that the lack of significant volumetric differences between groups (especially in the hippocampus) may suggest that some of our patients are unlikely to convert to dementia; a problem inherent in any study involving MCI. It is also possible that larger sample sizes would have revealed volumetric differences. Thus, longitudinal follow-up of these patients would be critical in addressing many of the limitations noted above. 
 
 
 4.5 Conclusions 
 Postma et al. (2008)  provided a three-part model of object location memory that is especially useful for conceptualizing the differences between HEC and aMCI patients found in the current study. Specifically, the HEC group demonstrated significantly greater activity than the aMCI group within object-related (ventral visual stream), spatial-related (dorsal visual stream and prefrontal cortex), and feature binding-related regions of the brain (hippocampus and other memory-related regions). Although hippocampal activity is typically of primary interest in these populations, our results suggest that aMCI patients demonstrate widespread cerebral dysfunction that affects multiple neocortical areas (and presumably neural networks) as well as the hippocampus. Comparing contrast and correlation maps within each group revealed fairly similar patterns within the HEC, indicating that areas active at the group level were also related to successful performance at the individual level. The HEC appeared to successfully utilize information relevant to the objects as well as both categorical and coordinate spatial processing. Although the overall pattern of contrast-based activity was similar in the aMCI patients (albeit significantly weaker than in the HEC), successful performance appeared to depend more on the sensorimotor aspects of the objects and categorical but not coordinate spatial processing. The correlation analyses may provide insight into the reasons for the behavioral differences and reduced contrast-based activity: aMCI patients could have been approaching the task in a different, possibly more rudimentary, manner than were HEC. Future studies will need to directly examine this possibility, but it may be worthwhile for studies to routinely use both contrast- and correlation-based analyses. Importantly, these differences were evident within groups who were similar on demographics, brain volumetrics, and non-memory related neuropsychological abilities (aside from semantic fluency). Future work will examine whether mnemonic strategy training “normalizes” these discrepant patterns of activity or facilitates the use of compensatory networks. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 This material is based upon work supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Office of Research and Development, and Rehabilitation Research and Development Service through grants B4602H & B6366W to BMH and VA Merit B6662R to KS. This work was also funded through the Emory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (NIA: 2P50AG025688) and support to KS from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant K24 EY017332. The contents of this manuscript do not represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States Government. Portions of this work were presented at the 2010 annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience. We wish to thank Dr. Pamela Phillips for her assistance with participant recruitment and testing. 
 
 
 Works Cited 
 
 
 
 
 Apostolova 
 LG 
 
 
 Mosconi 
 L 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Hwang 
 KS 
 
 
 Ramirez 
 A 
 
 
 
 2010a 
 Subregional hippocampal atrophy predicts Alzheimer’s dementia in the cognitively normal 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 31 
 7 
 1077 
 1088 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.08.008 
 18814937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Apostolova 
 LG 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Hwang 
 KS 
 
 
 Zoumalan 
 C 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 
 
 
 2010b 
 3D Comparison of Low, Intermediate, and Advanced Hippocampal Atrophy in MCI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 31 
 5 
 786 
 797 
 10.1002/hbm.20905 
 20143386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bird 
 CM 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 2008 
 The hippocampus and memory: insights from spatial processing 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 9 
 3 
 182 
 194 
 10.1038/Nrn2335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 Griffing 
 K 
 
 
 Arai 
 K 
 
 
 Bohl 
 J 
 
 
 Bratzke 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 1999 
 Neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease: what is new since A. Alzheimer? 
 European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 
 249 
 14 
 22 
 10654095 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Magda 
 S 
 
 
 Airriess 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 ME 
 
 
 2009 
 Fully-automated quantification of regional brain volumes for improved detection of focal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 30 
 578 
 580 
 19112065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 New 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 Moving beyond Kucera and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word frequency measure fo American English 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 41 
 4 
 977 
 990 
 19897807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2008 
 The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celone 
 K 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 V 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 B 
 
 
 Atri 
 A 
 
 
 Chua 
 E 
 
 
 Miller 
 S 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Alterations in memory networks in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: An independent component analysis 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 40 
 10222 
 10231 
 17021177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chouinard 
 PA 
 
 
 Goodale 
 MA 
 
 
 2010 
 Category-specific neural processing for naming pictures of animals and naming pictures of tools: An ALE meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 48 
 2 
 409 
 418 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.09.032 
 19800353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 2007 
 Evidence for a specific role of the anterior hippocampal region in successful associative encoding 
 Hippocampus 
 17 
 11 
 1071 
 1080 
 10.1002/hipo.20340 
 17604351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clement 
 F 
 
 
 Belleville 
 S 
 
 
 Mellah 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Functional neuroanatomy of the encoding and retrieval processes of verbal episodic memory in MCI 
 Cortex 
 46 
 8 
 1005 
 1015 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2009.07.003 
 19683225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 1992 
 A Power Primer 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 112 
 1 
 155 
 159 
 19565683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Rover 
 MPK 
 
 
 van der Werf 
 SP 
 
 
 Cools 
 AR 
 
 
 Berger 
 HJ 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural correlates of strategic memory retrieval: Differentiating between spatial-associative and temporal-associative strategies 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 29 
 1068 
 1079 
 17948888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Bakkour 
 A 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Feczko 
 E 
 
 
 Pacheco 
 J 
 
 
 Greve 
 DN 
 
 
 
 2009 
 The Cortical Signature of Alzheimer’s Disease: Regionally Specific Cortical Thinning Relates to Symptom Severity in Very Mild to Mild AD Dementia and is Detectable in Asymptomatic Amyloid-Positive Individuals 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 3 
 497 
 510 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn113 
 18632739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Greve 
 DN 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Increased hippocampal activation in mild cognitive impairment compared to normal aging and AD 
 Neurology 
 65 
 404 
 411 
 16087905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional abnormalities of the medial temporal lobe memory system in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: Insights from functional MRI studies 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 6 
 1624 
 1635 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.11.030 
 18206188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duvernoy 
 HM 
 
 
 1999 
 The Human Brain: Surface, blood supply, and three-dimensional sectional anatomy 
 New York 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 M 
 
 
 Folstein 
 SE 
 
 
 McHugh 
 PR 
 
 
 1975 
 Mini-Mental State: A practical method for grading the cognitive status of patients for the clinician 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 12 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) - Use of a cluster size threshold 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 33 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frings 
 L 
 
 
 Wagner 
 K 
 
 
 Quiske 
 A 
 
 
 Schwarzwald 
 R 
 
 
 Spreer 
 J 
 
 
 Halsband 
 U 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Precuneus is involved in allocentric spatial location encoding and recognition 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 173 
 4 
 661 
 672 
 10.1007/s00221-006-0408-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Ganzola 
 R 
 
 
 Canu 
 E 
 
 
 Rub 
 U 
 
 
 Pizzini 
 FB 
 
 
 Alessandrini 
 F 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Mapping local hippocampal changes in Alzheimers disease and normal ageing with MRI at 3 Tesla 
 Brain 
 131 
 3266 
 3276 
 10.1093/brain/awn280 
 18988639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 Analysis of functional image analysis contest (FIAC) data with Brainvoyager QX: From single-subject to cortically aligned group general linear model analysis and self-organizing group independent component analysis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 27 
 392 
 401 
 16596654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 JJ 
 
 
 Squire 
 L 
 
 
 2005 
 Quantifying medial temporal lobe damage in memory-impaired patients 
 Hippocampus 
 15 
 79 
 85 
 15390163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gould 
 RL 
 
 
 Brown 
 RG 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 ffytche 
 DH 
 
 
 Howard 
 RJ 
 
 
 2003 
 fMRI BOLD response to increasing task difficulty during successful paired associates learning 
 NeuroImage 
 20 
 1006 
 1019 
 14568470 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Beig 
 S 
 
 
 Keightley 
 ML 
 
 
 Burian 
 H 
 
 
 Black 
 SE 
 
 
 2003 
 Evidence from functional neuroimaging of a compensatory prefrontal network in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 3 
 986 
 993 
 12574428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hämäläinen 
 A 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 Tanila 
 H 
 
 
 Hanninen 
 T 
 
 
 Niskanen 
 E 
 
 
 Tervo 
 S 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Increased fMRI responses during encoding in mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 28 
 12 
 1889 
 1903 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.08.008 
 16997428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampstead 
 BM 
 
 
 Sathian 
 K 
 
 
 Moore 
 AB 
 
 
 Nalisnick 
 C 
 
 
 Stringer 
 AY 
 
 
 2008 
 Explicit memory training leads to improved memory for face-name pairs in patients with mild cognitive impairment: results of a pilot investigation 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 14 
 5 
 883 
 889 
 10.1017/S1355617708081009 
 18764984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampstead 
 BM 
 
 
 Stringer 
 AY 
 
 
 Stilla 
 RF 
 
 
 Deshpande 
 G 
 
 
 Hu 
 X 
 
 
 Moore 
 AB 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Activation and effective connectivity changes following explicit-memory training for face-name pairs in patients with mild cognitive impairment: A pilot study 
 Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 
 25 
 210 
 222 
 20935339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 Carson 
 RE 
 
 
 Herscovitch 
 P 
 
 
 Schapiro 
 MB 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 SI 
 
 
 1991 
 Dissociation of object and spatial visual processing pathways in human extrastriate cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 88 
 5 
 1621 
 1625 
 2000370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hayes 
 SM 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 Ryan 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 The effect of scene context on episodic object recognition: Parahippocampal cortex mediates memory encoding and retrieval success 
 Hippocampus 
 17 
 9 
 873 
 889 
 10.1002/hipo.20319 
 17604348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KRA 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Mehta 
 A 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Disruption of Functional Connectivity in Clinically Normal Older Adults Harboring Amyloid Burden 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 40 
 12686 
 12694 
 10.1523/jneurosci.3189-09.2009 
 19812343 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 Baxter 
 LC 
 
 
 Susskind-Wilder 
 L 
 
 
 Connor 
 DJ 
 
 
 Sabbagh 
 MN 
 
 
 Caselli 
 RJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Hippocampal adaptation to face repetition in healthy elderly and mild cognitive impairment 
 Neuropsychologia 
 42 
 7 
 980 
 989 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.11.015 
 14998712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 Saykin 
 AJ 
 
 
 Baxter 
 LC 
 
 
 Flashman 
 LA 
 
 
 Santulli 
 RB 
 
 
 McAllister 
 TW 
 
 
 
 2000 
 The relationship between fMRI activation and cerebral atrophy: Comparison of normal aging and Alzheimer disease 
 Neuroimage 
 11 
 3 
 179 
 187 
 10694460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kessels 
 RPC 
 
 
 Feijen 
 J 
 
 
 Postma 
 A 
 
 
 2005 
 Implicit and explicit memory for spatial information in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 
 20 
 2–3 
 184 
 191 
 10.1159/000087233 
 16088143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kessels 
 RPC 
 
 
 Rijken 
 S 
 
 
 Banningh 
 L 
 
 
 Van Schuylenborgh-Van Es 
 N 
 
 
 Rikkert 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Categorical spatial memory in patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer dementia: Positional versus object-location recall 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 16 
 1 
 200 
 204 
 10.1017/s1355617709990944 
 19883520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TT 
 
 
 Weis 
 S 
 
 
 Freymann 
 K 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Jessen 
 F 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Heun 
 R 
 
 
 Leube 
 DT 
 
 
 2007 
 Hippocampal activation in patients with mild cognitive impairment is necessary for successful memory encoding 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 
 78 
 812 
 818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 Engler 
 H 
 
 
 Nordberg 
 A 
 
 
 Wang 
 YM 
 
 
 Blomqvist 
 G 
 
 
 Holt 
 DP 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B 
 Annals of Neurology 
 55 
 3 
 306 
 319 
 10.1002/ana.20009 
 14991808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kondo 
 Y 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 M 
 
 
 Mugikura 
 S 
 
 
 Abe 
 N 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 S 
 
 
 Iijima 
 T 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Changes in brain activation associated with use of a memory strategy: a functional MRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 24 
 4 
 1154 
 1163 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.10.033 
 15670693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kukolja 
 J 
 
 
 Thiel 
 CM 
 
 
 Eggermann 
 T 
 
 
 Zerres 
 K 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2010 
 Medial temporal lobe dysfunction during encoding and retrieval of episodic memory in non-demented APOE epsilon 4 carriers 
 Neuroscience 
 168 
 2 
 487 
 497 
 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.03.044 
 20350587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 DA 
 
 
 Acevedo 
 A 
 
 
 Potter 
 E 
 
 
 Schinka 
 JA 
 
 
 Raj 
 A 
 
 
 Greig 
 MT 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Severity of Medial Temporal Atrophy and Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: Selecting Type and Number of Memory Tests 
 American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 
 17 
 12 
 1050 
 1058 
 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181b7ef42 
 20104061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Machulda 
 MM 
 
 
 Senjem 
 ML 
 
 
 Weigand 
 SD 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 Boeve 
 BF 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging changes in amnestic and nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment during encoding and recognition tasks 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 15 
 3 
 372 
 382 
 10.1017/s1355617709090523 
 19402923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Machulda 
 MM 
 
 
 Ward 
 HA 
 
 
 Borowski 
 B 
 
 
 Gunter 
 JL 
 
 
 Cha 
 RH 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 PC 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Comparison of memory fMRI response among normal, MCI, and Alzheimer’s patients 
 Neurology 
 61 
 4 
 500 
 506 
 12939424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malykhin 
 NV 
 
 
 Bouchard 
 TP 
 
 
 Ogilvie 
 CJ 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Three-dimensional volumetric analysis and reconstruction of amygdala and hippocampal head, body, and tail 
 Psychiatry Research 
 155 
 155 
 165 
 17493789 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mandzia 
 JL 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Graham 
 SJ 
 
 
 Black 
 SE 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural correlates of incidental memory in mild cognitive impairment: An fMRI study 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 30 
 5 
 717 
 730 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.08.024 
 17963998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayes 
 A 
 
 
 Montaldi 
 D 
 
 
 Migo 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Associative memory and the medial temporal lobes 
 TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 
 11 
 3 
 126 
 135 
 17270487 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Fenstermacher 
 E 
 
 
 Bates 
 J 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 2008 
 Hippocampal activation in adults with mild cognitive impairment predicts subsequent cognitive decline 
 Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 79 
 6 
 630 
 635 
 10.1136/jnnp.2007.124149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Macko 
 KA 
 
 
 1983 
 Object vision and spatial vision - 2 cortical pathways 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 6 
 10 
 414 
 417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newcombe 
 F 
 
 
 Russell 
 WR 
 
 
 1969 
 Dissociated visual perceptual and spatial deficits in focal lesions of right hemisphere 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 
 32 
 2 
 73 
 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 JL 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 KM 
 
 
 LaViolette 
 PS 
 
 
 DeLuca 
 AN 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Longitudinal fMRI in elderly reveals loss of hippocampal activation with clinical decline 
 Neurology 
 74 
 24 
 1969 
 1976 
 20463288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity 
 Journal of Internal Medicine 
 256 
 3 
 183 
 194 
 15324362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Roberts 
 R 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Boeve 
 BF 
 
 
 Geda 
 YE 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 
 
 2009 
 Mild cognitive impairment ten years later 
 Archives of Neurology 
 66 
 12 
 1447 
 1455 
 20008648 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrella 
 JR 
 
 
 Krishnan 
 S 
 
 
 Slavin 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tran 
 TTT 
 
 
 Murty 
 L 
 
 
 Doraiswamy 
 PM 
 
 
 2006 
 Mild cognitive impairment: Evaluation with 4-T functional MR imaging 
 Radiology 
 240 
 1 
 177 
 186 
 16684919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrella 
 JR 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Krishnan 
 S 
 
 
 Slavin 
 MJ 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Tran 
 TT 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Cortical deactivation in mild cognitive impairment: High field strength functional MR imaging 
 Radiology 
 245 
 224 
 235 
 17885190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeffer 
 RI 
 
 
 Kurosaki 
 TT 
 
 
 Harrah 
 CH 
 
 
 Chance 
 JM 
 
 
 Filos 
 S 
 
 
 1982 
 Measurement of functional activities in older adults in the community 
 Journal of Gerontology 
 37 
 323 
 329 
 7069156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postma 
 A 
 
 
 Kessels 
 RPC 
 
 
 van Asselen 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 How the brain remembers and forgets where things are: The neurocognition of object-location memory 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 32 
 8 
 1339 
 1345 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.05.001 
 18562002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 JC 
 
 
 Li 
 LM 
 
 
 Serles 
 W 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 M 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Kabani 
 N 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Volumetry of hippocampus and amygdala with high-resolution MRI and three-dimensional analysis software: Minimizing the discrepancies between laboratories 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 10 
 4 
 433 
 442 
 10769253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramsoy 
 TZ 
 
 
 Liptrot 
 MG 
 
 
 Skimminge 
 A 
 
 
 Lund 
 TE 
 
 
 Sidaros 
 K 
 
 
 Christensen 
 MS 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Regional activation of the human medial temporal lobe during intentional encoding of objects and positions 
 Neuroimage 
 47 
 4 
 1863 
 1872 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.03.082 
 19362156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Randolph 
 C 
 
 
 1998 
 Repeatable battery for the assessment of neuropsychological status manual 
 San Antonio 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwindt 
 GC 
 
 
 Black 
 SE 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional imaging studies of episodic memory in Alzheimer’s disease: a quantitative meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 45 
 1 
 181 
 190 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.11.024 
 19103293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sommer 
 T 
 
 
 Rose 
 M 
 
 
 Glascher 
 J 
 
 
 Wolbers 
 T 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 2005a 
 Dissociable contributions within the medial temporal lobe to encoding of object-location associations 
 Learning & Memory 
 12 
 3 
 343 
 351 
 10.1101/Lm.90405 
 15897257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sommer 
 T 
 
 
 Rose 
 M 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 2005b 
 Contributions of occipital, parietal and parahippocampal cortex to encoding of object-location associations 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 5 
 732 
 743 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.08.002 
 15721186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Davidson 
 PSR 
 
 
 Kim 
 ASN 
 
 
 Han 
 H 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2009 
 Event-related fMRI studies of episodic encoding and retrieval: Meta-analyses using activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 8–9 
 1765 
 1779 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.028 
 19428409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Bates 
 JF 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Cocchiarella 
 AJ 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 
 2003 
 FMRI studies of associative encoding in young and elderly controls and mild Alzheimer’s disease 
 Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 74 
 1 
 44 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 LaViolette 
 PS 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 K 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 J 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Amyloid Deposition Is Associated with Impaired Default Network Function in Older Persons without Dementia 
 Neuron 
 63 
 2 
 178 
 188 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.003 
 19640477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spiridon 
 M 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2006 
 Location and spatial profile of category-specific regions in human extrastriate cortex 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 27 
 1 
 77 
 89 
 10.1002/hbm.20169 
 15966002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steenland 
 NKAC 
 
 
 Patel 
 PM 
 
 
 Bartell 
 SM 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 FC 
 
 
 Levey 
 AI 
 
 
 Lah 
 JJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Development of a rapid screening instrument for mild cognitive impairment and undiagnosed dementia 
 Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 
 15 
 3 
 419 
 427 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stringer 
 AY 
 
 
 2007 
 Ecologically-oriented Neurorehabilitation of Memory Therapist Manual 
 Los Angeles 
 Western Psychological Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 JT 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 New York 
 Thieme Medical Publishers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trivedi 
 MA 
 
 
 Murphy 
 CM 
 
 
 Goetz 
 C 
 
 
 Shah 
 RC 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 
 2008 
 fMRI activation changes during successful episodic memory encoding and recognition in amnestic mild cognitive impairment relative to cognitively healthy older adults 
 Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 
 26 
 2 
 123 
 137 
 10.1159/000148190 
 18663302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Troyer 
 A 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Anderson 
 N 
 
 
 Hayman-Abello 
 B 
 
 
 Craik 
 F 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Item and associative memory in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: Performance on standardized memory tests 
 Neuropsychology 
 22 
 1 
 10 
 16 
 18211151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitwell 
 JL 
 
 
 Przybelski 
 SA 
 
 
 Weigand 
 SD 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Boeve 
 BF 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 
 
 2007 
 3D maps from multiple MRI illustrate changing atrophy patterns as subjects progress from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease 
 Brain 
 130 
 1777 
 1786 
 17533169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yesavage 
 JABT 
 
 
 Rose 
 TL 
 
 
 Lum 
 O 
 
 
 Huang 
 V 
 
 
 Adey 
 M 
 
 
 Leirer 
 VO 
 
 
 1983 
 Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale - A preliminary report 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 17 
 1 
 37 
 49 
 7183759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conflicts of Interest 
 
 No author has any conflict of interest. 
 
 
 
 Author Contributions 
 
 Each author provided significant intellectual contribution to warrant authorship and declares that he/she has seen and approved this manuscript. Dr. Benjamin M. Hampstead had full access to all the data in the study; he and Dr. K. Sathian had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Design of the object-location association paradigm. Participants saw an object for 2s followed by the object within a specific location of a room for 4s. An 8s inter-stimulus interval separated each trial. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Activations on the Novel > Repeated contrast for the HEC (a) and aMCI (b). Column (c) demonstrates the regions that were significantly more active in the HEC than the aMCI (orange). The areas in blue were significantly more active in the aMCI than HEC; however, both groups demonstrated negative activity within each of these regions (which were just less deactivated in the aMCI). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Subcortical and medial temporal activity for the Novel > Repeated contrast. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Correlation maps (green for HEC, blue for aMCI) overlaid on contrast-based Novel > Repeated activity (yellow) for each group. The correlation maps are overlaid in column (c) to demonstrate the between-group differences. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Correlation maps at the hippocampal regions demonstrating the strongest correlation with OLA memory test performance for each group. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Relationship between average hippocampal beta-weights (y-axis) and measures of disease severity (listed on the x-axis). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic, neuropsychological, brain volumetrics, and performances on the experimental OL task for the HEC and aMCI groups. Standard deviations are provided in parentheses. Significant differences are indicated by * (via t-tests). MMSE = mini-mental state exam; RBANS = Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; GDS = Geriatric Depression Scale; FAQ = Functional Activities Questionnaire. 
 
 
 
 
 
 HEC (n=16) 
 aMCI (n=18) 
 t(32) 
 p-value 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 72.1 (7.3) 
 71.2 (8.5) 
 0.33 
 .74 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 16.1 (2.7) 
 17.1 (2.1) 
 1.19 
 .25 
 
 
 MMSE 
 27.8 (1.97) 
 26.7 (2.3) 
 1.47 
 .15 
 
 
 RBANS Indices (Standard Scores) 
 
 
  Immediate Memory* 
 105.8 (13.5) 
 87.1 (13.2) 
 4.1 
 <.001 
 
 
  Visuospatial/construction 
 99.5 (14.4) 
 94.9 (16.8) 
 0.84 
 .41 
 
 
  Language* 
 103.3 (15.2) 
 92.2 (7.1) 
 2.77 
 .009 
 
 
  Attention 
 110.4 (11.8) 
 105.9 (11.8) 
 1.11 
 .28 
 
 
  Delayed Memory* 
 103.8 (8.9) 
 74.9 (15.1) 
 6.68 
 <.001 
 
 
  Total Score* 
 106.5 (14.4) 
 87.8 (10.4) 
 4.39 
 <.001 
 
 
 Trails A (T-scores) 
 49.0 (8.7) 
 45.8 (12.1) 
 0.87 
 .39 
 
 
 Trails B (T-scores) 
 50.4 (9.0) 
 47.7 (6.7) 
 0.98 
 .34 
 
 
 GDS (raw scores) 
 1.1 (1.9) 
 1.6 (1.9) 
 0.74 
 .46 
 
 
 FAQ* (raw scores) 
 0.4 (0.7) 
 3.6 (3.9) 
 3.07 
 .005 
 
 
 Brain Volumetrics (% intracranial volume; ICV) 
 
 
  Cortical gray 
 30.1 (2.1) 
 29.1 (1.6) 
 1.57 
 .13 
 
 
  Lateral ventricles 
 2.2 (0.8) 
 2.8 (1.0) 
 1.95 
 .06 
 
 
  Inferior lateral ventricles 
 0.16 (0.05) 
 0.19 (0.07) 
 1.73 
 .09 
 
 
  Hippocampus (Total) 
 0.49 (0.06) 
 0.46 (0.06) 
 1.39 
 .18 
 
 
   Left 
 0.24 (0.03) 
 0.23 (0.03) 
 1.0 
 .32 
 
 
   Right 
 0.25 (0.03) 
 0.24 (0.04) 
 1.5 
 .14 
 
 
  Amygdala 
 0.23 (0.03) 
 0.21 (0.05) 
 1.70 
 .10 
 
 
 Object-Location Association Test 
 
 
  Novel accuracy (% correct)* 
 48.6 (11.3) 
 37.3 (10.6) 
 3.0 
 .005 
 
 
  Novel reaction time (in seconds) 
 2.72 (.64) 
 2.78 (.50) 
 0.3 
 .79 
 
 
  Repeated accuracy (% correct) 
 99.2 (1.6) 
 95.9 (9.5) 
 1.3 
 .19 
 
 
  Repeated reaction time (in seconds) 
 0.94 (.16) 
 1.0 (.32) 
 0.6 
 .55 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Activation differences (HEC>aMCI) for successfully encoded Novel minus Repeated contrast. x,y,z: Talairach coordinates; t-max: peak t value; abbreviations used in the Results section are provided in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Side 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 t-max 
 
 
 
 
 Orbital gyrus 
 L 
 −32 
 30 
 −7 
 5.65 
 
 
 
 R 
 17 
 45 
 −2 
 3.65 
 
 
 
 
 19 
 28 
 −7 
 4.13 
 
 
 Inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) 
 L 
 −36 
 22 
 −4 
 3.25 
 
 
 
 
 −42 
 38 
 −3 
 3.41 
 
 
 
 R 
 46 
 27 
 19 
 3.54 
 
 
 Inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) 
 L 
 −38 
 35 
 16 
 2.96 
 
 
 
 
 −41 
 17 
 27 
 3.03 
 
 
 
 R 
 38 
 34 
 17 
 3.02 
 
 
 
 
 39 
 19 
 27 
 2.96 
 
 
 Middle frontal gyrus (MFG) 
 L 
 −42 
 20 
 35 
 3.45 
 
 
 
 R 
 41 
 13 
 43 
 3.14 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 −3 
 52 
 3.12 
 
 
 Superior frontal gyrus (SFG) 
 
 
  Lateral 
 L 
 −21 
 −3 
 57 
 2.78 
 
 
 
 R 
 22 
 −5 
 55 
 3.06 
 
 
  Medial 
 L 
 −5 
 −7 
 51 
 3.81 
 
 
 
 R 
 3 
 −6 
 54 
 3.65 
 
 
 Superior frontal sulcus (SFS) 
 L 
 −25 
 13 
 48 
 3.38 
 
 
 Precentral sulcus (preCS) 
 L 
 −42 
 −3 
 43 
 4.03 
 
 
 
 R 
 38 
 3 
 30 
 2.99 
 
 
 Precentral gyrus (preCG) 
 L 
 −42 
 −11 
 49 
 3.52 
 
 
 
 R 
 42 
 −9 
 51 
 2.53 
 
 
 Postcentral sulcus (poCS) 
 L 
 −36 
 −37 
 40 
 3.81 
 
 
 
 R 
 27 
 −41 
 47 
 3.61 
 
 
 Insula 
 L 
 −36 
 −1 
 −4 
 4.46 
 
 
 
 
 −32 
 8 
 7 
 3.18 
 
 
 
 R 
 30 
 17 
 11 
 3.26 
 
 
 Caudate nucleus 
 L 
 −14 
 0 
 17 
 3.81 
 
 
 
 R 
 10 
 0 
 17 
 4.09 
 
 
 Globidus pallidus 
 L 
 −17 
 −13 
 3 
 3.75 
 
 
 
 
 −14 
 −2 
 5 
 3.39 
 
 
 
 R 
 19 
 −15 
 2 
 4.59 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 −2 
 5 
 4.76 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 −20 
 6 
 8 
 3.78 
 
 
 
 R 
 21 
 6 
 8 
 3.86 
 
 
 Thalamus 
 
 
  Anterior nuclei 
 L 
 −10 
 −8 
 8 
 4.08 
 
 
 
 R 
 8 
 −5 
 9 
 3.83 
 
 
  Dorsal medial 
 L 
 −8 
 −18 
 11 
 3.57 
 
 
 
 R 
 6 
 −18 
 11 
 3.37 
 
 
  Pulvinar 
 L 
 −10 
 −28 
 6 
 3.10 
 
 
 
 R 
 14 
 −28 
 5 
 4.34 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 L 
 −30 
 −2 
 −15 
 2.94 
 
 
 Perirhinal cortex 
 L 
 −30 
 −5 
 −20 
 2.63 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 
 
  Anterior/Head 
 L 
 −18 
 −14 
 −13 
 3.09 
 
 
 
 R 
 17 
 −7 
 −16 
 2.35 
 
 
  Body 
 L 
 −29 
 −25 
 −8 
 3.30 
 
 
 
 R 
 28 
 −25 
 −8 
 3.75 
 
 
  Posterior 
 L 
 −24 
 −36 
 −1 
 3.47 
 
 
 
 R 
 20 
 −34 
 1 
 3.68 
 
 
 Parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) 
 L 
 −18 
 −38 
 −4 
 4.15 
 
 
 
 R 
 20 
 −39 
 −4 
 4.41 
 
 
 Collateral sulcus 
 L 
 −29 
 −46 
 −11 
 4.71 
 
 
 
 
 −27 
 −63 
 −6 
 4.52 
 
 
 
 R 
 22 
 −63 
 −6 
 4.05 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 −48 
 −8 
 2.75 
 
 
 Fusiform gyrus 
 R 
 37 
 −54 
 −9 
 6.39 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 −57 
 −12 
 3.80 
 
 
 
 
 30 
 −40 
 −15 
 3.53 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) 
 L 
 −7 
 −55 
 13 
 4.33 
 
 
 
 R 
 7 
 −61 
 21 
 3.75 
 
 
 Retrosplenial cortex (RSP) 
 L 
 −7 
 −48 
 5 
 4.9 
 
 
 
 R 
 7 
 −49 
 12 
 4.8 
 
 
 Precuneus (PCu) 
 
 
  Dorsal 
 L 
 −8 
 −67 
 48 
 2.85 
 
 
 
 R 
 6 
 −64 
 46 
 4.4 
 
 
  Ventral 
 L 
 −7 
 −63 
 18 
 3.26 
 
 
 
 R 
 7 
 −61 
 21 
 3.75 
 
 
 Superior parietal lobule (SPL) 
 L 
 −32 
 −53 
 51 
 3.76 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −65 
 48 
 3.23 
 
 
 
 R 
 27 
 −54 
 52 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 −64 
 51 
 3.68 
 
 
 Intraparietal sulcus (IPS) 
 L 
 −31 
 −65 
 35 
 3.00 
 
 
 
 
 −29 
 −53 
 47 
 3.37 
 
 
 
 R 
 25 
 −68 
 30 
 3.84 
 
 
 
 
 29 
 −53 
 47 
 3.71 
 
 
 Superior temporal gyrus (STG) 
 L 
 −32 
 5 
 −20 
 3.76 
 
 
 
 R 
 56 
 −6 
 −3 
 3.52 
 
 
 Middle temporal gyrus (MTG) 
 L 
 −50 
 −62 
 0 
 4.35 
 
 
 Inferior temporal gyrus (ITG) 
 L 
 −51 
 −53 
 −10 
 3.51 
 
 
 
 R 
 43 
 −55 
 −10 
 5.58 
 
 
 Lateral occipitotemporal sulcus 
 R 
 38 
 −39 
 −10 
 3.85 
 
 
 Occipital cortex 
 
 
  Cuneus 
 L 
 −9 
 −86 
 27 
 3.06 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −87 
 15 
 4.00 
 
 
 
 R 
 10 
 −76 
 13 
 3.95 
 
 
  Calcarine sulcus 
 L 
 −10 
 −74 
 7 
 4.38 
 
 
 
 R 
 10 
 −74 
 7 
 3.32 
 
 
  Superior occipital gyrus 
 L 
 −12 
 −88 
 21 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 
 −30 
 −83 
 24 
 5.04 
 
 
 
 R 
 24 
 −83 
 27 
 4.86 
 
 
 
 
 27 
 −76 
 24 
 6.27 
 
 
  Middle occipital gyrus 
 L 
 −37 
 −83 
 10 
 4.99 
 
 
 
 
 −19 
 −95 
 10 
 4.60 
 
 
 
 R 
 34 
 −83 
 7 
 4.36 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 −97 
 1 
 3.51 
 
 
  Inferior occipital gyrus 
 L 
 −41 
 −63 
 −9 
 4.58 
 
 
 
 
 −43 
 −74 
 −5 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 R 
 37 
 −80 
 −6 
 3.85 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −61 
 −12 
 4.22 
 
 
  Fourth occipital gyrus 
 L 
 −23 
 −68 
 −17 
 3.84 
 
 
 
 R 
 23 
 −68 
 −14 
 3.48 
 
 
 Brainstem 
 M 
 1 
 −24 
 −14 
 4.18 
 
 
 
 
 
