
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 21549721 
 3137688 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.04.020 
 NIHMS292595 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The neural correlates of competition during memory retrieval are modulated by attention to the cues 
 
 
 
 
 Danker 
 Jared F. 
 
 a 
 b 
 * 
 
 
 
 Fincham 
 Jon M. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 John R. 
 
 a 
 
 
 a  Department of Psychology and Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Carnegie Mellon University 
 b  Department of Psychology, New York University 
 
 
 * Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington Place, New York, NY, 10003,  jd153@nyu.edu , Tel: (212) 998-7896, Fax: (212) 995-4349 
 
 
 7 
 5 
 2011 
 
 
 27 
 4 
 2011 
 
 
 7 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 7 
 2012 
 
 49 
 9 
 2427 
 2438 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 As people learn more facts about a concept, those facts become more difficult to remember. This is called the fan effect, where fan refers to the number of facts known about a concept. Increasing fan has been shown to decrease accuracy and increase response time and left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) activity during retrieval. In this study, participants learned 36 arbitrary person-location pairings and had to recognize them while we recorded brain activity using fMRI. We separately manipulated the fan of each person and location, as well as the training procedure with which each pair was studied. In the  person focus  condition, participants studied pairs with a picture of the person’s face and used the person as a retrieval cue during training. In the  location focus  condition, participants studied pairs with a picture of the location and used the location as a retrieval cue during training. We found that the fan of the focused cue had a greater effect on response time, accuracy, and left VLPFC activity during retrieval than the fan of the unfocused cue. We also found that the parahippocampal place area (PPA) was more active during the recognition of pairs studied in the location focus condition, but not when the fan of the location was high. Overall, we found opposite effects of fan on VLPFC and PPA that were modulated by cue focus. 
 
 
 fan effect 
 left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) 
 parahippocampal place area (PPA) 
 ACT-R 
 reactivation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Associations compete during retrieval 
 We as human beings have stored a vast amount of information. It is a marvel, then, that we are often capable of singling out and accessing a specific piece of information from this expansive warehouse of knowledge with extreme ease. Whereas declarative memory can seem both infinitely large and extraordinarily efficient, it also has limited resources and is prone to interference. Interference in memory is often subtle but nonetheless reliable. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the case of the fan effect. The fan effect refers to the empirical finding that as people study more facts about a concept, those facts become more difficult to remember ( Anderson, 1974 ). In the classic fan paradigm, people study associations between people and locations (e.g., “The hippie is in the park”). The number of associations, or fan, of the people and locations are manipulated such that some people and locations appear in only one association (low fan) and some appear in multiple associations (high fan).  Anderson (1974)  found that both studied associations and rearranged foils containing high fan concepts are identified more slowly and less accurately during recognition compared to those containing low fan concepts. 
 Anderson and Reder (1999)  attribute the fan effect to competition during retrieval. This competition is described mathematically in  Anderson’s (2007)  ACT-R theory, according to which the availability of a fact in memory is represented by its activation value. The activation value of a fact consists of two components, 1) base-level activation, which is determined by how recently and frequently the fact has been encountered, and 2) spreading activation, which is determined by the number of retrieval cues and their respective fan. This relationship is formally expressed in the  activation equation , 
 
 A i = B i + ∑ j W j S j i ,  where  A i  is the activation of fact  i ,  B i  is the base-level activation and will reflect both the recency and frequency of fact  i , and the summation is the amount of spreading activation to fact  i  from the retrieval cues  j . The amount of spreading activation from a cue  j  is determined by the associative strength  S ji  between cue  j  and fact  i  weighted according to the amount of attention devoted to that cue during retrieval,  W j . The associative strength between cue  j  and fact  i  is determined by the fan of  j , such that as more facts are associated with  j , the associative strength between  j  and any particular fact is weakened by competition. This can be thought of either as decreasing the associative strength between the cue and the target fact or increasing the amount of competition from the cue’s other associates. Given a study sentence like ‘The hippie is in the park,’ the retrieval cues are the person (i.e., hippie) and the location (i.e., park) and increasing the fan of either cue will reduce the amount of spreading activation to the associated fact (‘The hippie is in the park’), thus making the fact more difficult to retrieve. 
 In ACT-R,  W j  scales the effect of associative strength according to the amount of attentional resources devoted to a retrieval cue, such that the effect of fan is greater for cues with higher values of  W j . When equal attentional resources are allocated to each retrieval cue  j  during retrieval,  W j  can be set to  W/n , where  n  is the number of retrieval cues and  W  is the limit on attentional resources. In this case, the fan of all retrieval cues has the same impact on activation. However, in cases where different cues receive different amounts of attentional resources during retrieval,  W j  can be larger for one cue and smaller for others. In this case, the fan of retrieval cues that receive more attention has a larger impact on spreading activation than the fan of cues that receive less attention. 
 Sohn et al. (2004)  investigated the effect of attention on the fan effect by having participants learn associations between people and locations using one of two learning procedures. In the  person focus  condition, participants were initially presented Person-Location associations (e.g., ‘The hippie is in the park’) with pictures of the person’s face. After reading each sentence with a picture, participants went through a two-tiered question-answering phase in which they were given the name of the person and had to correctly identify that person’s face (e.g., ‘Click on the hippie”) as well as all associated locations (e.g., ‘Where is the hippie?’). The training procedure ended when the participants answered each set of questions correctly twice. In the  location focus  condition, participants were initially presented Person-Location associations with a cell on a 5×5 grid associated with each location. After reading each sentence with the cell, participants went through a two-tiered question-answering phase in which they were given the name of the location and had to correctly identify that location’s cell (e.g., ‘Click on the park”) as well as all associated people (e.g., ‘Who is in the park?’). The major difference between the focus conditions was that in the person focus condition the person was used as a retrieval cue during training and in the location focus condition the location was used as a retrieval cue during training.  Sohn et al. (2004)  hypothesized that this difference caused participants to group the material differently, with participants in the person focus condition grouping the material according to the person and participants in the location focus condition grouping the material according to the location.  Sohn et al. (2004)  found that effect of person fan was greater in the person focus condition and the effect of location fan was greater in the location focus condition, which they interpreted as inconsistent with competing models of the fan effect ( Radvansky & Zacks, 1991 ). In their model of the task, the different training procedures caused participants to weigh the person and location cues differently during retrieval, with more weight ( W j ) devoted to the person cue in the person focus condition, and more weight devoted to the location cue in the location focus condition. That is, during retrieval, more attention was paid to the cue that was also used as a cue during training. Overall,  Sohn et al. (2004)  found that different training procedures cause participants to attend to retrieval cues differently, resulting in modulation of the fan effect. The competing associations of the focused cue caused more interference than the associations of the non-focused cue. This suggests that the amount of interference caused by the competing associations of a cue is proportional to the amount of attention devoted to that cue during retrieval. 
 
 
 Competition increases left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity during retrieval 
 Competition influences the extent to which control processes must be exerted during retrieval. Any brain region involved in guiding retrieval would be expected to increase activity as the amount of competition increases. Activity in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) has been shown to increase as the amount of competition during retrieval increases ( Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1999 ). Along the same lines, activity in this region during retrieval has been shown to increase as the fan of the retrieval cues increases ( Danker et al, 2008 ;  Sohn et al., 2003 ;  Sohn et al., 2005 ). Furthermore, activity in this region decreases when the retrieved association has been studied more often ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2003 ), or when competing associations are forgotten ( Kuhl et al., 2007 ). Whether the left VLPFC is involved in resolving competition specifically or guiding retrieval more generally has been a topic of substantial debate among researchers ( Badre & Wagner, 2002 ;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ; Thompson-Schill et al., 1998;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1999 ;  Wagner et al., 2001 ), and some researchers have argued that distinguishing between these accounts is impossible ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Martin & Byrne, 2006 ;  Martin & Cheng, 2006 ;  Thompson-Schill & Botvinick 2006 ). Despite substantial debate about what specific function this region performs during retrieval, it is generally accepted that left VLPFC activity during retrieval is directly proportional to retrieval difficulty in general and the amount of competition specifically. 
 
 
 Brain regions engaged during encoding reactivate during subsequent retrieval 
 The process of remembering can sometimes involve vividly re-experiencing the remembered episode. There is growing evidence that the brain regions involved in encoding an episode are partially reactivated when that episode is later remembered (for review, see  Danker & Anderson, 2010 ). That is, the process of remembering an episode involves partially recapitulating the brain state that was present during that episode. Neuroimaging studies have relied on an associative memory paradigm to provide evidence for reactivation ( Nyberg et al., 2000 ;  Wheeler et al., 2000 ). This design relies crucially on the association of neutral retrieval cues with different categories of stimuli (e.g., sounds vs. pictures) that preferentially engage distinct brain regions during encoding. Because the neutral cue is presented alone at retrieval, preferential engagement of category-specific encoding regions during retrieval can be attributed to memory reactivation. In the typical experiment, during the study session, participants study neutral stimuli (e.g., words) that are randomly associated with different stimuli (e.g., a picture or a sound). During the test session, participants are presented with the neutral stimuli as retrieval cues and asked to make decisions about their memory of the cue and/or its associates. Any regions that are more active during both the encoding and the retrieval of one kind of stimuli (e.g., pictures) compared to other (e.g., sounds) are taken as evidence of reactivation. Using variations on this paradigm, evidence has been found that the fusiform gyrus is reactivated during the retrieval of pictures and the superior temporal gyrus is reactivated during the retrieval of sounds ( Nyberg et al., 2000 ;  Vaidya et al., 2002 ;  Wheeler et al., 2000 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2003 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2004 ;  Wheeler et al., 2006 ). Additionally, the parahippocampal place area (PPA), which selectively responds to images of places ( Epstein et al., 1999 ), has been found to reactivate when places are imagined ( O’Craven & Kanwisher, 2000 ) or remembered ( Polyn et al., 2005 ;  Ranganath et al., 2004 ). Likewise, the fusiform face area (FFA), which selectively responds to images of faces ( Kanwisher et al., 1997 ), reactivates when faces are imagined ( O’Craven & Kanwisher, 2000 ) or remembered ( Polyn et al., 2005 ;  Ranganath et al., 2004 ). It has been found that the amount of reactivation during retrieval is influenced by a number of factors. For example, reactivation is greater when participants report recollecting details of the study experience ( Johnson & Rugg, 2007 ;  Wheeler et al., 2004 ;  Woodruff et al., 2005 ), or report vividly reliving a past experience ( Daselaar et al., 2008 ). Reactivation has also been found to scale with the amount of retrieved information ( Heil et al., 1996 ;  Heil et al., 1997 ;  Khader et al., 2005a ;  Khader et al., 2005b ;  Khader et al., 2007 ; Rosler et al., 2005). However, it is unknown whether the amount of competition specifically or the difficulty of the retrieval generally affects the amount of reactivation that occurs during retrieval, and if so, whether these factors increase or decrease the amount of reactivation ( Danker & Anderson, 2010 ). 
 
 
 Study and predictions 
 In the following study, we use  Sohn et al.’s (2004)  training procedure to manipulate the attentional weight of person and location cues during the recognition of person-location associations while simultaneously recording brain activity using fMRI. Our procedure diverges from that of  Sohn et al. (2004)  in several critical ways. Participants study associations between  famous  people and  famous  locations, and focus condition is manipulated  within  subject rather than  between  subjects. In the person focus condition, person-location pairs are associated with a picture of the famous person, and in the location focus condition, pairs are associated with a picture of the famous location (rather than a cell on a grid). We hope to replicate  Sohn et al.’s (2004)  finding that the fan effect is modulated by focus condition. We have several predictions that we believe follow directly from the known findings: 
 
 
 Based on evidence that the magnitude of left VLPFC activity during retrieval is proportional to the amount of competition (e.g.,  Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ), we predict that fan effects in left VLPFC will be modulated by focus condition, with the effect of person fan being greater in the person focus condition and the effect of location fan being greater in the location focus condition. 
 
 
 Based on evidence that PPA and FFA reactivate during the retrieval of faces and places, respectively (e.g.,  Ranganath et al., 2004 ), we predict that, using text-only stimuli, FFA will be more active during the recognition of pairs studied in the person focus condition, and PPA will be more active during recognition of pairs studied in the location focus condition. 
 
 
 Most tentatively, we predict that the amount of reactivation in FFA and PPA will be greater when fan is low compared to when fan is high. We theorize that reactivation decreases rather than increases with fan because interference would reduce the amount of activation spreading to the target memory. 
 
 
 In addition to the recognition task, participants in our study also performed a mental imagery task between the study task and the recognition task in which they were asked to think about each individual famous person and location while we record brain activity. Based on the previous research, we might expect FFA to be more active during imagery for people and items studied in the person focus condition and the PPA to be more active during imagery for locations and items studied in the location focus condition. 
 
 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty-two right-handed participants (8 female, 14 male, ages 18 to 27, mean age 20.95) who were eligible to participate in fMRI research were recruited locally and completed two sessions each. All participants gave informed consent to the experimeneter in accordance with Carnegie Mellon University and University of Pittsburgh guidelines. Two participants were excluded from further analysis due to excessive movement in the scanner (>x mm within run). 
 
 
 Stimuli and Design 
 Stimuli for each participant were the 36 studied Person-Location pairs and 36 rearranged pairs. Each studied pair consisted of a famous person and a famous location, and studied pairs were randomly generated for each participant from a pool of 24 famous people and 24 famous locations. The design was 2×2×2×2 factorial with 16 conditions and four major factors: person fan (1 or 3), location fan (1 or 3), focus condition (person or location focus), and probe type (studied or rearranged). In half of the studied pairs, the person was unique to that pair (person fan 1), and in the remaining half the person appeared in two other studied pairs (person fan 3). Likewise, in half of the studied pairs, the location was unique to that pair (person fan 1), and in the other half the location appeared in two other studied pairs (location fan 3). Because some people and some locations appeared in multiple pairs, there were more unique Person-Location pairs (36) than there were either unique people (24) or unique locations (24), with 18 of the people and 18 of the locations appearing in only one pair each and 6 of the people and 6 of the locations appearing in three pairs each. Furthermore, half of the studied pairs (and the corresponding people and locations) were assigned to the person focus condition, and half were assigned to the location focus condition. Studied pairs in different focus conditions were learned by slightly different training procedures. Specifically, in the person focus condition, the pair was presented with a corresponding photograph of the person’s face and the person was used as a retrieval cue during training. Likewise, in the location focus condition, the pair was presented with a corresponding photograph of the location and the location was used as a retrieval cue. The differences between the focus conditions are outlined in more detail in the procedure section, below. For each studied pair, a corresponding rearranged foil in the same person fan, location fan, and focus condition was created by reshuffling Person-Location pairs within that condition to produce a new Person-Location combination that had not been studied. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Participants performed one training session and one test session. The training session consisted of a learning procedure in which participants learned the 36 pairs to criterion. The learning procedure consisted of two stages: 1) an initial presentation stage in which sentences describing the pairs were presented in random order along with accompanying pictures, and 2) a triple-pass question-answering procedure in which participants had to correctly answer two questions about each sentence three times in order to reach a learning criterion. During the initial presentation stage, participants were presented with each of the sentences and were instructed to study each sentence and the associated picture and indicate when they were ready for the next sentence by clicking a button. For pairs in the  person focus  condition, the initial presentation consisted of sentences in the format “<Person> went to <Location(s)>” presented with a photograph of the person’s face (see  Figure 1A ). All locations associated with a given person were grouped into a single sentence (e.g., person fan 1: “Tom Cruise went to the Grand Canyon”, person fan 3: “Tom Cruise went to the Grand Canyon, Big Ben, and the Colosseum”). For pairs in the  location focus  condition, the initial presentation consisted of sentences in the format “<Person(s)> is/are at <Location>” presented with a photograph of the location (see  Figure 1B ). All people associated with a given location were grouped into a single sentence (e.g., location fan 1: “Brad Pitt is at the Eiffel Tower”, location fan 3: “Brad Pitt, Angelina Jolie, and Oprah Winfrey are at the Eiffel Tower”). 
 After participants studied each of the sentences, their memory of the sentences was perfected through a triple-pass question-answering procedure. The procedure required participants to correctly answer two questions for each of the sentences. In the  person focus  condition, participants had to pick the photograph of the person’s face out of an array of 12 faces (e.g., “Who is Tom Cruise?”) and select the associated location(s) out of an array when given the person as a retrieval cue (e.g., “Where did Tom Cruise go?” -- see  Figure 1A ). In the location focus condition, participants had to pick the photograph of the location out of an array of 12 photographs of locations (e.g., “Where is the Eiffel Tower?”) and select the associated person(s) out of a random array of person names when given the location as a retrieval cue (e.g., “Who was at the Eiffel Tower?” -- see  Figure 1B ). Each pair of questions was drawn randomly from a pool of the questions that had not yet been correctly answered. When participants correctly answered both questions for a given sentence, those questions dropped out of the pool. In the case of an error, participants were presented the correct answer and the questions were left in the pool to be asked again later. The procedure ended when participants answered all of the questions in the pool correctly three times. No data was collected during training. 
 The test session was an fMRI scan that occurred between 0 and 48 hours after the training session. Due to constraints in scheduling, participants were tested either immediately (n = 4), after approximately 24 hours (n = 14), or after approximately 48 hours (n = 2). The following three tasks were performed during the functional scan: 1) A localizer for FFA and PPA, 2) A short imagery task in which participants were asked to think about each studied person and location, and 3) a recognition task in which participants had to distinguish studied pairs from rearranged pairs. 
 The localizer consisted of 5 blocks each of rapidly presented faces, locations, and flowers, ordered pseudorandomly such that 2 blocks of the same type did not occur in succession. During a block, images of a single type were presented every 500 ms for 16 s and participants had to click their index finger every time an image was presented twice in a row (i.e., a 1-back task). The only major factor was stimulus type. There was 10 s of fixation between blocks. The task lasted 6 min 40 s. 
 In the imagery task, participants were presented with the name of each person or location and asked to think about whatever comes to mind with respect to that person or location for 6 s. The major factors were whether the word referred to a person or a location (stimulus type), the fan of the word from training (1 or 3), and the focus condition of the word from training (person or location). There was 10 s between each item. Each item was presented once such that the task lasted 12 min 48 s. 
 In the recognition task, participants were presented with each of the 72 Person-Location pairs (36 studied pairs and 36 rearranged pairs) and asked to indicate whether that pair had been studied by clicking their index finger for yes and middle finger for no. The major factors were person fan (1 or 3), location fan (1 or 3), attentional focus (person or location focus), and studied/rearranged. Each stimulus was presented as text: no images were presented during the recognition task. Each pair was presented for 4 s followed by 2 s of feedback and 10 s of fixation. Each item was presented three times 1  such that the experiment consisted of 216 trials presented in random order. Feedback indicated whether each response was correct or incorrect and allowed participants to recover memory for subsequent repetitions. The recognition task was divided into 9 blocks of 24 trials, lasting 6 min 24 s each. The entire recognition task lasted 57 min 36 s plus short breaks between blocks. 
 
 
 Imaging Parameters 
 Event-related fMRI data were collected using a gradient echo-planar-image (EPI) acquisition on a Siemens 3T Allegra Scanner. Imaging parameters for all functional scans were TR = 2000-ms, TE = 30-ms, flip angle = 79°, FOV = 200-mm, matrix-size = 64×64, slice thickness = 3.2-mm, slice gap 0-mm, and 34 axial slices per scan with AC-PC on the 11th slice from the bottom. There were a total of eleven functional runs consisting of the localizer (200 volumes), the imagery task (384 volumes), and nine blocks of recognition (192 volumes each). Anatomical scans were acquired prior to the functional data using a standard T2-weighted pulse sequence, with 34 slices and the AC-PC on the 11th slice from the bottom. 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 
 Behavioral 
 Response time and error rate (misses + false alarms) were collected for each trial of the recognition task. Response times were analyzed for correct trials only (hits + correct rejections). Group statistics were performed on response time and error rate using repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Factors included person fan (1 or 3), location fan (1 or 3), focus (person or location), and studied/rearranged. 
 
 
 Imaging 
 All preprocessing was done within the Neuro Imaging Software system (NIS,  http://kraepelin.wpic.pitt.edy/nis/index.html ). Preprocessing of the functional imaging data included six-parameter rigid-body motion correction using AIR ( Woods, Cherry, and Mazziotta 1992 ). Images were coregistered to a common reference anatomical MRI scan by means of the 12-parameter AIR algorithm ( Woods et al. 1998 ) and smoothed with a 6-mm full-width half-maximum three-dimensional Gaussian filter. 
 Predefined analyses were performed using ROIs created in NIS. We used the same predefined left ventrolateral prefrontal region that has been the focus of several studies by our group ( Danker, Gunn, & Anderson, 2008 ;  Sohn et al., 2003 ;  Sohn et al., 2005 ). This region consists of a box approximately 16 mm wide, 16 mm long, and 13 mm high (5 × 5 × 4 voxels) centered at Talaraich coordinates  x  = −40,  y  = 21,  z  = 21 ( Figure 3A ). It contains parts of Brodmann areas 45 and 46 around the inferior frontal sulcus. Localized fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippocampal place area (PPA) ROIs were defined separately for each participant by contrasting faces > not faces and places > not places in the localizer task, respectively. The minimum threshold for defining these regions was  p  < .05 and was decreased until distinct regions were apparent in the appropriate anatomical locations. The range of thresholds used to isolate regions across participants varied between .05 and 5×10 −7  for FFA ( M  = 0.022,  SD  = 0.024) and .05 and 5×10 −13  for PPA ( M  = 0.0026,  SD  = 0.011). Using this method, FFAs were localized on the right for 19 participants and on the left for 16 participants. Bilateral PPAs were localized for all 20 participants. Values from left and right PPA and FFA regions were averaged for each participant to produce a single value for each condition. Group statistics were performed on the predefined regions using repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), where the dependent measure was calculated as the average percent BOLD signal change across voxels in the region relative to baseline on the first scan. For each region, trials that included scan-to-scan fluctuations of greater than 5.0% BOLD or raw MR values below 200 were excluded from analyses. For the imagery task, factors included stimulus type (person or location), fan (1 or 3), focus (person or location), and scan (8 TRs). For the recognition task, factors included person fan (1 or 3), location fan (1 or 3), focus (person or location), studied/rearranged, and scan (8 TRs). When a region shows significant interactions between factors and scan, it indicates that the region shows an effect of that factor that changes over time, and this effect can oftentimes be characterized as a differential rise or fall in the percent BOLD change across conditions relative to baseline at the first scan. In order to ensure that significant effects were driven by differential rises or falls in the BOLD response across conditions, we followed up all significant interactions between factors and scan with corresponding  t  tests comparing mean activity around the peak (scans 3–6) across conditions. 
 Masked analyses were performed using mixed-effects ANOVA models ( Braver et al., 1997 ;  Snitz et al., 2005 ) within NIS with masks created in AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ;  Cox & Hyde, 1997 ). The localizer mask included all voxels that were differentially activated by faces and places in the localizer task ( p  < .005, 6019 voxels, approximately 12% of voxels in the brain). For the imagery task, voxel-wise 2-stimulus type × 2-fan × 2 focus × 8-scan ANOVAs were performed on all voxels in this mask with participant as a random factor. For the recognition task, voxel-wise 2-person fan × 2-location fan × 2 focus × 2-studied/rearranged × 8-scan ANOVAs were performed on all voxels in this mask with participant as a random factor. For the localizer mask, significant regions of interest were required to consist of at least 62 contiguous voxels at a voxel-wise alpha of .05 or 18 contiguous voxels at a voxel-wise alpha of .01 such that the brain-wide alpha was estimated to be .05 by simulation. The smaller voxel-wise alpha of .01 is reported where it was necessary to reduce the alpha in order to separate distinct regions. The response mask included all voxels that showed a significant effect of scan during the recognition task (i.e., responded strongly to stimulus onset,  p  < 5×10 −10 , 15731 voxels, approximately 31% of voxels in the brain). For the recognition task, voxel-wise 2-person fan × 2-location fan × 2-focus × 2-studied/rearranged × 8-scan ANOVAs were performed on all voxels in this mask with participant as a random factor. For the response mask, significant regions of interest were required to consist of at least 73 contiguous voxels at a voxel-wise alpha of .05 such that the brain-wide alpha was estimated to be .05 by simulation. 
 All imaging analyses were performed only on correct trials (hits + correct rejections). 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Imagery task 
 
 Localized FFA 
 This region did not show the predicted preferences for people as a function of stimulus type and focus condition. The interaction between type and scan was not significant ( F (7,126) = 1.32,  p  > .10), indicating that this region was not sensitive to whether participants thought about people or locations. The interaction between focus and scan was also not significant ( F (7,126) = 0.84,  p  > .10). 
 
 
 Localized PPA 
 In accordance with our predictions, the PPA ( Figure 2A ) was more active when participants were thinking about locations than people, and was more active in the location focus condition than the person focus condition (see  Figures 2B and D ). In accordance with the observations, the interaction between type and scan was significant ( F (7,133) = 2.34,  p  < .05), and a follow-up  t  test comparing the average activation over scans 3–6 in the location and person conditions was significant ( t (19) = 3.36,  p  < .005), indicating that this region responded more strongly when participants thought about locations than people. The interaction between focus and scan was marginally significant ( F (7,133) = 2.03,  p  < .10), indicating that this region tended to respond more strongly in the location focus condition than the person focus condition, but a follow-up  t  test comparing the average activation over scans 3–6 in the location and person focus conditions was not significant ( t (19) = 1.32,  p  > .10). 
 
 
 Masked analysis 
 We looked for regions within the localizer mask that showed three kinds of effects in the imagery task: 1) stimulus type × scan interactions indicative of regions that responded differently when people and locations were thought about, 2) fan × scan interactions indicative of regions that respond differently depending on the number of associations of the person or location during training, and 3) focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that responded differentially depending on whether the person or location was part of a person focus or location focus pair during training. Because all regions were within the localizer mask, all of the regions responded more strongly to the visual presentation of either faces or places in the localizer task. 
 The regions within the localizer mask showing effects of stimulus type, fan, and focus are displayed in  Table 1  along with their sizes, locations (Brodmann areas and Talaraich coordinates), activation for faces and places in the localizer, and activation according to imagery condition. The activation values represent the sums of the average % BOLD signal change in these regions summed over 13 scans in the localizer task and the sums over the eight scans in the imagery task. Of particular note, the parahippocampal gyrus, which preferred places in the localizer task, also responded more strongly when participants were instructed to think about locations or when they were thinking about people or locations studied in the location focus condition. This region also responded more strongly when fan was low. Several other visual processing regions responded more strongly both when places were presented visually in the localizer and when participants were instructed to think about locations in the imagery task, including superior occipital gyrus, precuneus, and lingual gyrus. However, no regions that responded more strongly to people’s faces in the localizer also responded more strongly when participants were instructed to think about people in the imagery task. Interestingly, all the regions within this mask that showed effects of fan in the localizer task responded more strongly when fan was low. The opposite pattern is typically observed during recall and recognition tasks ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Sohn et al., 2003 ;  Sohn et al., 2005 ). 
 
 
 
 Recognition task 
 
 Proportion correct 
 Proportion correct did not differ between participants tested at immediate ( n  = 4,  M ± SD  = 0.92±0.04), 24 hour ( n  = 14,  M ± SD  = 0.93±0.05), and 48 hour ( n  = 2,  M ± SD  = 0.89±0.01) delays (all  p s > .10), and there was no notable correlation across participants between retention interval and proportion correct ( r  = −.09). This observed lack of forgetting over substantial delays is not unusual in a paradigm where associations are learned to an extremely high criterion. For this reason, all further analyses include data from all three groups. 
 The mean proportion correct by condition is presented in  Table 2 . For both person fan and location fan, participants correctly responded to low fan pairs more than high fan pairs. Furthermore, person fan effects were greater in the person focus condition, and location fan effects were greater in the location focus condition. The magnitude of the person and location fan effects in proportion correct (fan 3 - fan 1) are presented for the two focus conditions in  Figure 3A . In accordance with these observations, there were significant main effects of both person fan ( F (1,19) = 15.97,  p  < .001) and location fan ( F (1,19) = 25.36,  p  < .0001). Furthermore, there was a significant interaction between person fan and focus ( F (1,19) = 5.16,  p  < .05), confirming that the person fan effects were significantly greater in the person focus condition. The interaction between location fan and focus was not significant ( F (1,19) = .13,  p  > .10), indicating the trend observed is not reliable. 
 
 
 Response time 
 The mean response time by condition is presented in  Table 2 . For both person fan and location fan, participants took longer to respond to high fan pairs than low fan pairs. Furthermore, person fan effects were greater in the person focus condition, and location fan effects were greater in the location focus condition. The magnitude of the person and location fan effects in response time (fan 3 - fan 1) are presented for the two focus conditions in  Figure 3B . In accordance with these observations, there were significant main effects of both person fan ( F (1,19) = 50.97,  p  < .0001) and location fan ( F (1,19) = 73.93,  p  < .0001). Furthermore, there were significant interactions between person fan and focus ( F (1,19) = 20.73,  p  < .0005) and between location fan and focus ( F (1,19) = 5.03,  p  < .05), confirming that the fan effects were significantly greater in the appropriate focus condition. 
 
 
 Predefined left VLPFC 
 In accordance with the predictions, person fan effects in left VLPFC were greater in the person focus condition, and location fan effects were greater in the location focus condition ( Figure 4B ). In fact, person fan effects were actually reversed in the location focus condition, with low fan items producing more activity than high fan items ( Figure 4B and C ). Likewise, location fan effects were greatly reduced in the person focus condition ( Figure 4B and D ). The interaction between person fan and scan was not significant ( F (7,133) = .97,  p  > .10), indicating that person fan effects were not present when focus condition was not taken into account. The interaction between location fan and scan was marginal ( F (7,133) = 1.88,  p  < .10). However, the interaction between person fan, focus, and scan was marginally significant ( F (7,133) = 1.78,  p  < .10) and the interaction between location fan, focus, and scan was significant ( F (7,133) = 2.16,  p  < .05), confirming that the fan effects were significantly greater in the appropriate focus condition. In order to determine whether left VLPFC generally showed greater fan effects on the focused dimension, we performed a follow-up  t  test on the fan effects averaged over scans 3–6. We compared the average of the location fan effect in the location focus condition and the person fan effect in the person focus condition with the average of the location fan effect in the person focus condition and the person fan effect in location focus condition (comparing the outer bars to the inner bars in  Figure 4B ). The difference was significant ( t (19) = 1.91,  p  < .05, one tailed). 
 
 
 Localized FFA 
 Our predictions were not borne out for this region, as it did not show the predicted effect of focus or the significant interaction between person fan, focus, and scan. Against our predictions, the interaction between focus and scan ( F (7,126) = 0.73,  p  > .10) and between person fan, focus, and scan ( F (7,126) = 1.27,  p  > .10) were not significant. Likewise, the interaction between location fan, focus, and scan was not significant ( F (7,126) = 1.70,  p  > .10). 
 
 
 Localized PPA 
 In accordance with the predictions, PPA was more active in the location focus condition than the person focus condition, suggesting that the pictorial information about locations is being accessed during retrieval. Furthermore, this effect of focus seems to be largely driven by the low location fan condition, such that activity is greatest in the location fan 1/location focus condition (see  Figures 2C and E ). In accordance with our observations, there was a significant interaction between focus and scan ( F (7,133) = 4.83,  p  < .0001), and a follow-up  t  test comparing the average activation over scans 3–6 in the location and person focus conditions was significant ( t (19) = 2.21,  p  < .05), indicating that the PPA responded more strongly in the location-focus condition. There was also a significant interaction between location fan, focus, and scan ( F (7,133) = 2.17,  p  < .05), and a follow-up  t  test comparing activation in the location fan 3/location focus condition with that in the other three conditions was significant ( t (19) = 2.59,  p  < .05), indicating activation was greatest in the location fan 1/location focus condition. The interaction between person fan, focus, and scan was not significant ( F (7,133) = 1.06,  p  > .10). 
 In order to highlight the differences in the effects shown between this region and our predefined VLPFC region, we performed a 2-region (PPA vs. VLPFC) × 2-person fan × 2-location fan × 2-focus × 2-studied/rearranged repeated-measured ANOVA with average activation over scans 3–6 as the dependent measure. As might be expected based on the results of the separate tests for each region, the interaction between region, location fan, and focus was significant ( F (1,19) = 6.59,  p  < .05). In the location focus condition, left VLPFC responded more strongly to higher location fan, while PPA responded more strongly to lower location fan. A follow-up  t  test directly comparing the magnitude of location fan effects in PPA and VLPFC in the location focus condition was significant (t(19) = 2.81,  p  < .05). Lastly, the interaction between region, person fan, and focus was marginally significant ( F (1,19) = 3.36,  p  < .10), indicating the differences in the responses of these regions to person fan. Left VLPFC responded more strongly when person fan was high in the person focus condition, while PPA was insensitive to both person fan and its interaction with focus. A follow-up  t  test directly comparing the magnitude of person fan effects in PPA and VLPFC in the person focus condition was significant (t(19) = 2.37,  p  < .05). In the person focus condition, left VLPFC responded more strongly to higher person fan, while PPA was insensitive to person fan. 
 
 
 
 Masked analyses 
 
 Localizer mask 
 We looked for regions within the localizer mask that showed three kinds of effects in the recognition task: 1) focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that responded differently depending on whether the recognized pair was studied in the person or location focus condition, 2) person fan × focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that show person fan effects that depend on the focus condition, and 3) location fan × focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that show location fan effects that depend on the focus condition. Because all regions were within the localizer mask, all of the regions responded more strongly to the visual presentation of either faces or places in the localizer task. 
 The regions within the localizer mask showing effects of focus or interactions between location fan and focus are displayed in  Table 3  along with their sizes, locations (Brodmann areas and Talaraich coordinates), activation for faces and places in the localizer, and activation according to fan and focus condition. The activation values represent the sums of the average % BOLD signal change in these regions summed over 13 scans in the localizer and the sums for the eight scans in the recognition task. Several regions that responded more positively to places in the localizer also responded more strongly in the location focus condition during recognition, including the left parahippocampal gyrus. As in the imagery task, no regions in the mask that preferred people’s faces in the localizer responded more strongly in the person focus condition. No regions within the mask showed significant interactions between person fan, focus, and scan. However, several regions showed an interaction between location fan, focus, and scan, including the right parahippocampus, which, as in the localized PPA analysis, responded most strongly in the location fan 1/location focus condition. 
 
 
 Response mask 
 We looked for regions within the response mask that showed two kinds of effects: 1) person fan × focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that show person fan effects that depend on the focus condition, and 2) location fan × focus × scan interactions indicative of regions that show location fan effects that depend on the focus condition. Because all regions were within the response mask, all of the regions responded strongly to the recognition task. 
 The regions within the response mask showing interactions between fan and focus are displayed in  Table 4  along with their sizes, locations (Brodmann areas and Talaraich coordinates), and activation according to fan and focus condition. For regions showing interactions with person fan, the fan conditions reported refer to person fan, and for regions showing interactions with location fan, the fan conditions reported refer to location fan. The activation values represent the sum of the average % BOLD signal change in these regions summed across eight scans in the recognition task. Several regions showed larger person fan effects in the person focus condition, including part of the left middle frontal gyrus near our predefined left VLPFC region. Only three of the regions showing location fan × focus × scan interactions showed greater fan effects in the location focus condition. One of these regions responded positively (right precuneus), and two responded negatively (superior/medial frontal gyrus and angular gyrus). 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 
 Fan effects in left VLPFC are modulated by attention to the retrieval cues 
 Activity in left VLPFC has been shown to correlate inversely with the accessibility of retrieved information during memory retrieval, such that activity in this region is greater when information is more difficult to retrieve. Many factors that influence the accessibility of information have been shown to influence activity in this region during retrieval, such as competition and the number of study presentations ( Danker, Gunn, & Anderson, 2008 ;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ;  Wagner et al., 2001 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2003 ). During associative memory retrieval, it has been repeatedly shown that increasing the fan, or number of associations, of the retrieval cues increases response time, error rate, and left VLPFC activity during retrieval ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Sohn et al, 2003 ;  Sohn et al., 2005 ). According to  Anderson and Reder (1999) , when the fan of a retrieval cue is increased, the cue becomes less strongly associated with the retrieved association and more strongly associated with its other associates.  Danker et al. (2008)  argued that this could be thought of either as decreasing the associative strength between the cue and the target association or increasing the competition from the cue’s other associations. 
 Sohn et al. (2004)  found that when participants were trained to focus more on one cue than the other during recognition, the fan of the focused cue had a larger effect on response time and accuracy than the fan of the unfocused cue. In this study, we replicated the  Sohn et al.’s (2004)  findings with response time and accuracy. Given findings that the left VLPFC activity increases with fan ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Sohn et al, 2003 ;  Sohn et al., 2005 ), and decreases when competing associations are forgotten ( Kuhl et al., 2007 ), we predicted that fan effects in left VLPFC activity would be modulated by  Sohn et al.’s (2004)  focus manipulation. Consistent with this prediction, we found that person fan increased left VLPFC activity more in the person focus condition, and location fan increased left VLPFC activity more in the location focus condition ( Figure 4B ). From these findings, we conclude that: 1) Preferentially using one cue over another during training leads participants to weigh that cue more heavily during retrieval, 2) The interference caused by the fan of a cue during retrieval is proportional to the amount of attention directed at that cue, 3) This interference is reflected in left VLPFC activity during retrieval. This is consistent with theories that propose the left VLPFC is involved guiding retrieval generally (e.g.,  Danker et al., 2008 ;  Wagner et al., 2001 ), and resolving competition specifically (e.g.,  Badre & Wagner, 2007 ;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ). What most strongly differentiates these theories is that competition theories propose separate retrieval and selection processes ( Badre & Wagner, 2007 ;  Thompson-Schill et al. 1997 ), in which case left VLPFC could be said to be involved in selection among competitors but not retrieval generally, and controlled retrieval theories propose that retrieval is a selection process ( Danker et al., 2008 ;  Martin & Byrne, 2006 ;  Martin & Cheng, 2006 ), in which case the distinction between retrieval and selection is immaterial. Our findings can be explained using either theory. According to competition theories, our focus manipulation might impact which retrieval cue is used, which in turn impacts how many competing associations are retrieved and, in turn, must be selected among. When a high fan, focused cue is used (e.g., location fan 3/location focus), many competitors would be retrieved and must be selected among, leading to interference, but when a high fan, unfocused cue is used (e.g., location fan 3/person focus), those competitors may not be retrieved at all, abolishing the fan effect. Likewise, according to retrieval theories, our focus manipulation might impact which retrieval cue is used, which in turn impacts how many competing items must be selected among during retrieval. Future empirical work is required to provide evidence for one of these accounts over the other, as our current data does not favor one interpretation over the other. 
 However, one data point in particular seems inconsistent with the theory that left VLPFC is tracking retrieval difficulty and/or competition. The person fan 1/location focus condition shows more activation than the person fan 3/location focus condition (see  Figure 4C ), despite the fact that theoretically the person fan 3 condition should induce similar or slightly more competition (because person is not the focused cue), and behavioral it does induce more competition (see  Figure 3 ). We attribute this reversed fan effect in the left VLPFC to noise in our data. Consistent with this interpretation, this reversed person fan effect in the location focus condition is not statistically reliable ( t (19) = 1.39,  p  > .10). 
 
 
 PPA is reactivated during both semantic and episodic retrieval 
 The fusiform face area is a region on the fusiform gyrus that is selectively activated during the perception of faces ( Kanwisher et al., 1997 ). The parahippocampal place area (PPA) is a region on the parahippocampal gyrus that is selectively activated during the perception of locations, such as landmarks and buildings ( Epstein et al., 1999 ).  O’Craven and Kanwisher (2000)  found that FFA activity was greater when participants were asked to imagine famous faces and PPA activity was greater when participants were asked to imagine familiar buildings. Furthermore,  Ranganath et al. (2004)  and  Polyn et al. (2005)  have found that FFA is more active during the retrieval of associated faces and PPA is more active during the retrieval of associated places. In our imagery task, we instructed participants to think about whatever comes to mind when cued with a famous person or famous location that they learned about during the training procedure. Consistent with the findings of O’Craven and Kanwisher, we found that PPA was more active when participants thought about locations compared to people ( Figure 2B ). Consistent with the findings of  Ranganath et al. (2004)  and  Polyn et al. (2005) , activity in PPA was more active when participants thought about people or locations studied in the location focus condition compared to the person focus condition ( Figures 2B and D ). Furthermore, during the recognition task, PPA was more active during the recognition of pairs studied in the location focus condition compared to the person focus condition ( Figures 2C and E ). This suggests that during the imagery and recognition tasks, participants may be remembering the pictures of the associated places. Consistent with previous work, PPA was active during both the semantic retrieval of locations (location > person) and the episodic retrieval of images from training (location focus > person focus). However, in contrast to previous findings, we found that activity in the FFA was not affected by these manipulations. It is worth noting that participants were not  required  or  directly instructed  to retrieve or images faces or faces during either the imagery task or the recognition task. Participants could think about whatever they want during the imagery task, and the recognition decision could definitely be made without accessing images from memory. This makes our findings in PPA all the more impressive. For whatever reason, participants may have been more prone to retrieve images of places than images of faces. This could be because famous places are more strongly tied to their associated images than famous people, who are also strongly associated with a number of things (events, movies, songs, etc.) besides their faces. Furthermore, the failure to find reactivation in FFA may be theoretically important, especially considering we are not the only researchers to report reactivation in PPA but not FFA in the same experiment (Tubridy & Davachi, SFN posters, 2010, also using a long-term memory paradigm). That is, FFA and PPA may behave differently during memory retrieval. 
 
 
 Why is reactivation in PPA reduced by fan? 
 The magnitude of reactivation during retrieval has been found to be sensitive to a number of factors ( Daselaar et al., 2008 ;  Heil et al., 1996 ;  Heil et al., 1997 ;  Johnson & Rugg, 2007 ;  Khader et al., 2005a ;  Khader et al., 2005b ;  Khader et al., 2007 ;  Rosler et al., 2005 ;  Wheeler et al., 2004 ;  Woodruff et al., 2005 ). However, the effect of retrieval difficulty generally and competition specifically on the reactivation of encoding regions during retrieval is unknown ( Danker & Anderson, 2010 ). Because we expected competition to interfere with reactivation, we predicted that the fan of the person cue would reduce reactivation in FFA and the fan of the location cue would reduce reactivation in PPA. Whereas FFA did not reactivate at all and demonstrated no sensitivity to fan, PPA was more active during the recognition of pairs studied with pictures of places compared to faces, and this reactivation was reduced when location fan was high ( Figure 2C ). There are two primary explanations for the finding that increasing fan decreased reactivation. The first explanation is that competition reduces reactivation. That is, increasing location fan reduces reactivation because the competing associations would reduce reactivation associated with the target association. Essentially, less activation is spread from the location cue to the associated image, causing less activity in the part of cortex representing that image. However, because in this paradigm high fan items oftentimes require twice as many presentations during training to reach criterion, it is also possible that PPA activity is reduced during retrieval by repetition suppression because high fan items and images are presented more often during training and testing than low fan items and images. These repetitions might make high location fan images easier to process, which in turn might make them require less PPA reactivation to retrieve during recognition. This would be consistent with findings that parahippocampal cortex decreases activity with repetition suppression ( Gonsalves et al., 2005 ). However, this would be the first evidence to our knowledge of repetition suppression on reactivation during memory retrieval. That is, it has never been shown before to our knowledge that repeating a particular type of item reduces the reactivation associated with that item during memory retrieval. It is worth noting that previous studies that directly manipulated the number of encoding presentations of word-picture and word-sound associations found no detectable effect of repetition on the amount of reactivation during retrieval ( Nyberg et al., 2000 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2003 ). 
 Based on our findings, we can see that VLPFC and PPA respond very differently to our manipulations of competition. While VLPFC increases activity with fan, PPA decreases activity with fan. This raises the question: What is the relationship between activity in VLPFC and activity in PPA in our task? It is possible that competition has direct, independent effects on VLPFC and PPA such that competition increases cognitive control but decreases reactivation of the target memory. Alternatively, it is possible that reactivation represents the amount of bottom-up information evoked by the retrieval cue, and the amount of cognitive control required to resolve competition is inversely proportional to the amount of bottom-up information. That is, left VLPFC comes online as a result of a paucity of bottom-up information from the cue. In this case, competition may act directly on the amount of reactivation, which in turn influences the amount of left VLPFC activity. These results should motivate future research exploring the relationship between cognitive control and reactivation during memory retrieval. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 In this study, we found that interference as reflected in response time, accuracy, and left VLPFC activity during retrieval can be modulated by the attentional weight given to the retrieval cues, such the fan of focused cues has a larger effect than the fan of unfocused cues. Furthermore, we found more activation in PPA during the recognition of pairs that were associated with a picture of a place during training. This reactivation was reduced when the fan of the location cue was high. We also found that PPA was more active when people thought about famous locations, or thought about famous people or locations associated with a picture of a location during training. Overall, our results (1) support the assertion that left VLPFC is involved in resolving competition during retrieval and (2) suggest that competition may reduce the amount of sensory reactivation that occurs during retrieval. 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health grant MH068243 to J. R. A., and J. F. D. was supported by National Institute of Mental Health grant T32MH019883 to Lynne Reder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 1974 
 Retrieval of propositional information from long-term memory 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 5 
 451 
 474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2007 
 How Can the Human Mind Occur in the Physical Universe? 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 Reder 
 LM 
 
 
 1999 
 The fan effect: New results and new theories 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 128 
 186 
 197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2002 
 Semantic retrieval, mnemonic control, and prefrontal cortex 
 Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Review 
 1 
 206 
 218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 E 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1997 
 A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory 
 Neuroimage 
 5 
 49 
 62 
 9038284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 1997 
 Software tools for analysis and visualization of FMRI Data 
 NMR in Biomedicine 
 10 
 171 
 178 
 9430344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Danker 
 JF 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2010 
 The ghosts of brain states past: Remembering reactivates the brain regions engaged during encoding 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 136 
 87 
 102 
 20063927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Danker 
 JF 
 
 
 Gunn 
 P 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2008 
 A rational account of memory predicts left prefrontal activation during controlled retrieval 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 2674 
 2685 
 18321871 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Rice 
 HJ 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 DL 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2008 
 The spatiotemporal dynamics of autobiographical memory: Neural correlates of recall, emotional intensity, and reliving 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 217 
 229 
 17548799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 R 
 
 
 Harris 
 A 
 
 
 Stanley 
 D 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 1999 
 The parahippocampal place area: Recognition, navigation, or encoding? 
 Neuron 
 23 
 115 
 125 
 10402198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gonsalves 
 BD 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Curran 
 T 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2005 
 Memory strength and repetition suppression: multimodal imagina of medial temporal cortical contributions to recognition 
 Neuron 
 47 
 751 
 761 
 16129403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heil 
 M 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 Hennighausen 
 E 
 
 
 1996 
 Topographically distinct cortical activation in episodic long-term memory: The retrieval of spatial versus verbal information 
 Memory & Cognition 
 24 
 777 
 795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heil 
 M 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 Hennighausen 
 E 
 
 
 1997 
 Topography of brain electrical activity dissociates spatial versus verbal information from episodic long-term memory in humans 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 222 
 45 
 48 
 9121719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2007 
 Recollection and the reinstatement of encoding-related cortical activity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 17 
 2507 
 2515 
 17204822 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 McDermott 
 J 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 1997 
 The fusiform face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 17 
 4302 
 4311 
 9151747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khader 
 P 
 
 
 Burke 
 M 
 
 
 Bien 
 S 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 2005a 
 Content-specific activation during associative long-term memory retrieval 
 NeuroImage 
 27 
 805 
 816 
 15964209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khader 
 P 
 
 
 Heil 
 M 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 2005b 
 Material-specific long-term memory representations of faces and spatial positions: Evidence from slow event-related potentials 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 2109 
 2124 
 16243055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khader 
 P 
 
 
 Knoth 
 K 
 
 
 Burke 
 M 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Bien 
 S 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 2007 
 Topography and dynamics of associative long-term memory retrieval in humans 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 19 
 493 
 512 
 17335397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuhl 
 BA 
 
 
 Dudukovic 
 NM 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Decreased demands on cognitive control reveal the neural processing benefits of forgetting 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 10 
 908 
 914 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loftus 
 GR 
 
 
 Masson 
 MR 
 
 
 1994 
 Using confidence intervals in within-subject designs 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 1 
 476 
 490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 RC 
 
 
 Byrne 
 MD 
 
 
 2006 
 Why opening a door is as easy as eating an apple: A reply to Thompson-Schill and Botvinick 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 13 
 409 
 411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 RC 
 
 
 Cheng 
 Y 
 
 
 2006 
 Selection demands versus association strength in the verb generation task 
 Psychonomic Bulletin& Review 
 13 
 396 
 401 
 17048721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Habib 
 R 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 2000 
 Reactivation of encoding-related brain activity during memory retrieval 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 97 
 11120 
 11124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Craven 
 KM 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2000 
 Mental imagery of faces and places activates corresponding stimulus-specific brain regions 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 12 
 1013 
 1023 
 11177421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Polyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Natu 
 VS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 2005 
 Category-specific cortical activity precedes retrieval during memory search 
 Science 
 310 
 1963 
 1966 
 16373577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Radvansky 
 GA 
 
 
 Zacks 
 RT 
 
 
 1991 
 Mental models and the fan effect 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 23 
 1233 
 1246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Dam 
 C 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Inferior temporal, prefrontal, and hippocampal contributions to visual working memory maintenance and associative memory retrieval 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 3917 
 3925 
 15102907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 Heil 
 M 
 
 
 Hennighausen 
 E 
 
 
 1995 
 Distinct cortical activation patterns during long-term memory retrieval of verbal, spatial, and color information 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 7 
 51 
 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snitz 
 BE 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 A 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Cho 
 RY 
 
 
 Becker 
 T 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2005 
 Lateral and medial hypofrontality in first-episode schizophrenia: functional activity in medication-naïve state and effects of short-term atypical antipsychotic treatment 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 162 
 2322 
 2329 
 16330597 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sohn 
 MH 
 
 
 Goode 
 A 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2003 
 Competition and representation during memory retrieval: Roles of prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex 
 PNAS 
 100 
 7412 
 7417 
 12773617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sohn 
 MH 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 Reder 
 LM 
 
 
 Goode 
 A 
 
 
 2004 
 Differential fan effect and attentional focus 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 11 
 729 
 734 
 15581125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sohn 
 MH 
 
 
 Goode 
 A 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2005 
 An information-processing model of three cortical regions: evidence in episodic memory retrieval 
 NeuroImage 
 25 
 21 
 33 
 15734340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge: A reevaluation 
 PNAS 
 94 
 14792 
 14797 
 9405692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 1999 
 Effects of repetition and competition on activity in left prefrontal cortex during word generation 
 Neuron 
 23 
 513 
 522 
 10433263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 2006 
 Resolving conflict: A response to Martin and Cheng (2006) 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 13 
 402 
 408 
 17048722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Zhao 
 M 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2002 
 Evidence for cortical specificity in episodic memory: Memory-induced re-activation of picture processing areas 
 Neuropsychologia 
 40 
 2136 
 2143 
 12208009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Paré-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Clark 
 J 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2001 
 Recovering meaning: Left prefrontal cortex guides controlled semantic retrieval 
 Neuron 
 31 
 329 
 338 
 11502262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional dissociations among components of remembering: Control, perceived oldness, and content 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 3869 
 3880 
 12736357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing 
 NeuroImage 
 21 
 1337 
 1349 
 15050559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Memory’s echo: Vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 97 
 11125 
 11129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Bucckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2006 
 Evidence for separate perceptual reactivation and search processes during remembering 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 6 
 949 
 959 
 16162854 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woodruff 
 CC 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2005 
 Content-specificity of the neural correlates of recollection 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 1022 
 1032 
 15769488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Cherry 
 SR 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 1992 
 Rapid automated algorithm for aligning and reslicing PET images 
 Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 
 16 
 620 
 633 
 1629424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Holmes 
 CJ 
 
 
 Cherry 
 SR 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 1998 
 Automated image registration: I. General methods of intrasubject, intramodality variation 
 Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 
 22 
 139 
 152 
 9448779 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 The repetitions allowed us to increase our number of observations per condition without having an extremely long training procedure. None of the effects reported in this paper interacted with repetition. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Training procedure for the person and location focus conditions. A. In the person focus condition, sentences describing associations between a person and one or three locations are presented with a photograph of the person. During the dropout procedure, participants were required to identify the photograph of the person and the associated location(s) when given the name of the person as a retrieval cue. B. In the location focus condition, sentences describing associations between a location and one or three people are presented with a photograph of the location. During the dropout procedure, participants were required to identify the photograph of the location and the associated person(s) when given the name of the location as a retrieval cue. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 PPA activation during imagery and recognition. A. Example of bilateral PPA localized in one participant. B. Magnitude of PPA activity averaged over scans 3-6 by stimulus type and focus condition during imagery. C. Magnitude of PPA activity averaged over scans 3-6 by location fan and focus condition during recognition. D. Average BOLD response in PPA by stimulus type and focus condition during imagery. E. Average BOLD response in PPA by location fan and focus condition during recognition. Confidence intervals are calculated using the method of  Loftus and Masson (1994) . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Fan effects in proportion correct and response time. Fan effects are calculated as the difference between fan 3 and fan 1 conditions. A. Magnitude of person and location fan effects in proportion correct by focus condition. B. Magnitude of person and location fan effects in response time by focus condition. Confidence intervals are calculated using the method of  Loftus and Masson (1994) . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Effect of fan and focus on left VLPFC activity during recognition. A. The predefined left ventrolateral prefrontal region. B. The magnitude of person and location fan effects by focus condition. Fan effects are calculated as the average difference in activity over scans 3-6 between fan 3 and fan 1 conditions. C. Average BOLD response in left VLPFC by person fan and focus condition. D. Average BOLD response in left VLPFC by location fan and focus condition. Confidence intervals are calculated using the method of  Loftus and Masson (1994) . 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Regions showing effects in the imagery task (masked with localizer) 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Interest 
 Brodmann Area(s) 
 Voxel Count 
 Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 % BOLD Faces 
 % BOLD Places 
 Summed % BOLD by Imagery Condition 
 
 
 
 
 
 stimulus type × scan (p < .01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Person 
 
 
 Location 
 
 
 
 R. superior occipital gyrus 
 19 
 23 
 34,−82,29 
 1.43 
 3.96 
 −0.64 
 0.30 
 
 
 L. superior occipital gyrus 
 19 
 24 
 −38,−82,32 
 −4.28 
 −0.71 
 −0.42 
 1.17 
 
 
 R. precuneus 
 29,31 
 122 
 14,−60,22 
 −2.57 
 1.61 
 −0.10 
 0.95 
 
 
 L. precuneus 
 31 
 40 
 −18,−63,23 
 −3.58 
 0.25 
 −0.07 
 0.89 
 
 
 L. lingual gyrus 
 18,19 
 27 
 −12,−52,2 
 −5.04 
 0.72 
 0.12 
 1.21 
 
 
 L. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19,37 
 56 
 −29,−46,−5 
 0.06 
 6.51 
 0.13 
 1.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 focus × scan (p < .01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Person focus 
 
 
 Location focus 
 
 
 
 R. middle occipital gyrus 
 37 
 25 
 44,−69,4 
 11.40 
 4.67 
 −0.16 
 0.27 
 
 
 R. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19 
 42 
 23,−54,−4 
 3.45 
 9.05 
 −0.04 
 0.53 
 
 
 L. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19 
 44 
 −25,−57,−4 
 2.38 
 6.14 
 0.13 
 0.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 fan × scan (p < .01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fan 1 
 
 
 Fan 3 
 
 
 
 L. precuneus 
 7 
 19 
 −11,−81,51 
 −1.07 
 2.87 
 0.66 
 −0.27 
 
 
 R. precuneus 
 7 
 24 
 5,−82,51 
 −0.61 
 2.98 
 0.08 
 −1.12 
 
 
 L. cuneus 
 18,19 
 52 
 −14,−86,26 
 −3.81 
 −1.16 
 0.20 
 0.07 
 
 
 R. cuneus 
 18,19 
 26 
 21,−82,25 
 7.76 
 9.24 
 0.47 
 −0.17 
 
 
 R. middle temporal gyrus 
 19 
 19 
 52,−68,10 
 6.46 
 1.71 
 0.05 
 −0.69 
 
 
 L. middle temporal gyrus 
 19 
 56 
 −52,−73,8 
 13.48 
 5.65 
 0.71 
 0.39 
 
 
 L. middle occipital gyrus 
 18 
 31 
 −31,−94,11 
 15.44 
 15.19 
 1.59 
 0.74 
 
 
 R. middle occipital gyrus 
 18,19 
 40 
 40,−80,−1 
 17.10 
 9.06 
 1.39 
 0.77 
 
 
 L. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19 
 42 
 −23,−58,−6 
 4.61 
 8.99 
 0.37 
 0.35 
 
 
 R. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19 
 47 
 24,−66,−8 
 10.38 
 13.75 
 0.62 
 0.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean Response Time and Proportion Correct by Condition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Response time (ms) 
 Proportion correct 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Person fan/Location fan 
 Person fan/Location fan 
 
 
 1/1 
 1/3 
 3/1 
 3/3 
 1/1 
 1/3 
 3/1 
 3/3 
 
 
 
 
 Studied 
 Person focus 
 1458 
 1693 
 1732 
 1895 
 0.98 
 0.93 
 0.93 
 0.82 
 
 
 
 Location focus 
 1527 
 1786 
 1621 
 1921 
 0.97 
 0.94 
 0.94 
 0.85 
 
 
 Rearranged 
 Person focus 
 1595 
 1881 
 2058 
 2169 
 0.98 
 0.91 
 0.86 
 0.85 
 
 
 
 Location focus 
 1638 
 1949 
 1706 
 2063 
 0.99 
 0.89 
 0.97 
 0.92 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regions showing focus effects in the recognition task (masked with localizer) 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Interest 
 Brodmann Area(s) 
 Voxel Count 
 Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 % BOLD Faces 
 % BOLD Places 
 Summed % BOLD by Recognition Condition 
 
 
 
 
 
 focus × scan (p < .01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Person focus 
 
 
 Location focus 
 
 
 
 R. superior occipital gyrus 
 19 
 31 
 38,−82,28 
 1.03 
 3.62 
 −0.23 
 0.10 
 
 
 L. superior occipital gyrus 
 19 
 23 
 −36,−90,30 
 −1.94 
 3.49 
 −0.35 
 −0.15 
 
 
 R. posterior cingulate 
 23,31 
 180 
 11,−57,12 
 −2.73 
 1.87 
 0.57 
 0.94 
 
 
 L. posterior cingulate 
 31 
 29 
 −17,−61,16 
 −3.67 
 0.19 
 0.47 
 0.73 
 
 
 L. parahippocampal gyrus 
 37 
 27 
 −30,−39,−9 
 −1.46 
 5.48 
 0.15 
 0.52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 location fan × focus × scan (p < .05) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fan 1/Person 
 
 
 Fan 1/Location 
 
 
 Fan 3/Person 
 
 
 Fan 3/Location 
 
 
 
 R. precuneus 
 7,19 
 99 
 10,−78,44 
 0.07 
 1.92 
 1.21 
 1.19 
 1.02 
 1.31 
 
 
 L. middle occipital gyrus 
 18,19 
 62 
 −27,−96,24 
 10.72 
 13.24 
 1.35 
 1.67 
 1.53 
 1.47 
 
 
 Medial cuneus 
 18 
 102 
 1,−92,14 
 5.89 
 8.57 
 1.25 
 1.85 
 1.85 
 1.68 
 
 
 R. parahippocampal gyrus 
 19,37 
 85 
 17,−42,−3 
 0.59 
 5.62 
 0.48 
 0.78 
 0.51 
 0.65 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regions showing fan × focus interactions in the recognition task (masked with main effect of scan) 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Interest 
 Brodmann Area(s) 
 Voxel Count 
 Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Summed % BOLD by Recognition Condition 
 
 
 
 Fan 1/Person 
 
 
 Fan 1/Location 
 
 
 Fan 3/Person 
 
 
 Fan 3/Location 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 person fan × focus × scan (p < .05) 
 
 
 
 Superior frontal gyrus 
 6 
 76 
 3,13,50 
 0.88 
 1.03 
 1.27 
 0.85 
 
 
 L. superior parietal/precuneus 
 7,29,39 
 160 
 −28,−55,41 
 1.34 
 1.54 
 1.86 
 1.35 
 
 
 L. middle frontal gyrus 
 9,46 
 73 
 −49,13,34 
 1.03 
 1.50 
 1.70 
 1.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 location fan × focus × scan (p < .05) 
 
 
 
 Superior/medial frontal gyrus 
 8,9 
 219 
 0,60,27 
 −0.73 
 −0.58 
 −0.67 
 −1.05 
 
 
 R. precuneus 
 7 
 220 
 6,−75,44 
 1.50 
 1.31 
 1.50 
 1.62 
 
 
 L. angular gyrus 
 39 
 82 
 −53,−65,33 
 −0.72 
 −0.51 
 −0.61 
 −0.87 
 
 
 L. thalamus/lentiform nucleus 
 -- 
 77 
 −27,−25,7 
 0.36 
 0.50 
 0.51 
 0.57 
 
 
 L. putamen 
 -- 
 109 
 −20,2,16 
 0.48 
 0.47 
 0.72 
 0.69 
 
 
 L. posterior cingulate 
 30 
 82 
 −9,−49,21 
 0.87 
 0.87 
 1.08 
 1.01 
 
 
 
 
 
