
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 21616086 
 3165023 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.04.035 
 NIHMS298405 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Functional dissociations between four basic arithmetic operations in the human posterior parietal cortex: A cytoarchitectonic mapping study 
 
 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Lee 
 Miriam 
 
 miriamrl@stanford.edu 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 Ting Ting 
 
 1 
 5 
 * 
 
 
 
 Young 
 Christina B 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 Sarah 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 Vinod 
 
 menon@stanford.edu 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA 
 2 Program in Neuroscience, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA 
 3 Symbolic Systems Program, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA 
 4 Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA 
 5 Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan 
 
 Address for Correspondence:  V. Menon, Ph. D. and M. Rosenberg-Lee, Ph. D., Symbolic Systems Program, Program in Neuroscience and Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, 401 Quarry Rd., Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, CA 94305-5179 
 
 * 
 MRL and TTC contributed equally to the study 
 
 
 
 29 
 6 
 2011 
 
 
 18 
 5 
 2011 
 
 
 7 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 7 
 2012 
 
 49 
 9 
 2592 
 2608 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Although lesion studies over the past several decades have focused on functional dissociations in posterior parietal cortex (PPC) during arithmetic, no consistent view has emerged of its differential involvement in addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. To circumvent problems with poor anatomical localization, we examined functional overlap and dissociations in cytoarchitectonically-defined subdivisions of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), superior parietal lobule (SPL) and angular gyrus (AG), across these four operations. Compared to a number identification control task, all operations except addition, showed a consistent profile of left posterior IPS activation and deactivation in the right posterior AG. Multiplication and subtraction differed significantly in right, but not left, IPS and AG activity, challenging the view that the left AG differentially subserves retrieval during multiplication. Although addition and multiplication both rely on retrieval, multiplication evoked significantly greater activation in right posterior IPS, as well as the prefrontal cortex, lingual and fusiform gyri, demonstrating that addition and multiplication engage different brain processes. Comparison of PPC responses to the two pairs of inverse operations: division vs. multiplication and subtraction vs. addition revealed greater activation of left lateral SPL during division, suggesting that processing inverse relations is operation specific. Our findings demonstrate that individual IPS, SPL and AG subdivisions are differentially modulated by the four arithmetic operations and they point to significant functional heterogeneity and individual differences in activation and deactivation within the PPC. Critically, these effects are related to retrieval, calculation and inversion, the three key cognitive processes that are differentially engaged by arithmetic operations. Our findings point to distributed representation of these processes in the human PPC and also help explain why lesion and previous imaging studies have yielded inconsistent findings. 
 
 
 Arithmetic 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex 
 Cytoarchitectonics 
 Intraparietal Sulcus 
 Angular Gyrus 
 Superior Parietal Lobule 
 Addition 
 Subtraction 
 Multiplication 
 Division 
 Retrieval 
 Calculation 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD059205-01 || HD 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD057610-01A1 || HD 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD047520-01A1 || HD 
 
 
 
 
 Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division constitute the four basic arithmetic operations. There has been considerable behavioral research on the cognitive processes associated with these operations over the past several decades. Surprisingly, individuals use a variety of strategies when solving simple arithmetic problems suggesting that these operations are not entirely automatized even in adults ( Campbell & Timm, 2000 ;  Hecht, 1999 ;  LeFevre et al., 1996 ;  Siegler & Shrager, 1984 ). In particular, the rate of retrieval versus alternate calculation strategies differs widely across operations ( Campbell, 2008 ). Retrieval is the dominant method for addition and multiplication, whereas subtraction and division rely more on alternate strategies such as counting and inversion.  Campbell and Xue (2001)  reported retrieval rates of 76% for addition and 96% for multiplication, but only 58% for subtraction and 57% for division in college-age adults ( Campbell & Xue, 2001 ). These differences may be the consequence of addition and multiplication being taught prior to subtraction and division, their respective inverse operations, in most school curricula ( Campbell, 2008 ). Problem solving using a related fact from previously learned inverse operations is clearly a more parsimonious strategy than memorizing facts for all four operations ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ). 
 Although both addition and multiplication rely heavily on retrieval, they differ in their primary backup strategies. Whereas counting and decomposition are fairly efficient strategies for addition, it is less appropriate for multiplication ( Hecht, 1999 ), which can be solved by repeated addition or number series (7, 14, 21 etc). Similarly, subtraction and division differ in their reliance on inversion for problem solving. Many dividends have a small set of unique multiplicative factors (e.g. the only factors of 35 are 5 and 7), thus making division more likely to be solved using multiplication ( Rickard, 2005 ). In contrast, problems involving subtraction can be solved by invoking many alternate addends. In summary, these behavioral results suggest that retrieval is the primary method used by adults for solving simple addition and multiplication problems, whereas subtraction and division rely primarily on calculation and various backup strategies. 
 Behavioral differences in strategy use across operations suggest that the operations may have different neural correlates. Based on a case study of two patients with distinct cortical and subcortical lesions Dehaene and Cohen proposed that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) was involved in calculation, whereas subcortical and left-lateralized frontal and temporal language regions were involved in math fact retrieval ( Dehaene & Cohen, 1997 ). However, other lesion studies have found dissociations between arithmetic operations within the parietal lobe and have suggested that both retrieval and calculation involve the PPC.  Dagenbach and McClosky (1992)  reported that a patient with lesions in the left PPC performed better in subtraction than addition or multiplication problems, suggesting that compared to retrieval, calculation relies more on left PPC regions. In contrast,  van Harskamp, Rudge, and Cipolotti (2002)  described a patient with lesions to most of the left PPC who had preserved multiplication but impaired addition.  Delazer and Benke (1997)  reported a case of a left PPC tumor that damaged the supramarginal gyrus (Brodmann Area 40), the angular gyrus (AG, BA 39) and underlying white matter, leaving the patient with no conceptual knowledge of arithmetic but preserved multiplication facts. Although there has been considerable effort in understanding the role of the PPC in mathematical cognition using lesion studies, this effort has been largely unsuccessful. The highly variable locations and laterality of the lesions as well as the limited number of operations examined in each study, makes drawing specific conclusions about the differential role of the PPC in the four basic arithmetic operations difficult. 
 Functional imaging studies have begun to provide more precise anatomical localization of PPC activity during each arithmetic operation. Multiplication and subtraction are the two operations that have most often been compared in studies seeking to examine differences between operations that predominantly use retrieval versus calculation strategies.  Lee (2000)  compared brain responses to single-digit multiplication and subtraction problems using fMRI and reported that multiplication elicited greater activation than subtraction in the left AG and supramarginal gyrus while subtraction elicited larger activation than multiplication, bilaterally, in the IPS. These findings led  Lee (2000)  and  Dehaene and colleagues (2003)  to suggest that verbally-based retrieval engaged the AG, whereas quantity based calculation differentially recruited the IPS. However the absence of a control condition precluded examination of brain activity produced by each operation separately. Other studies have failed to demonstrate differential AG activation for multiplication, compared to subtraction, and have instead found equivalent IPS activation for both operations. For example,  Chochon and colleagues (1999)  found that multiplication (multiplying a presented number by 3) was associated with left IPS activity while subtraction (subtraction a presented number from 11) was associated with bilateral IPS activity. A direct comparison of subtraction to multiplication revealed greater activation only in the right IPS. No brain regions showed greater responses to multiplication over subtraction. 
 Using positron emission tomography,  Hayashi and colleagues (2000)  compared a counting control to continuous subtraction from 100 by 9 and to the recitation of the multiplication ‘times tables’. Although they did not compare activity directly, they found that the same areas were activated by the tasks, with more extensive activity for subtraction than multiplication. In particular, both operations activated bilateral inferior parietal areas and the left precentral and medial frontal gyri, whereas only subtraction activated right frontal areas. They attribute these differences to greater working memory demands in the subtraction task ( Hayashi, et al., 2000 ).  Kawashima et al. (2004)  presented single-digit addition, subtraction and multiplication problems with covert responses. Compared to a resting baseline all three operations showed left inferior parietal cortex activity, but subtraction and multiplication also demonstrated right inferior parietal cortex activity. In a direct comparison between operations, they found no significant activity differences anywhere in the brain. There was no separate control condition in their study. These early studies were limited by small sample sizes and lacked the overt behavioral responses needed to assess compliance and brain-behavior relationships. In addition, many of these studies often lacked adequate control conditions, limiting the interpretability of the findings. 
 Only two studies to date have examined brain responses to all four arithmetic operations using a within-subjects design ( Fehr, Code, & Herrmann, 2007 ,  2008 ). Fehr and colleagues compared brain responses to complex (2-digit) and simple (1-digit) problems with each of the four operations using visually (2007) and aurally presented (2008) stimuli. Using a conjunction analysis they found that complex, compared to simple, problems activated bilateral superior and middle frontal gyri and right precuneus across all operations. Brain activation between operations was not compared directly; therefore it is unclear whether there are any reliable differences between the operations. Simple problems were assumed to always be solved by retrieval of memorized math facts and were not reported. Furthermore, the use of a self-paced design with a fixed inter-stimulus interval of two seconds, without the jittering required to estimate distinct fMRI responses to each stimulus, precludes a clear functional dissociation of the brain regions involved in each operation. Zhou and colleagues found that when addition and multiplication problems were matched on difficulty, addition elicited greater activity in the IPS compared to multiplication but no differences were found in the AG ( Zhou et al., 2007 ). 
 Taken together, behavioral, lesion and functional imaging studies paint a conflicting view of functional dissociations between arithmetic operations, and the precise neural correlates of overlapping and distinct PPC responses across the four operations are as yet unclear. In this study we examine the functional overlap and dissociations in brain activity between the four operations, in the context of differential cognitive processes they evoke. Participants performed an arithmetic equation verification task with two operands, in each of the four operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. A common non-arithmetic control task involving number identification was used to examine responses to each operation. By using a single-digit, two-operand task, we were able to limit the effects of working memory load and assess the neural responses elicited by each operation, controlling for sensory input, basic number processing, response selection and motor response ( Menon, Mackenzie, Rivera, & Reiss, 2002 ;  Menon, Rivera, White, Glover, & Reiss, 2000 ). To our knowledge, this is the first study to contrast brain responses to the four basic mental arithmetic operations effects in a single study. 
 In this study, we focused on three distinct areas of the PPC that have been consistently implicated in math cognition: the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), superior parietal lobule (SPL, BA 7) and angular gyrus (AG, BA 39) ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ;  Menon, et al., 2000 ;  Wu et al., 2009 ). Importantly, we employed the recently developed cytoarchitectonic probabilistic maps of the PPC, which provide a more anatomically precise and consistent basis for examining the differential profile of fMRI responses across the four operations. Using post-mortem human brains, Zilles and colleagues have parcellated these three structures through observer-independent analyses of cellular structure and organization. In the IPS, which was not part of Brodmann’s original parcellation scheme, cytoarchitectonic mapping has identified three subdivisions: anterior hIP1 and hIP2 ( Choi et al., 2006 ) and posterior hIP3 ( Scheperjans et al., 2008 ). The AG (BA 39) is subdivided into the anterior and posterior subregions, PGa and PGp, respectively ( Caspers et al., 2006 ). The SPL (BA 7) is divided into four areas: one immediately posterior to the post-central sulcus (SPL 7PC), an anterior area (SPL 7A), a posterior area (SPL 7P) and a medial area (SPL 7M) ( Scheperjans, et al., 2008 ). A previous probabilistic cytoarchitectonic mapping study of arithmetic involving both addition and subtraction operations found heterogeneous pattern of activation in the IPS and deactivation in the AG ( Wu, et al., 2009 ). Wu and colleagues also found that AG responses were more sensitive to task difficulty than other IPC regions. We use a similar approach here to quantify the profile of activation and deactivation in the IPS, AG and SPL. 
 Our investigation focused on four key hypotheses. Compared to subtraction, multiplication relies to a greater extent on retrieval and whereas subtraction involves more calculation ( Campbell, 2008 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ). We therefore hypothesized that they would differentially engage the PPC, with greater IPS response during subtraction and greater left AG response for multiplication ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ). A related question we address here is whether differences in IPS and AG response arise from activation or deactivation. Second, since both addition and multiplication are well-rehearsed and highly automatized in adults, we hypothesized that these two operations would show no differences in accuracy, reaction time or PPC response. Third, addition and subtraction constitute inverse operations and involve similar quantity manipulations on the number line. Yet subtraction is more cognitively demanding and less reliant on retrieval than addition. We hypothesized that subtraction would result in longer response times and greater IPS activations than addition. Finally, multiplication and division also constitute inverse operations in which multiplication problems are most directly solved by retrieval. We hypothesized that if these two pairs of operations are primarily solved by inversion they would evoke a similar pattern of differences. The alternate hypothesis we examine is that processing of inverse relations is operation specific. 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty participants (11 males, 9 females), between the ages of 18 and 30 (M = 23.9, SD = 3.28), were recruited from the Stanford University community. All participants gave written informed consent, and were treated in accordance with the APA "Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct". All protocols were approved by the Human Subjects Committee at Stanford University School of Medicine. 
 
 
 Experimental Procedures 
 Participants performed blocks of alternating arithmetic and control trials. In the arithmetic trials, participants were asked to verify the validity of two operand arithmetic equations, such as “2 + 4 = 6.” Addition problems consisted of single-digit operands from 1 – 9 summing to less than 10. Multiplication problems consisted of all the combinations of single-digit operands from 1 – 9. Subtraction and division stimuli were inverses of these problems, respectively. This design allowed us to match reaction times (RT) between multiplication and subtraction, a key comparison of interest. This is because for educated adults, reaction times (RT) for small subtraction problems tends to lie between RTs for small and large multiplication problems ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ) whereas RTs on large subtraction problems, involving double-digit minuends, are much longer ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Seyler, Kirk, & Ashcraft, 2003 ). 
 Invalid equations were constructed by adding or subtracting ‘1’ or ‘2’ from the correct answer (e.g., 2 + 4 = 7). For the Number Identification control stimuli, the arithmetic symbols were replaced by symbols randomly chosen from the following: “@”, “(“, or “o”. No symbol was repeated within a trial. Participants were asked to identify whether the number 5 was present in a string of stimuli (e.g. 6 @ 1 o 5). 
 The experiment consisted of two runs, one containing addition, subtraction and number identification blocks, and the second containing multiplication, division and number identification blocks. The order of the runs was randomized across participants. Each run consisted of 20 blocks alternating between arithmetic and number identification blocks and the arithmetic blocks alternated between addition and subtraction or multiplication and division. Each stimulus was presented for 2 seconds and blocks had 12 trials, lasting for 24 seconds. A run lasted eight minutes. In each experimental block, half of the equations presented were valid, and the other half were invalid; the order of valid and invalid equations was randomized. In control blocks, half of the strings presented contained the numeral 5, whereas the other half did not; the order of presentation of these strings was randomized. Participants were randomly given different versions of the task in which either the addition, subtraction, or control block was presented first. The order of the experimental and control stimuli was also randomly selected. Similar randomization procedures were used in the run involving multiplication and division trials. 
 
 
 fMRI data acquisition 
 Images were acquired using a GE 3T Signa Scanner with the standard quadrature birdcage head coil. 28 axial slices, 4.0 mm thick, 1.0 mm skip were imaged using a T2* Spiral in/out sequence ( Glover & Lai, 1998 ) and a TR of 2 s. The task was programmed using Psyscope ( Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993 ) on a Macintosh (Cupertino, CA) computer. Scan and task onsets were synchronized using a TTL pulse delivered to the scanner timing microprocessor board from a ‘CMU Button Box’ microprocessor ( http://poppy.psy.cmu.edu/psyscope ). Stimuli were presented visually at the center of a screen using a custom-built magnet compatible projection system (Resonance Technology, CA). An external timer maintained an accuracy of stimulus presentation to within 1 millisecond. 
 
 
 fMRI data analysis 
 
 Preprocessing 
 The first 5 volumes were not analyzed to allow for signal equilibration effects. Images were reconstructed, by inverse Fourier transform, for each of the time points into 64 × 64 × 28 image matrices (voxel size 3.125 × 3.125 × 4.5 mm). A linear shim correction was applied separately for each slice during reconstruction using a magnetic field map acquired automatically by the pulse sequence at the beginning of the scan ( Glover & Lai, 1998 ). Functional MRI data were pre-processed using SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). Images were realigned to correct for motion and errors in slice-timing, spatially transformed to standard stereotaxic space (based on the Montreal Neurologic Institute coordinate system), resampled every 2 mm using sinc interpolation and smoothed with a 6mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel to decrease spatial noise prior to statistical analysis. 
 
 
 Individual and Group analyses 
 Statistical analysis was performed on individual and group data using a general linear model as implemented in SPM8. Individual subject analyses were first performed using a general linear model with task-related regressors as well as 6 movement parameters from the realignment procedure mentioned above. Task-related regressors were modeled as boxcar functions corresponding to each condition, and convolved with a hemodynamic response function and a temporal dispersion derivative to account for voxel-wise latency differences in hemodynamic response. Low-frequency drifts at each voxel were removed using a high-pass filter (0.5 cycles/min) and serial correlations were accounted for by modeling the fMRI time series as a first degree autoregressive process ( Friston et al., 1997 ). Voxel-wise  t -statistics maps for each condition were generated for each participant, along with the respective contrast images. Group analysis was performed using a random-effects model that incorporated a two-stage hierarchical procedure ( Holmes & Friston, 1998 ). Group-level activation was determined using individual subject contrast images and a second-level random-effects analysis of variance. Finally, significant clusters of activation were determined using a voxel-wise height threshold of  p  < 0.01, corrected for multiple spatial comparisons at the cluster level ( p  < .01) ( Poline, Worsley, Evans, & Friston, 1997 ). For a priori regions of interest we used a stringent height threshold of  p  < 0.001, uncorrected. 
 At the group level, we used paired  t -tests to compare brain activity for each arithmetic operation against the corresponding number identification tasks. The following between-operation comparisons were also performed at the group level: ( 1 ) (Subtraction – Number Identification) versus (Multiplication – Number Identification); ( 2 ) (Addition – Number Identification) versus (Multiplication – Number Identification); ( 3 ) Addition versus Subtraction; ( 4 ) Multiplication versus Division. The comparisons of each operation to the control task were also used to examine the relation between behavioral performance and brain activation for each of the four operations. Activation foci were superimposed on high-resolution T1-weighted images and their locations were interpreted using known neuroanatomical landmarks ( Mai, Paxinoss, & Voss, 2007 ). 
 
 
 PPC regions of interest 
 Regions of interest (ROI) analyses were based on the cytoarchitectonically distinct maps of three IPS (hIP3, hIP1 and hIP2), two AG (PGp and PGa) and four SPL (7P, 7M, 7A, 7PC) regions. In the order listed, these ROIs run successively along the caudal to rostral axis of the PPC. Detailed information about the anatomical boundaries of these maps has been published elsewhere ( Caspers, et al., 2006 ;  Choi, et al., 2006 ;  Scheperjans, et al., 2008 ). Quantitative analysis of activations in each of the cytoarchitectonic probabilistic maps was performed using the SPM Anatomy Toolbox ( Eickhoff et al., 2005 ). The spatial distribution of regional activations were characterized by three metrics – the percentage of a specific cytoarchitectonic region that belonged to an activated cluster, the percentage of an activation cluster that was in a specific region, and probability that a peak in the cluster was assigned to a region ( Eickhoff et al., 2007 ;  Eickhoff, et al., 2005 ;  Scheperjans, et al., 2008 ;  Wu, et al., 2009 ). The overlap between specific cytoarchitectonically defined PPC subdivisions and each functional ROI, from the general linear model analysis, and was determined using the MarsBar toolbox ( Brett, 2002 ) and the average t-score was computed in these overlapping voxels. Flat maps of cytoarchitectonically-defined PPC subdivisions and functional ROIs were generated using Caret ( Van Essen et al., 2001 ) and displayed using the PALS atlas ( Van Essen, 2005 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavior 
 Figure 1  summarizes the accuracy and reaction times for each of the four arithmetic operations. Repeated measures ANOVA were used to examine differences in accuracy and reaction time between the operations. For accuracy, there was a significant difference between the operations ( F (3,57) = 3.029,  p  = .037). However, post-hoc pair-wise comparisons of estimated marginal means revealed no significant differences between the operations (all  p s > .2, Bonferroni corrected). Average RTs for correct trials were computed after removing trials more than two standard deviations away from each participant’s mean reaction time. A repeated measures ANOVA for reaction times showed significant differences between the operations ( F (3, 57) = 16.827,  p  < 0.001). Post-hoc pair-wise comparisons of estimated marginal means revealed that addition and multiplication were significantly faster than their respective inverses (p < 0.001), whereas multiplication did not differ from addition ( p  = 0.197) or subtraction ( p  =1.000). 
 
 
 PPC responses to each individual operation 
 Here we focus on PPC regions that showed greater task-related activation (calculation > number identification control) and deactivation (number identification control > calculation) ( Table 1  and  Figures 2 ,  3  and  4 ).  Supplementary Table S1  summarizes results at the whole-brain level. 
 
 Addition 
 No PPC regions showed significant activation during addition. However, significant deactivations were detected in the right AG and adjoining supramarginal gyrus. Specifically, quantitative mapping using the SPM Anatomy Toolbox revealed that 45% of the right PGa and 30% of the right PGp showed deactivations. The right superior parietal lobule also deactivated encompassing 17% of the SPL 7A and 8% of the SPL 7P. 
 
 
 Subtraction 
 All three left IPS regions showed significant activations with a posterior to anterior gradient, with 37% hIP3, 23% of hIP1 and 23% of hIP2 activated above baseline. Two left SPL regions were also activated, encompassing 33% of 7PC and 8% of 7A. Activation peaks were detected in all these areas except for hIP2. Interestingly, there was no significant activation in the right IPS or SPL. There was significant and wide spread deactivation of the right PGp (54%) and PGa (50%). 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 There were significant bilateral activations in the PPC during multiplication. In the left hemisphere, all three IPS regions showed prominent activations with decreasing response in a posterior to anterior direction (96% of hIP3, 66% of hIP1 and 56% of hIP2). Less extensive activations were observed in SPL regions 7PC, 7A, and 7P as well as PGa. A similar pattern was observed in the right IPS and SPL. In contrast, 52% of the right PGp and 29% of the right PGa were deactivated during multiplication. Prominent deactivations were also observed in the medial aspects of SPL in subdivision 7M. 
 
 
 Division 
 There were significant bilateral activations in the PPC during division. In the left hemisphere, 100% of hIP3, 81% of hIP1, and 70% of hIP2 were activated, again reflecting a posterior to anterior gradient. In the left SPL, a similar posterior to anterior gradient was observed with 66% of 7P, 57% of 7PC, 52% of 7A being activated. 21% of PGa also showed significant activation above the control task. A similar pattern was observed in the right IPS and SPL. Peaks were detected bilaterally in hIP3. The medial SPL region 7M showed significant deactivation in both hemispheres. Both AG subdivisions PGa and PGp showed large deactivations in the left and right hemispheres. 
 
 
 
 Individual differences in PPC response 
 Accuracy was close to ceiling on all four tasks and there was little variability in accuracy across participants so this analysis focused on individual differences in reaction time. Here we focus on individual differences in PPC response ( Figure 5  and  Table 2 );  Supplementary Table S2  summarizes results at the whole-brain level. 
 
 Addition and Subtraction 
 RT was not significantly correlated with activation in the addition or subtraction tasks in the PPC or elsewhere in the brain. 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 Reaction times were negatively correlated with activity in the right PGa ( r  = − .818,  p  < .001). This cluster covered 27% of PGa and 6% of the hIP2 and extended to cover large portions of the supramarginal gyrus ( Figure 5b ,  Table 2 ). Longer reaction times resulted in greater deactivation of these regions. Reaction times were also positively correlated with left AG response ( r  = .763,  p  < .001). This cluster covered 9% of the left PGp and 6% of the left PGa. 
 
 
 Division 
 No brain regions showed negative correlations with reaction time. Reaction time was positively correlated with activity in the left PPC ( r  = 0.811,  p  < .001). This cluster covered 35% of the left SPL 7P, and 7% of the left PGa. Longer reaction times resulted in greater activation of these regions. 
 
 
 
 Between-operation differences in the PPC 
 Our analysis focused on four cognitive processes. To contrast retrieval and calculation in arithmetic we first compared brain responses to (i) multiplication versus subtraction. We then examined retrieval processes associated with (ii) multiplication and addition. We investigated differences in PPC activation across two pair-wise inverse operations: (iii) addition versus subtraction, and (iv) multiplication versus division. Here we focus on the PPC ( Figures 6  and  7 ).  Supplementary Table S3  summarizes results at the whole-brain level. 
 
 Multiplication versus Subtraction 
 No differences in activation between multiplication and subtraction were observed in the left PPC. Multiplication elicited greater activation than subtraction in right PPC, covering 18% of the right PGa, 16% of the right PGp, 16% of the right hIP1 and 7% of the hIP3. We then examined the profile of responses within this cluster that overlapped with each of these four IPS and AG subdivisions. In the hIP1 and hIP3, multiplication showed activation above baseline, whereas subtraction did not. Multiplication showed weak activation of PGp and PGa, whereas subtraction showed strong deactivation. No PPC regions showed greater activation to subtraction, compared to multiplication. 
 
 
 Multiplication versus Addition 
 No differences in activation between multiplication and addition were observed in the left PPC. Multiplication elicited greater activation in right PPC, encompassing 20% of the hIP3 and 12% of the hIP1% and 7% of the PGp. Differences in these regions were driven by activation during multiplication and deactivation during addition in PGp and hIP1. No PPC regions showed greater activation during addition, compared to multiplication. 
 
 
 Addition versus Subtraction 
 No PPC regions showed greater activation to addition, compared to subtraction. Subtraction resulted in greater left PPC activations relative to addition, which encompassed 35% of hIP3, 22% of hIP1, 14% of hIP2, 36% of SPL 7PC and 14% of SPL 7A. These results were driven by differences in activation above the control task. 
 
 
 Multiplication versus Division 
 Division showed significantly greater activation in the left IPS, encompassing 71% of the left hIP3, 64% of the left hIP1, and 30% of the left hIP2. Greater activation was also observed bilaterally in the SPL, encompassing 58% of left 7P, 39% of left 7A, 12% of left 7PC, 41% of right 7P and 13% of SPL 7A. Left PGa showed greater activation during division. These results were driven by differences in activation above the control task. Multiplication showed greater activation than division in the medial parietal lobe, with 12% of left SPL 7M and 8% of right SPL 7M, but these differences were driven by greater deactivation for division than multiplication. 
 
 
 
 (Division – Multiplication) versus (Subtraction – Addition) 
 An ANOVA revealed significant interaction between the two pairs of inverse operations in left SPL 7P ( p  < .001, uncorrected), as shown in  Supplementary Figure S1 . 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 We examined functional overlap and dissociation in brain responses to four basic arithmetic operations, with a particular focus on cognitive processes that modulate PPC responses. We show that cytoarchitectonically defined subdivisions within the PPC ( Caspers, et al., 2006 ;  Choi, et al., 2006 ;  Scheperjans, et al., 2008 ) provide a more precise method for relating structure and function in the human PPC. This in turn helps to examine functional dissociations with the PPC underlying basic mathematical problem solving operations. Below, we describe functional dissociations and regional heterogeneities in relation to activation and deactivation in specific cytoarchitectonically-defined subdivisions of the IPS, AG and SPL. We next describe how responses in these regions are modulated by fact retrieval, calculation and inversion across operations. 
 
 Functional overlap and dissociations in the IPS 
 The IPS is the PPC region most consistently implicated in numerical and mathematical information processing ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ;  Menon, et al., 2000 ). Activity in the IPS is modulated by difficulty in magnitude comparison and arithmetic problem solving ( Ansari, Dhital, & Siong, 2006 ;  Delazer et al., 2003 ;  Menon, et al., 2002 ;  Pinel, Dehaene, Riviere, & LeBihan, 2001 ;  Rosenberg-Lee, Lovett, & Anderson, 2009 ;  Zago et al., 2008 ). All four operations, except addition, activated the IPS above the number identification control task. Activations were most prominent in the posterior IPS regions hIP3 and hIP1 (note that in the nomenclature defined by  Caspers et al. (2006) , hIP1 is posterior to hIP2). Subtraction primarily activated left hIP3, whereas multiplication and division showed extensive bilateral activations of hIP3 and hIP1. Across the four conditions and three IPS regions, activations showed a distributed pattern of responses rather than discrete foci ( Figures 2  and  6 ). An important finding highlighted by the precise cytoarchitectonic mapping of the PPC is that IPS responses do not necessarily scale with task difficulty. Although RTs did not differ between subtraction and multiplication, IPS activation was significantly greater during multiplication. These results suggest that IPS responses are operation-specific, independent of task difficulty. Furthermore, this result challenges the view that subtraction engages the IPS to a greater extent because of its greater reliance on calculation. 
 Anatomical and physiological connectivity analysis provides insights into the neural processing subserved by these regions. We have recently suggested that IPS acts as an intermediate station for relaying salient visual information into the dorsal attention and working memory network ( Uddin et al., 2010 ). Using DTI and resting-state functional connectivity we found differential connectivity patterns for these regions ( Uddin, et al., 2010 ). Specifically, the hIP3 has greater connectivity to striate and extrastriate cortex and hIP1 has greater connectivity with inferior and middle frontal gyri. Consistent with this finding, greater activation of the hIP1 during multiplication and division was accompanied by greater activation of the prefrontal cortex. This pattern of responses suggests that the anterior IPS (hIP1) relies more on prefrontal control mechanisms during multiplication and division problem solving, in comparison to addition and subtraction and is consistent with the results of a recent meta-analysis which found strong activity in prefrontal cortex regions involved in working memory during arithmetic tasks ( Arsalidou & Taylor, 2011 ). 
 
 
 Functional heterogeneity in the AG: Activation and deactivation 
 In contrast to the IPS which showed greater activation, the AG showed prominent reductions in activation, or deactivation, relative to the number identification control task during all four operations. Although we cannot directly assess signal levels relative to a rest baseline in our study, previous studies have consistently found deactivation relative to rest baseline in the AG during arithmetic problem solving ( Grabner et al., 2007 ;  Mizuhara, Wang, Kobayashi, & Yamaguchi, 2005 ;  Zhou, et al., 2007 ). Deactivations were most prominent in the right AG. One emerging view of AG function comes from research into the default mode network, a set of brain regions that consistently shows reduced activity during cognitive tasks, compared to rest ( Greicius, Krasnow, Reiss, & Menon, 2003 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). In addition to the two mid-line areas, the ventral medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior cingulate cortex, the default mode network also includes lateral parietal areas within the AG ( Uddin, et al., 2010 ). Consistent with this observation, we found significant deactivation, relative to the control task, medially and bilaterally in all these areas for all four operations, except the addition task which only deactivated the right AG. Most nodes of the default mode network typically show greater deactivation with increased task difficulty ( Daselaar, Prince, & Cabeza, 2004 ;  McKiernan, Kaufman, Kucera-Thompson, & Binder, 2003 ;  Wu, et al., 2009 ). Three analyses from our study suggest that this is not always the case. First, even though addition and subtraction differed on reaction time, these operations did not differ in the level of AG deactivation. Second, a similar finding held for multiplication and division. Third, even when there were no reaction time differences between multiplication and subtraction, there were differences in AG deactivation between the operations. Taken together, our analysis suggests that AG deactivations depend on the operation, independent of behavioral difficulty as assessed by differences in reaction time. 
 AG responses were sensitive to individual differences in mathematical ability. Previous studies have suggested that increased AG deactivation is associated with poorer math performance ( Wu, et al., 2009 ) and abilities ( Grabner, et al., 2007 ), but no studies have examined how individual differences in AG activation and deactivation differ across the four arithmetic operations. In our study, we found that AG responses were correlated with reaction time during multiplication and division, but not during addition or subtraction ( Figure 5 ). A different pattern of individual differences emerged for these two operations. For multiplication, the right and left AG showed an opposing pattern of effects with slower participants showing greater deactivation in the right AG and greater activation in the left AG. For division, only the left AG showed significant effects with slower participants showing greater activation. Most participants showed positive task-related responses, rather than deactivation in the left PGa bordering the supramarginal gyrus, during both multiplication and division. These results point to further heterogeneities in the AG as well as functional dissociations between the left and right AG. Interestingly, individual differences and differences between operations were most prominent close to functional boundaries between PPC regions. The functional circuits underlying these effects remain to be investigated, but one possible explanation is that individual variation in functional connectivity appears to correlate best with the transitional areas between the task positive and task negative areas, rather than the peaks of network activity ( Mennes et al., 2010 ). 
 
 
 Functional heterogeneity in the SPL 
 While the IPS and AG have been the focus of most investigations in mental arithmetic, the SPL is also known to be consistently activated across a wide range of studies ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ). Since the boundary between the SPL and dorsal aspects of the IPS has not been adequately differentiated in previous studies, quite often activations in these regions tend to be arbitrarily assigned to the SPL. The use of cytoarchitectonic maps of the SPL and IPS allows us to more clearly distinguish activations in these regions than has been possible so far. 
 Our analysis demonstrates that the SPL shows a pattern of heterogeneity different from the IPS and AG. All operations, except addition, showed significant responses in the SPL compared to the number identification control task. Notably, while the lateral SPL subregions (7A, 7PC and 7P) showed task-related activations in each operation, medial SPL subregion 7M showed prominent deactivations. However, unlike the IPS and AG, which showed heterogeneous responses, both between and within operations and bilaterally, SPL 7M had monotonically increasing deactivation with operation reaction times. SPL 7M is part of the midline structures comprising the default mode network ( Greicius, et al., 2003 ).  Scheperjans et al. (2008)  have noted that medial parietal areas tend to have less inter-individual response variability than lateral structures, perhaps accounting for the strong effects noted in this region. Recently,  Margulies et al. (2009)  used resting state functional connectivity measures to parcellate the medial parietal cortex in both humans and monkeys. They propose that the ‘cognitive’ dorsal posterior area with connections to the lateral frontal areas and the IPS can be distinguished from a ‘limbic’ ventral area (essentially posterior cingulate cortex), with connections to midline frontal areas and angular gyrus. Although the exact mapping of these areas to 7A, 7P and 7M is unclear, it does match our findings of task related activation in 7A and deactivation in 7M. Finally, we note the specific engagement of the SPL by division relative to other operations. Division strongly activated SPL 7A and 7P bilaterally, whereas the other operations activated it weakly (left 7A) or not at all (right 7A, bilateral 7P,  Figure 3c ). Moreover, division was also the only operation to show significant correlation with performance in SPL (left 7P). Together, these results suggest that activation in SPL regions 7A, 7P & 7PC is modulated differently from deactivation in SPL 7M across operations. 
 
 
 Retrieval versus calculation: Contrasting subtraction and multiplication 
 The IPS has been the focus of four previous investigations of differential PPC responses during subtraction and multiplication. The main reason for contrasting these operations is that they encapsulate two key cognitive processes in arithmetic: calculation and fact retrieval, respectively. Previous studies have yielded conflicting findings with little agreement on the precise anatomical localization of between-task differences. In the IPS, greater activity for multiplication ( Kawashima, et al., 2004 ) and subtraction ( Hayashi, et al., 2000 ;  Lee, 2000 ) have both been reported. On the other hand,  Chochon et al. (1999)  found no differences in the IPS. However, because most of these studies did not acquire behavioral data concurrently with fMRI data it is unclear whether the observed IPS differences are due to differences between operations or the result of task difficulty. Our study overcomes several limitations of previous studies by carefully matching task difficulty across the two operations, along with the use of more appropriate control tasks and larger samples compared to previous studies. Critically, by restricting the range of addition and subtraction problems, we were able to ensure that RTs on subtraction and multiplications were comparable. In particular, subtraction problems with minuends in the range of 11–18 have RTs 450–850 milliseconds longer than problems in the range used in our study ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ;  Seyler, et al., 2003 ). 
 Although there were no differences in either accuracy or reaction time between the conditions, we found that multiplication, compared to subtraction, showed greater activation in the right IPS regions hIP3 and hIP1, as well as the right AG. Critically, no differences were observed in the left hemisphere. In order to further delineate the profile of differences between multiplication and subtraction, we examined responses in each cytoarchitectonically defined IPS and AG region that overlapped with the significant areas on the multiplication vs. subtraction comparison. Although a large extent of the right PGp showed significant deactivation relative to the control task for both multiplication (52%) and subtraction (50%), a direct comparison of the two operations identified a subregion within the right PGp and adjoining PGa which showed activation above the control task for multiplication and deactivation for subtraction ( Figure 7e ). Thus, although both operations deactivate the PGp, relatively circumscribed subregions of the PGa and PGp, bordering the IPS, showed activations above baseline only in the multiplication task. Taken together, these results hint at further heterogeneities within the AG above and beyond those demarcated by its cytoarchitectonic boundaries. Furthermore, it should be noted that these differences between operations were found in the right AG. These findings do not provide support for a differential role for left AG mediated verbal fact retrieval during multiplication as proposed by the “triple-code” model ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ). 
 
 
 Fact retrieval in multiplication versus addition 
 Addition and multiplication are two operations that rely most heavily on retrieval of well-learned math facts in adults ( Campbell, 2008 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ). The two operations were well matched for accuracy. Addition problems were solved slightly faster than multiplication problems, perhaps because the addition problems were from a restricted range. RT difference between these operations was about 62 milliseconds. Previous behavioral studies by Campbell and colleagues have shown that addition problems with sums greater than ten also show faster RTs than the corresponding multiplication problems ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Robert & Campbell, 2008 ), so matching addition and multiplication problems on RT while simultaneously matching RTs on subtraction and multiplication problems is non-trivial. Despite the lack of significant differences in RT, there were substantial differences in brain response to the two problem types. In contrast to addition, which produced no activity above the number identification control task, the multiplication task showed significant activation bilaterally in the PPC as well as the prefrontal cortex. A direct comparison between the two tasks revealed significantly greater activation in the right PPC, covering 20% of hIP3, 12% of hIP1 and 7% of PGp ( Figure 7d ,  Table 3 ). Critically, it should be noted that PPC differences within the AG were restricted to the right hemisphere suggesting that verbally mediated retrieval of multiplication is not the main source of processing differences in the two tasks. Interestingly, functional differences in the AG were driven by deactivation for addition and activation for multiplication, further weakening the case for a strong role for the AG in verbal retrieval of math facts. 
 Retrieval is used more consistently for multiplication because alternative computational strategies are more time consuming than those for addition. Consistent with these observations, we found greater ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation during multiplication than addition (and subtraction), brain regions which have been implicated in controlled memory retrieval ( Badre & Wagner, 2002 ). Interestingly these differences were strongest in the right hemisphere, consistent with a recent meta-analysis of arithmetic tasks ( Arsalidou & Taylor, 2011 ) which found that activity during multiplication tasks was strongly right-lateralized in prefrontal cortex. Taken together, these findings challenge the view that multiplication relies primarily on left-lateralized language areas. 
 
 
 Processing inverse arithmetic operations 
 We focus here on distinctions between the two pair-wise inverse operations: addition vs. subtraction and multiplication vs. division. An important question is whether processing of inverse relations is operation specific. Subtraction is not as automated as addition ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ), despite the fact that problem solving by inversion is essential part of understanding mathematical concepts ( Bryant, Christie, & Rendu, 1999 ). Consistent with this model, we found that participants were significantly slower at solving subtraction than addition verification problems. Subtraction also resulted in greater activation of the left IPS and SPL; interestingly, there were no differences in the prefrontal cortex or any other brain regions for subtraction problems, compared to addition. 
 Behavioral studies have suggested that inversion is the primary back-up strategy for division ( Campbell & Xue, 2001 ). One view holds that division is facilitated by the automatic activation in memory of the multiplicative factors of dividends ( Rickard, 2005 ). Reaction time differences of 86 milliseconds observed between division and multiplication was identical to reaction time differences between subtraction and addition. Thus, if both subtraction and division depended equally on inversion, we might predict similar patterns of differences between division and multiplication on the one hand and those between subtraction and addition on the other. However, activation differences between division and multiplication were more widespread, than between subtraction and addition, in the left IPS and SPL, and included additional regions in the right IPS and SPL. Moreover, activation differences were also observed in the ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, fusiform gyrus, basal ganglia and the cerebellum – areas that did not show any activation differences between subtraction and addition. Further, multiplication also showed greater activity than division, and these differences were driven by greater deactivation for division than multiplication in SPL 7M, bilaterally. No such differences were observed in addition compared to subtraction. 
 What accounts for these extensive differences in brain activation when there are no behavioral differences between pairs of inverse operations?  Dube and Robinson (2010)  found that one-quarter of university undergraduates tested failed to solve problems of the form  a  ×  b  ÷  b  by cancelling the final two terms, suggesting that they did not understand conceptually the inverse relationship between multiplication and division. This suggests that participants may not readily use inversion strategies to solve related inverse problems. One possibility here is that the verification format of tasks used in our study may interfere with the automatic activation of the multiplicative factors ( Rickard, 2005 ). 
 Finally, multiplication and division were the only operations to show individual differences in brain response related to performance. While both multiplication and division showed positive correlations with reaction time in the left PGa, only division showed prominent brain-behavior relationships in the SPL. No such effects were observed in the case of subtraction and addition. Taken together, these results suggest that strategies used to solve division problems are much more complex than strategies used to solve subtraction problems. These results further suggest that processing of inverse relations is operation specific. 
 
 
 
 Limitations 
 There are multiple trade-offs in stimulus selection and RT matching across the four operations. In general, it is not possible to achieve behavioral matching to test all possible hypotheses comparing across the four operations ( Campbell & Alberts, 2009 ;  Campbell & Xue, 2001 ;  Robert & Campbell, 2008 ). For multiplication vs. subtraction, a key comparison in our study, there were no significant performance differences. Addition and multiplication showed modest, but not significant, RT differences likely arising from the use of smaller problems for addition and subtraction relative to multiplication and division. However, as noted above, if we had used the full range of addition and subtraction problems, RTs on the latter could have been up to 850 milliseconds longer ( Seyler, et al., 2003 ) and problem difficulty would significantly confound interpretation of brain responses. Furthermore, this stimulus set enabled us to examine how inverse operations are processed across the two pairs of operations – because the RT difference across these pairs was almost exactly 86 msec in both cases. This would have been impossible if we had used the full complement of single-digit subtraction problems. 
 Another potential limitation of this study is the use of verification rather than production tasks. We have framed differences between subtraction and multiplication in the context of retrieval and calculation strategies. However, familiarity may also influence performance on verification tasks like the one used here ( Zbrodoff & Logan, 1990 ). To minimize familiarity effects, incorrect answers were created by adding or subtraction ‘1‘ or ‘2’ from the correct value, following research showing larger discrepancies greatly increase rejection speed ( Ashcraft & Battaglia, 1978 ;  De Rammelaere, Stuyven, & Vandierendonck, 2001 ;  Yagoubi, Lemaire, & Besson, 2003 ). However, for multiplication and division these values are implausible based on the multiplication table. For example, 6 × 5 = 31 can be rejected because products ending in 1 never appear in the 6 or 5 times table. If this were the case, we would expect multiplication and division to be more rapidly solved than addition and subtraction, respectively, which we did not observe. Additional behavioral studies are needed to construct a more balanced set of stimuli across the four operations in order to further evaluate, and advance our understanding of similarities and differences in the neural representations of cognitive processes underlying various arithmetic operations. 
 A final limitation of our experimental design was the lack of a passive fixation (“rest”) block. Thus, we cannot directly assess the direction of brain responses for each operation relative to a rest baseline, and also the lack of activity for addition. We suspect that both addition and the number identification task activated the IPS, as has previously been shown for number identification ( Eger, Sterzer, Russ, Giraud, & Kleinschmidt, 2003 ). 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 We have presented the most detailed study yet of the involvement of the PPC across the four basic arithmetic operations. When compared against a common number identification task that controls for sensorimotor processing, these operations show prominent functional overlap as well as functional dissociations within the PPC. Overlap across the operations was most prominent in activation of the left posterior IPS and in deactivation of the right posterior AG. We demonstrate that PPC subdivisions are differentially modulated by the four arithmetic operations and we point to significant functional heterogeneity and individual differences in activation and deactivation of these regions. Critically, these differences were related to retrieval, calculation and inversion, the three key cognitive processes that are differentially engaged by arithmetic operations. Our findings provide new insights into the functional organization of specific cytoarchitectonic divisions within the PPC, and further suggest that brain of responses associated with calculation and retrieval processes cannot be uniquely mapped to specific PPC regions. More generally, our study helps shed new light on the neural basis of contradictory findings in the lesion literature by demonstrating that the four basic arithmetic operations rely on a complex profile of distributed responses within the PPC, involving differential levels of activation and deactivation across distinct subdivisions of the IPS, SPL and AG. How distributed representations in the PPC contribute to arithmetic information processing and problem solving remains to be investigated, and will most likely require novel multivariate approaches ( Kriegeskorte, Mur, & Bandettini, 2008 ). 
 
 
 Research Highlights 
 
 
 
 Parietal cortex showed functional heterogeneity across basic arithmetic operations 
 
 
 Operations matched for task difficulty differ in parietal cortex activation 
 
 
 Parietal cortex subdivisions are variably activated and deactivated 
 
 
 Activation is strongest in intra-parietal sulcus and deactivation in angular gyrus 
 
 
 Significant individual differences in parietal cortex activation and deactivation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 
 
 03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations used 
 
 
 AG 
 
 Angular Gyrus 
 
 
 
 fMRI 
 
 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
 
 
 IPS 
 
 IntraParietal Sulcus 
 
 
 
 PPC 
 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 
 Regions of Interest 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 
 Superior Parietal Lobule 
 
 
 
 BA 
 
 Brodmann Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 We thank Arron Metcalfe for valuable feedback on the manuscript. This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (HD047520, HD059205, HD057610) and the National Science Foundation (DRL-0750340). 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Dhital 
 B 
 
 
 Siong 
 SC 
 
 
 Parametric effects of numerical distance on the intraparietal sulcus during passive viewing of rapid numerosity changes 
 Brain Res 
 2006 
 1067 
 1 
 181 
 188 
 16359648 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arsalidou 
 M 
 
 
 Taylor 
 MJ 
 
 
 Is 2+2=4? Meta-analyses of brain areas needed for numbers and calculations 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 54 
 3 
 2382 
 2393 
 20946958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 Battaglia 
 J 
 
 
 Cognitive Arithmetic - Evidence for Retrieval and Decision-Processes in Mental Addition 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Learning and Memory 
 1978 
 4 
 5 
 527 
 538 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Semantic retrieval, mnemonic control, and prefrontal cortex 
 Behav Cogn Neurosci Rev 
 2002 
 1 
 3 
 206 
 218 
 17715593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Anton 
 JL 
 
 
 Valabregue 
 JBP 
 
 
 Region of interest analysis using an SPM toolbox [abstract] 
 2002 
 Paper presented at the 8th International Conference on Functional Mapping of the Human Brain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bryant 
 P 
 
 
 Christie 
 C 
 
 
 Rendu 
 A 
 
 
 Children's understanding of the relation between addition and subtraction: inversion, identity, and decomposition 
 J Exp Child Psychol 
 1999 
 74 
 3 
 194 
 212 
 10527554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Subtraction by addition. [Article] 
 Memory & Cognition 
 2008 
 36 
 6 
 1094 
 1102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Alberts 
 NM 
 
 
 Operation-specific effects of numerical surface form on arithmetic strategy 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 2009 
 35 
 4 
 999 
 1011 
 19586266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Timm 
 JC 
 
 
 Adults' strategy choices for simple addition: Effects of retrieval interference 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 2000 
 7 
 4 
 692 
 699 
 11206211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Xue 
 Q 
 
 
 Cognitive arithmetic across cultures 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 2001 
 130 
 2 
 299 
 315 
 11409105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Geyer 
 S 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 The human inferior parietal cortex: Cytoarchitectonic parcellation and interindividual variability 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 33 
 2 
 430 
 448 
 16949304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chochon 
 F 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 van de Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Differential contributions of the left and right inferior parietal lobules to number processing 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1999 
 11 
 6 
 617 
 630 
 10601743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choi 
 HJ 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Armstrong 
 E 
 
 
 
 Cytoarchitectonic identification and probabilistic mapping of two distinct areas within the anterior ventral bank of the human intraparietal sulcus 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 2006 
 495 
 1 
 53 
 69 
 16432904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 MacWhinney 
 B 
 
 
 Flatt 
 M 
 
 
 Provost 
 J 
 
 
 PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment for designing psychology experiments 
 Behav. Res. Meth. Instr. Comp 
 1993 
 25 
 2 
 257 
 271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dagenbach 
 D 
 
 
 McCloskey 
 M 
 
 
 The organization of arithmetic facts in memory: evidence from a brain-damaged patient 
 Brain Cogn 
 1992 
 20 
 2 
 345 
 366 
 1449763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 When less means more: deactivations during encoding that predict subsequent memory 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 3 
 921 
 927 
 15528092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Rammelaere 
 S 
 
 
 Stuyven 
 E 
 
 
 Vandierendonck 
 A 
 
 
 Verifying simple arithmetic sums and products: are the phonological loop and the central executive involved? 
 Mem Cognit 
 2001 
 29 
 2 
 267 
 273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Cerebral pathways for calculation: double dissociation between rote verbal and quantitative knowledge of arithmetic 
 Cortex 
 1997 
 33 
 2 
 219 
 250 
 9220256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Piazza 
 M 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Three parietal circuits for number processing 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 2003 
 20 
 3–6 
 487 
 506 
 20957581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 Benke 
 T 
 
 
 Arithmetic facts without meaning 
 Cortex 
 1997 
 33 
 4 
 697 
 710 
 9444471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delaze 
 M 
 
 
 Domahs 
 F 
 
 
 Bartha 
 L 
 
 
 Brenneis 
 C 
 
 
 Lochy 
 A 
 
 
 Trieb 
 T 
 
 
 
 Learning complex arithmetic - an fMRI study 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2003 
 18 
 1 
 76 
 88 
 14659499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dube 
 AK 
 
 
 Robinson 
 KM 
 
 
 The relationship between adults' conceptual understanding of inversion and associativity 
 Can J Exp Psychol 
 2010 
 64 
 1 
 60 
 66 
 20384420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eger 
 E 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 Russ 
 MO 
 
 
 Giraud 
 AL 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 A supramodal number representation in human intraparietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 2003 
 37 
 4 
 719 
 725 
 12597867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Grosbras 
 MH 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 
 Assignment of functional activations to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 36 
 3 
 511 
 521 
 17499520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 4 
 1325 
 1335 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fehr 
 T 
 
 
 Code 
 C 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Common brain regions underlying different arithmetic operations as revealed by conjunct fMRI-BOLD activation 
 Brain Res 
 2007 
 1172 
 93 
 102 
 17822681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fehr 
 T 
 
 
 Code 
 C 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Auditory task presentation reveals predominantly right hemispheric fMRI activation patterns during mental calculation 
 Neurosci Lett 
 2008 
 431 
 1 
 39 
 44 
 18093736 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 G 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 R 
 
 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Lai 
 S 
 
 
 Self-navigated spiral fMRI: interleaved versus single-shot 
 Magn Reson Med 
 1998 
 39 
 3 
 361 
 368 
 9498591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grabner 
 RH 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Reishofer 
 G 
 
 
 Stern 
 E 
 
 
 Ebner 
 F 
 
 
 Neuper 
 C 
 
 
 Individual differences in mathematical competence predict parietal brain activation during mental calculation 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 38 
 2 
 346 
 356 
 17851092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2003 
 100 
 1 
 253 
 258 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hayashi 
 N 
 
 
 Ishii 
 K 
 
 
 Kitagaki 
 H 
 
 
 Kazui 
 H 
 
 
 Regional differences in cerebral blood flow during recitation of the multiplication table and actual calculation: a positron emission tomography study 
 J Neurol Sci 
 2000 
 176 
 2 
 102 
 108 
 10930591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hecht 
 SA 
 
 
 Individual solution processes while solving addition and multiplication math facts in adults 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1999 
 27 
 6 
 1097 
 1107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Generalisability, random effects & population inference 
 Neuroimage 
 1998 
 7 
 4 
 S754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Taira 
 M 
 
 
 Okita 
 K 
 
 
 Inoue 
 K 
 
 
 Tajima 
 N 
 
 
 Yoshida 
 H 
 
 
 
 A functional MRI study of simple arithmetic--a comparison between children and adults 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 2004 
 18 
 3 
 227 
 233 
 14741309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Mur 
 M 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 P 
 
 
 Representational similarity analysis - connecting the branches of systems neuroscience 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 2008 
 2 
 4 
 19104670 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 KM 
 
 
 Cortical areas differentially involved in multiplication and subtraction: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study and correlation with a case of selective acalculia 
 Ann Neurol 
 2000 
 48 
 4 
 657 
 661 
 11026450 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeFevre 
 J 
 
 
 Bisanz 
 J 
 
 
 Daley 
 KE 
 
 
 Buffone 
 L 
 
 
 Greenham 
 SL 
 
 
 Sadesky 
 GS 
 
 
 Multiple Routes to Solution of Single-Digit Multiplication Problems 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 1996 
 125 
 3 
 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mai 
 JK 
 
 
 Paxinoss 
 G 
 
 
 Voss 
 T 
 
 
 Atlas of the Human Brain 
 2007 
 3rd ed. 
 San Diego 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 
 Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2009 
 106 
 47 
 20069 
 20074 
 19903877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKiernan 
 KA 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 JN 
 
 
 Kucera-Thompson 
 J 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2003 
 15 
 3 
 394 
 408 
 12729491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 
 Inter-individual differences in resting-state functional connectivity predict task-induced BOLD activity 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 4 
 1690 
 1701 
 20079856 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Mackenzie 
 K 
 
 
 Rivera 
 SM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex involvement in processing incorrect arithmetic equations: Evidence from event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2002 
 16 
 2 
 119 
 130 
 11954061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Rivera 
 SM 
 
 
 White 
 CD 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Dissociating prefrontal and parietal cortex activation during arithmetic processing 
 Neuroimage 
 2000 
 12 
 4 
 357 
 365 
 10988030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mizuhara 
 H 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Kobayashi 
 K 
 
 
 Yamaguchi 
 Y 
 
 
 Long-range EEG phase synchronization during an arithmetic task indexes a coherent cortical network simultaneously measured by fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 27 
 3 
 553 
 563 
 15921932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Riviere 
 D 
 
 
 LeBihan 
 D 
 
 
 Modulation of parietal activation by semantic distance in a number comparison task 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 14 
 5 
 1013 
 1026 
 11697933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Combining spatial extent and peak intensity to test for activations in functional imaging 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 5 
 2 
 83 
 96 
 9345540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2001 
 98 
 2 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rickard 
 TC 
 
 
 Revised identical elements model of arithmetic fact representation 10.1037/0278-7393.31.2.250 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 
 2005 
 31 
 2 
 250 
 257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robert 
 ND 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Simple addition and multiplication: No comparison 
 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 
 2008 
 20 
 1 
 123 
 138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Lee 
 M 
 
 
 Lovett 
 MC 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 Neural correlates of arithmetic calculation strategies 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2009 
 9 
 3 
 270 
 285 
 19679763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheperjans 
 F 
 
 
 Hermann 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Observer-independent cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human superior parietal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 4 
 846 
 867 
 17644831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seyler 
 DJ 
 
 
 Kirk 
 EP 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 Elementary subtraction 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 2003 
 29 
 6 
 1339 
 1352 
 14622065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegler 
 RS 
 
 
 Shrager 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Sophian 
 C 
 
 
 Strategy choices in addition and subtraction: How do children know what to do? 
 The origins of cognitive skills 
 1984 
 Hillsdale: NJ 
 Erlbaum 
 229 
 293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Amin 
 H 
 
 
 Rykhlevskaia 
 E 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 DA 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 
 Dissociable Connectivity within Human Angular Gyrus and Intraparietal Sulcus: Evidence from Functional and Structural Connectivity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 A Population-Average, Landmark- and Surface-based (PALS) atlas of human cerebral cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 3 
 635 
 662 
 16172003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Drury 
 HA 
 
 
 Dickson 
 J 
 
 
 Harwell 
 J 
 
 
 Hanlon 
 D 
 
 
 Anderson 
 CH 
 
 
 An integrated software suite for surface-based analyses of cerebral cortex 
 J Am Med Inform Assoc 
 2001 
 8 
 5 
 443 
 459 
 11522765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Harskamp 
 NJ 
 
 
 Rudge 
 P 
 
 
 Cipolotti 
 L 
 
 
 Are multiplication facts implemented by the left supramarginal and angular gyri? 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2002 
 40 
 11 
 1786 
 1793 
 12062890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 SS 
 
 
 Chang 
 TT 
 
 
 Majid 
 A 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Functional heterogeneity of inferior parietal cortex during mathematical cognition assessed with cytoarchitectonic probability maps 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 12 
 2930 
 2945 
 19406903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yagoubi 
 RE 
 
 
 Lemaire 
 P 
 
 
 Besson 
 M 
 
 
 Different brain mechanisms mediate two strategies in arithmetic: Evidence from event-related brain potentials 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 7 
 855 
 862 
 12631535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zago 
 L 
 
 
 Petit 
 L 
 
 
 Turbelin 
 MR 
 
 
 Anderson 
 F 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 How verbal and spatial manipulation networks contribute to calculation: An fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 9 
 2403 
 2414 
 18406434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zbrodoff 
 NJ 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 On the Relation between Production and Verification Tasks in the Psychology of Simple Arithmetic 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 
 1990 
 16 
 1 
 83 
 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhou 
 X 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Dong 
 Q 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Qiao 
 S 
 
 
 
 Dissociated brain organization for single-digit addition and multiplication 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 35 
 2 
 871 
 880 
 17292628 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Behavioral performance during addition, subtraction, multiplication and division tasks. (a) Accuracy and (b) mean reaction time for each of the four arithmetic operations. Bonferonni corrected post-hoc comparisons of the estimated marginal means on the contrasts of interest (addition vs. subtraction, division vs. multiplication, addition vs. multiplication and subtraction vs. multiplication) showed that there were no between-operation differences in accuracy. Reaction times were faster for addition, compared to subtraction, and for multiplication, compared to division (*** p < .001). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Brain activation and deactivation during the four arithmetic tasks. Surface rendering and coronal sections of brain regions that showed significant activation (red) and deactivation (blue) are shown for (a) addition, (b) subtraction, (c) multiplication, and (d) division, compared to a common number identification control task. Each cluster was significant at height p < .01, corrected for spatial extent at p < .01. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Signal strength of activation and deactivation in the cytoarchitectonically-defined regions of the posterior parietal cortex (PPC). (a) intraparietal sulcus regions (IPS - hIP3, hIP1, and hIP2), (b) angular gyrus (AG - PGp and PGa), and (c) superior parietal lobule (SPL - 7P, 7PC, 7M and 7A) during addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. The three left and most right IPS areas showed positive task-related activation during all four operations. Both AG regions showed consistent deactivation in the right hemisphere, whereas the left PGp and PGa either showed deactivation or nonsignificant effects. SPL regions 7P, 7PC and 7A responses were at or above baseline, whereas, SPL 7M showed consistent deactivation for all four operations. Within the IPS, AG and SPL, the respective subdivisions are organized in a posterior to anterior direction. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Surface maps of activations and deactivations in cytoarchitectonically-defined PPC regions. Surface maps of each cytoarchitectonic subdivision of the IPS, AG and SPL was created by projecting these regions onto the PALS atlas ( Van Essen, 2005 ) using Caret ( Van Essen, 2005 ). Task-related activations (white outline) and deactivations (black outline) are projected onto these surface maps for each arithmetic operation. Across operations, overlapping activations were detected in the left IPS and adjoining SPL, whereas deactivations overlapped in the right AG and were most variable in medial SPL area 7M. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Brain regions where activation and deactivation was significantly correlated with reaction time (white outline). (a) For multiplication, reaction times were positively correlated with activation in the left AG region PGp and negatively correlated with right PGa and hIP2, extending into the posterior supramarginal gyrus. Correlation maps are shown outlined in white on surface maps of cytoarchitectonically-defined PPC regions and as surface renderings. (b) For division, reaction times were positively correlated with activation in the left PGp. Each cluster was significant at height p < .01, corrected for spatial extent at p < .01. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Brain regions that showed significant differences in activation between operations. Surface rendering and coronal sections of brain regions that showed significant activation (red) and deactivations (blue) are shown for (a) multiplication vs. subtraction, (b) multiplication vs. addition, (c) subtraction vs. addition and (d) division vs. multiplication. Each cluster was significant at height p < .01, corrected for spatial extent at p < .01. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Surface maps of brain regions that showed significant differences in activation (white outline) in cytoarchitectonically-defined PPC regions. (a) multiplication vs. subtraction, (b) multiplication vs. addition, (c) subtraction vs. addition, and (d) division vs. multiplication. Graphs display average t-score for the entire functional cluster (orange) as well as voxels that overlapped with each cytoarchitectonic subdivision of the PPC. Only subdivisions where greater than 5% of the voxels were significantly activated are shown. Other details are in  Figure 4 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Probabilistic labeling of posterior parietal cortex (PPC) activation and deactivation during the four arithmetic tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 Comparison 
 Region 
 Size of Cluster 
 % of Region Activated 
 % of Cluster in Region 
 Peak Activation Coordinates 
 Probability of Peak in Assigned Region (%) 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Identification – 
 
 Calculation 
 
 R SPL 7A 
 200 
 16.8 
 5.7 
 6 
 −60 
 60 
 30 
 
 
 R SPL 7P 
 57 
 8.3 
 1.6 
 6 
 −68 
 60 
 40 
 
 
 R PGa 
 448 
 44.7 
 28.3 
 48 
 −54 
 34 
 60 
 
 
 R PGp 
 353 
 30.3 
 22.3 
 48 
 −64 
 16 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subtraction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calculation –  
 
 Identification 
 
 L hIP3 
 103 
 37.7 
 13.1 
 −28 
 −54 
 42 
 30 
 
 
 L SPL 7PC 
 62 
 32.8 
 7.8 
 −34 
 −50 
 68 
 20 
 
 
 L hIP2 
 56 
 23.0 
 7.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L hIP1 
 105 
 22.9 
 13.3 
 −34 
 −44 
 38 
 40 
 
 
 L SPL 7A 
 148 
 8.4 
 18.8 
 −28 
 −58 
 58 
 90 
 
 
 
 Identification – 
 
 Calculation 
 
 R PGp 
 630 
 54.0 
 40.9 
 40 
 −76 
 30 
 40 
 
 
 R PGa 
 505 
 50.4 
 32.8 
 48 
 −52 
 32 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calculation – 
 
 Identification 
 
 L hIP3 
 264 
 96.3 
 10.5 
 −30 
 −64 
 42 
 20 
 
 
 L hIP1 
 301 
 65.7 
 12.0 
 −40 
 −44 
 44 
 30 
 
 
 L hIP2 
 136 
 56.3 
 5.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7PC 
 73 
 38.7 
 2.9 
 −58 
 −34 
 52 
 10 
 
 
 L SPL 7A 
 332 
 18.3 
 12.8 
 −26 
 −52 
 44 
 10 
 
 
 L SPL 7P 
 92 
 17.0 
 3.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L PGa 
 126 
 15.3 
 5.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R hIP3 
 196 
 65.7 
 15.3 
 30 
 −52 
 46 
 50 
 
 
 R hIP1 
 131 
 57.2 
 10.2 
 30 
 −62 
 34 
 10 
 
 
 R hIP2 
 48 
 32.7 
 3.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7PC 
 48 
 11.9 
 3.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7A 
 60 
 5.1 
 4.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Identification – 
 
 Calculation 
 
 R SPL 7M 
 103 
 59.2 
 2.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7M 
 68 
 48.0 
 1.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R PGp 
 601 
 51.6 
 39.0 
 50 
 −64 
 18 
 40 
 
 
 R PGa 
 294 
 29.3 
 19.0 
 62 
 −56 
 16 
 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calculation – 
 
 Identification 
 
 L hIP3 
 278 
 99.5 
 1.1 
 −26 
 −58 
 46 
 50 
 
 
 L hIP1 
 381 
 81.4 
 1.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L hIP2 
 172 
 69.7 
 0.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7P 
 363 
 65.5 
 1.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7PC 
 110 
 57.4 
 0.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7A 
 935 
 52.1 
 3.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L PGa 
 178 
 21.2 
 0.7 
 −26 
 −72 
 50 
 20 
 
 
 R hIP3 
 271 
 91.1 
 11.2 
 34 
 −52 
 44 
 60 
 
 
 R hIP1 
 148 
 64.8 
 6.1 
 40 
 −42 
 36 
 30 
 
 
 R hIP2 
 87 
 59.5 
 3.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7A 
 429 
 36.8 
 17.7 
 32 
 −62 
 54 
 50 
 
 
 R SPL 7P 
 232 
 35.0 
 9.6 
 26 
 −68 
 44 
 10 
 
 
 R PGp 
 78 
 6.7 
 3.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Identification – 
 
 Calculation 
 
 L SPL 7M 
 84 
 63.6 
 0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7M 
 101 
 60.5 
 0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R PGp 
 565 
 48.5 
 3.0 
 50 
 −66 
 14 
 30 
 
 
 R PGa 
 387 
 38.6 
 2.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L PGp 
 351 
 32.3 
 40.8 
 −48 
 −72 
 38 
 70 
 
 
 L PGa 
 138 
 16.8 
 16.1 
 −50 
 −58 
 20 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior parietal cortex (PPC) regions that showed significantly greater activation (Calculation > Identification) and deactivation (Identification > Calculation) during each of the four arithmetic operations. For each significant cluster, the probabilistic region, percentage of activation in the region, percentage of cluster that was in the region, peak MNI coordinate, and the probability of the peak being in the region are shown. Each cluster was significant after correction for height ( p  < 0.01) and extent ( p  < 0.01). Cytoarchitectonically-defined probability maps were used to interpret the locations of the cluster and peaks within subdivisions of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), angular gyrus (AG), and supramarginal gyrus (SMG). Only subdivisions where greater than 5% of the voxels were significantly activated are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Probabilistic labeling of PPC regions which were significantly correlated with reaction time during multiplication and division. 
 
 
 
 
 Operation 
 Region 
 Size of Cluster 
 % of Region Activated 
 % of Cluster in Region 
 Peak Activation Coordinates 
 Probability of Peak in Assigned Region (%) 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 
 – positive 
 
 L PGp 
 92 
 8.5 
 13.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L PGa 
 50 
 6.1 
 7.2 
 −30 
 −74 
 48 
 40 
 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 
 – negative 
 
 R PGa 
 268 
 26.7 
 22.2 
 54 
 −54 
 18 
 40 
 
 
 R hIP2 
 9 
 5.9 
 0.7 
 42 
 −32 
 30 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Division 
 
 – positive 
 
 L SPL 7P 
 191 
 35.1 
 21.1 
 −6 
 −78 
 50 
 70 
 
 
 L PGa 
 54 
 6.6 
 6.0 
 −26 
 −74 
 48 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 Both positive and negative correlations are shown. Other details as in  Table 1 . 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Probabilistic labeling of posterior parietal cortex (PPC) responses in four key between-operation comparisons. 
 
 
 
 
 Comparison 
 Region 
 Size of Cluster 
 % of Region Activated 
 % of Cluster in Region 
 Peak Activation Coordinates 
 Probability of Peak in Assigned Region (%) 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Multiplication – 
 
 Subtraction 
 
 R PGa 
 176 
 17.5 
 17.8 
 44 
 −64 
 56 
 30 
 
 
 R PGp 
 191 
 16.3 
 19.3 
 40 
 −68 
 38 
 30 
 
 
 R hIP1 
 36 
 15.5 
 3.6 
 40 
 −56 
 36 
 20 
 
 
 R hIP3 
 20 
 6.6 
 2.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Multiplication – 
 
 Addition 
 
 R hIP3 
 59 
 19.9 
 7.0 
 34 
 −64 
 44 
 20 
 
 
 R hIP1 
 27 
 11.9 
 3.2 
 28 
 −60 
 36 
 10 
 
 
 R PGp 
 78 
 6.7 
 9.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subtraction – 
 
 Addition 
 
 L SPL 7PC 
 67 
 35.8 
 6.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L hIP3 
 96 
 35.1 
 9.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L hIP1 
 101 
 22.1 
 9.9 
 −34 
 −46 
 44 
 30 
 
 
 L hIP2 
 35 
 14.3 
 3.4 
 −44 
 −40 
 42 
 20 
 
 
 L SPL 7A 
 245 
 13.9 
 23.8 
 −26 
 −58 
 58 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Division – 
 
 Multiplication 
 
 L hIP3 
 196 
 71.4 
 5.5 
 −32 
 −50 
 42 
 40 
 
 
 L hIP1 
 295 
 64.4 
 8.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7P 
 315 
 58.0 
 8.9 
 −10 
 −76 
 56 
 60 
 
 
 L SPL 7A 
 679 
 38.6 
 19.3 
 −28 
 −68 
 56 
 40 
 
 
 L hIP2 
 71 
 29.4 
 2.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L PGa 
 113 
 13.7 
 3.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SPL 7PC 
 22 
 11.7 
 0.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7P 
 273 
 41.2 
 7.8 
 20 
 −82 
 54 
 20 
 
 
 R SPL 7A 
 147 
 12.6 
 4.2 
 30 
 −76 
 56 
 20 
 
 
 
 Multiplication 
 
 – Division 
 
 L SPL 7M 
 16 
 11.8 
 0.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R SPL 7M 
 14 
 8.1 
 0.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other details as in  Table 1 . 
 
 
 
 
