
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 21620984 
 3165021 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.013 
 NIHMS298466 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 What difference does a year of schooling make?: Maturation of brain response and connectivity between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades during arithmetic problem solving 
 
 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Lee 
 Miriam 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Barth 
 Maria 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 Vinod 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA 
 2 Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA 
 3 Program in Neuroscience, Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA 
 4 Symbolic Systems Program, Stanford University School of Medicine Stanford, California, USA 
 
 Address for Correspondence: M. Rosenberg-Lee, Ph.D. and V. Menon, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, 401 Quarry Rd., Stanford University, School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5179, USA,  miriamrl@stanford.edu  and  menon@stanford.edu 
 
 
 29 
 6 
 2011 
 
 
 18 
 5 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 8 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 8 
 2012 
 
 57 
 3 
 796 
 808 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Early elementary schooling in 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades (ages 7-9) is an important period for the acquisition and mastery of basic mathematical skills. Yet, we know very little about neurodevelopmental changes that might occur over a year of schooling. Here we examine behavioral and neurodevelopmental changes underlying arithmetic problem solving in a well-matched group of 2 nd  ( n  = 45) and 3 rd  ( n  = 45) grade children. Although 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders did not differ on IQ or grade- and age-normed measures of math, reading and working memory, 3 rd  graders had higher raw math scores (effect sizes = 1.46-1.49) and were more accurate than 2 nd  graders in an fMRI task involving verification of simple and complex two-operand addition problems (effect size = 0.43). In both 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders, arithmetic complexity was associated with increased responses in right inferior frontal sulcus and anterior insula, regions implicated in domain-general cognitive control, and in left intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and superior parietal lobule (SPL) regions important for numerical and arithmetic processing. Compared to 2 nd  graders, 3 rd  graders showed greater activity in dorsal stream parietal areas right SPL, IPS and angular gyrus (AG) as well as ventral visual stream areas bilateral lingual gyrus (LG), right lateral occipital cortex (LOC) and right parahippocampal gyrus (PHG). Significant differences were also observed in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), with 3 rd  graders showing greater activation in left dorsal lateral PFC (dlPFC) and greater deactivation in the ventral medial PFC (vmPFC). Third graders also showed greater functional connectivity between the left dlPFC and multiple posterior brain areas, with larger differences in dorsal stream parietal areas SPL and AG, compared to ventral stream visual areas LG, LOC and PHG. No such between-grade differences were observed in functional connectivity between the vmPFC and posterior brain regions. These results suggest that even the narrow one-year interval spanning grades 2 and 3 is characterized by significant arithmetic task-related changes in brain response and connectivity, and argue that pooling data across wide age ranges and grades can miss important neurodevelopmental changes. Our findings have important implications for understanding brain mechanisms mediating early maturation of mathematical skills and, more generally, for educational neuroscience. 
 
 
 arithmetic 
 children 
 intraparietal sulcus 
 dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD059205-01 || HD 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD057610-01A1 || HD 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD047520-01A1 || HD 
 
 
 
 
 How much difference does a year of schooling make in children’s arithmetic problem solving abilities? This question is of great interest to psychologists and educators alike ( Case, 1978 ). Previous behavioral and classroom-based research studies have shown that arithmetic proficiency undergoes significant improvement in elementary school; however, surprisingly little is known about its neurodevelopmental underpinnings. Here we examine the neural correlates of the maturation of arithmetic problem solving skills over a narrow developmental window spanning a one year interval between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. 
 Early elementary school represents an important period for the acquisition and mastery of arithmetic fact knowledge. Behavioral research has characterized a progression of increasingly sophisticated calculation procedures leading to the greater use of direct retrieval over time ( Siegler & Shrager, 1984 ). By 2 nd  grade, children are typically able to answer single-digit addition problems, although rapid fact retrieval is still not mature in most children ( N. C. Jordan, Hanich, & Kaplan, 2003a ). Between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades, problem solving abilities generally progress from effortful counting strategies to more automatic retrieval strategies, although the extent and magnitude of skill maturation and the sources of individual variability are less well understood. In a school-based study of typically developing children, growth curve modeling revealed that from the beginning of 2 nd  grade to the end of 3 rd  grade there was only a modest increase in the number of correctly answered problems (less than one item); however there was a large decrease in the use of finger counting and an increase in the number of correctly retrieved items ( N. C. Jordan, et al., 2003a ). 
 Although most of the school-based studies in this age group have focused on accuracy ( Fuchs et al., 2006 ;  J. A. Jordan, Mulhern, & Wylie, 2009 ;  N. C. Jordan, Glutting, & Ramineni, 2010 ;  N. C. Jordan, et al., 2003a ;  N. C. Jordan, Hanich, & Kaplan, 2003b ), the few studies that have examined response times have suggested developmental improvements in reaction times of 1-4 seconds on average between 1 st , 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades ( Ashcraft, 1982 ;  Geary, Hamson, & Hoard, 2000 ). Besides procedural improvements, significant increases in conceptual knowledge occur in this period (see  Prather & Alibali, 2009 , for a review). For example, understanding the commutative property of addition enables the use of more sophisticated strategies such as the  min  strategy, (i.e. counting up from the largest addend, regardless of presentation order ( Geary, Brown, & Samaranayake, 1991 )). Taken together, these findings suggest that both procedural and conceptual knowledge of arithmetic mature during early elementary schooling between grades 2 and 3, resulting in increased accuracy and faster reaction times. We currently know nothing about the neurocognitive basis of this change. 
 Normative functional neuroimaging studies in children and adults have consistently implicated the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) within the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) as a region specifically involved in the representation and manipulation of numerical quantity ( Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003 ). With experience and learning, the IPS builds an increasingly amodal, language-independent semantic representation of numerical quantity ( Ansari, 2008 ;  Bruandet, Molko, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2004 ;  Cantlon, Brannon, Carter, & Pelphrey, 2006 ;  Cantlon et al., 2009 ). In addition to the IPS, mathematical information processing also critically involves activation and deactivation in a more distributed network of regions within the dorsal visual stream encompassing the superior parietal lobule (SPL), the angular gyrus (AG) and the supramarginal gyrus regions of the PPC ( Delazer et al., 2003 ;  Grabner et al., 2009 ;  Ischebeck et al., 2006 ;  Menon, Rivera, White, Glover, & Reiss, 2000 ;  Rickard et al., 2000 ;  Wu et al., 2009 ;  Zago et al., 2001 ). 
 Previous developmental brain imaging studies have focused on maturation of numerical and arithmetic skills over a large age range, spanning one or more decades. Kawashima and colleagues found that, compared to 40-49 year old adults, 9-14 year old children had reduced activation in the left and right IPS during multiplication and subtraction, but equal engagement of prefrontal cortex (PFC) for both groups ( Kawashima et al., 2004 ). Kucian and colleagues ( Kucian, von Aster, Loenneker, Dietrich, & Martin, 2008 ) found greater left IPS activity in 22-32 year old adults and greater right anterior cingulate cortex activity in 9- and 12-year old children during approximate addition. Rivera and colleagues ( Rivera, Reiss, Eckert, & Menon, 2005 ) used a cross-sectional design in children and adults spanning ages 8-19 years to investigate changes in brain response during the solution of mixed addition and subtraction problems. They found that activity in the bilateral superior and middle frontal gyri and the left inferior frontal gyrus decreased with age whereas activity in left supramarginal gyrus and the adjoining IPS showed an opposite profile of increased responses with age. The authors argued that the development of arithmetic problem solving skills between childhood and adulthood is characterized by decreased engagement of the PFC and increased engagement and functional specialization of the PPC. 
 A similar pattern of developmental shifts from the PFC to the PPC have been reported in other numerical tasks involving symbolic and non-symbolic magnitude comparisons. In a non-symbolic magnitude discrimination task Cantlon and colleagues ( Cantlon, et al., 2009 ) found that while 6-7 year old children engaged the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus and adjoining insular cortex, these PFC areas were not significantly activated in 24 year old adults. In contrast, both groups showed activation of the left IPS, although the spatial extent of activity was greater in adults. Further, numerical distance effects (greater activity for comparisons involving smaller ratios) were correlated with left IPS activity in adults ( Pinel, Dehaene, Riviere, & LeBihan, 2001 ), whereas children displayed this effect in frontal areas ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Ansari, Garcia, Lucas, Hamon, & Dhital, 2005 ). In a non-symbolic comparison task, Ansari and Dhital ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ) found that only 9-11 year old children displayed a distance effect in the right dorsal lateral PFC, whereas 19-21 year old adults had stronger distance effect in the left anterior IPS. Similarly, in a symbolic number comparison task using the same age groups, Ansari and colleagues ( Ansari, et al., 2005 ) found that adults showed sensitivity to numerical distance bilaterally in the IPS; whereas in children, the right precentral gyrus and right inferior frontal gyrus were sensitive to numerical distance. Thus, although the precise neural locus of development varies with cognitive process and stimulus, a consistent profile of decreased reliance on the PFC and increased reliance on the PPC has been found in a wide range of studies of numerical cognition involving comparisons of children and adults. 
 Most previous studies of numerical cognition have focused on dorsal stream areas, considerably less attention has been paid to ventral visual stream areas such as the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), the lateral occipital cortex (LOC), the fusiform gyrus (FG) and the lingual gyrus (LG) which are often co-activated with the PPC during arithmetic processing ( Keller & Menon, 2009 ;  Rickard, et al., 2000 ;  Rosenberg-Lee, Tsang, & Menon, 2009 ;  Wu, et al., 2009 ;  Zago, et al., 2001 ). These ventral areas are thought to play an important role in recognition and discrimination of visual objects and number-letter strings ( Allison, Puce, Spencer, & McCarthy, 1999 ;  Milner & Goodale, 2008 ), rather than semantic processing of quantity and numerosity. Crucially, the involvement of ventral visual areas in arithmetic problem solving also undergoes significant developmental changes; specifically, the LOC showed increased activation with age, and the PHG showed reduced response with age ( Rivera et al., 2005 ). Despite rapid progress in charting development across broadly defined age groups (e.g. children versus adults) over the past decade, almost nothing is known about neurodevelopmental changes that can occur in a narrow window of schooling in mathematics, reading or any other cognitive domain relevant for academic success. The present study addresses this important gap in our current understanding of cognitive skill development by investigating how the neural correlates of mathematical information processing change over a one year interval. 
 In the current study, we focus on developmental changes in math problem solving abilities in 7 to 9 year old children in the 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades of elementary school. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and well-matched experimental tasks which manipulate arithmetic complexity. In adults, previous imaging studies have manipulated complexity by varying the number of operations in a problem ( Menon, Rivera, et al., 2000 ) or the number of digits in the operands ( Gruber, Indefrey, Steinmetz, & Kleinschmidt, 2001 ;  Rosenberg-Lee, Lovett, & Anderson, 2009 ;  Zago, et al., 2001 ). Behavioral research using single-digit problems in adults and children has consistently reported longer reaction times and more errors for problems with larger operands ( Barrouillet & Lepine, 2005 ;  Campbell & Metcalfe, 2007 ;  Zbrodoff & Logan, 2005 ). In adults, imaging studies of single-digit problems have found increased fronto-parietal activation with increased complexity ( Jost, Khader, Burke, Bien, & Rosler, 2009 ;  Kiefer & Dehaene, 1997 ;  Stanescu-Cosson et al., 2000 ). Based on these findings, we used single-digit addition problems in which we contrasted ‘Complex’ problems (neither of the addends were ‘1) with ‘Simple’ problems (one of the addends was ‘1’). This allowed us to simultaneously control for basic number and symbol processing, as well as decision making and sensorimotor response with both ‘Complex’ and ‘Simple’ problems presented in exactly the same format. 
 We used a cross-sectional design to characterize the effects of one year of schooling by comparing forty-five 2 nd  and forty-five 3 rd  grade children. We hypothesized that 3 rd  grade children would show significantly better behavioral performance than 2 nd  grade children. We predicted 3 rd  graders would show reduced reliance on PFC and greater reliance on PPC and LOC when compared to 2 nd  graders. Structural and functional brain imaging studies have suggested that development is characterized by protracted maturation of long range connectivity from childhood to adulthood ( Supekar et al., 2010 ;  Uddin, Supekar, & Menon, 2010 ). In particular, maturation of PFC connectivity with posterior association cortex is thought to play a prominent role in cognitive development ( Menon, Boyett-Anderson, & Reiss, 2005 ;  Stevens, 2009 ). We therefore predicted that functional maturation of arithmetic skills in 3 rd  grade children would be characterized by increased task-related temporal coupling of the PFC with posterior brain regions. Within posterior brain regions we distinguish between dorsal and ventral visual stream areas as both sets of areas have shown enhanced activation with development ( Rivera et al (2005)  allowing us to examine whether developmental changes in PFC connectivity are specific to the parietal cortex or extend to ventral visual areas as well. 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were recruited from a wide range of schools in the San Francisco Bay Area using mailings to schools, postings at libraries and community groups. Prior to inclusion in the study, parents completed a questionnaire which screened for handedness, history of psychiatric illness and medication use. If the child was right-handed and had no history of psychiatric illness or medication use, they continued to a neuropsychological assessment session. One child failed to meet the inclusion criteria of having both performance and verbal IQ above 80, as measured using the Wechsler Abbreviated Scales of Intelligence ( Wechsler, 1999 ). All participants were scanned in the summer following completion of either 2 nd  or 3 rd  grade. From a group of 62 2 nd  graders and 56 3 rd  graders we selected 90 typically developing participants based on their Wechsler Individual Achievement Test – Second Edition (WIAT-II,  Wechsler, 2001 ) scores. Following Murphy and colleagues ( Murphy, Mazzocco, Hanich, & Early, 2007 ), we chose participants who had Mathematical Reasoning scores between the 25 th  and 98 th  percentile. Mathematical Reasoning scores were the most discrepant measure between the grades, and using this criterion automatically allowed us to match the 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders on all the other cognitive measures including Numerical Operations, Word Reading and Reading Comprehension subtests of the WIAT-II. The final sample included 45 children in 2 nd  grade (15 girls, 30 boys) between the ages of 7.03 to 8.40 ( M  = 7.67 years;  SD  = 0.40), and 45 children in 3 rd  grade (24 girls, 21 boys) between the ages of 7.90 and 9.40 ( M  = 8.67 years;  SD  = 0.40). A chi-square test revealed that there was no significant difference in the distribution of genders between the grades ( X 2 (1) = 3.66,  p  = .06). 
 
 
 Standardized measures of cognitive abilities 
 
 Mathematical abilities 
 Mathematical abilities were assessed using the WIAT-II ( Wechsler, 2001 ). This achievement battery includes nationally standardized measures of academic skills and problem-solving abilities which are normed by grade and time of the academic year (Fall, Spring, or Summer). The Numerical Operations subtest is a paper-and-pencil test that measures number writing and identification, rote counting, number production, and simple addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division calculations. For example, 4 - 2 = ___ and 37+54 (presented vertically) are two problems in the 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade range. The Mathematical Reasoning subtest is a verbal problem-solving test that measures counting, geometric shape identification, and single- and multi-step word problem-solving involving time, money, and measurement with both verbal and visual prompts. The child is required to solve problems with whole numbers, fractions or decimals, interpret graphs, identify mathematical patterns, and solve problems of statistics and probability. For example, a dime is presented and the child is asked: “How many pennies does it take to equal the value of one dime?” A probability problem asks: “If you flipped a coin ten times, how many times would the coin be most likely to land on heads?” 
 
 
 Reading abilities 
 The WIAT-II was also used to assess reading abilities. The Word Reading subtest involves reading individual words presented visually to the child, whereas the Reading Comprehension subtest requires them to match words to pictures and answer questions about sentences and passages they have read. 
 
 
 Working memory 
 Four subtests of the Working Memory Test Battery for Children (WMTB-C,  Pickering & Gathercole, 2001 ) were used to assess the three components of working memory. The Central Executive was assessed by the Counting Recall and Backwards Digit Recall subtests. Phonological capacity was assessed by the Digit Recall subtest and visuo-spatial sketch capacity was assessed by the Block Recall subtest, as described elsewhere ( Meyer, Salimpoor, Wu, Geary, & Menon, 2010 ). 
 
 
 
 Brain Imaging 
 
 Experimental procedures 
 The fMRI experiment consisted of four task conditions: (1) Complex addition, (2) Simple addition, (3) Number identification and (4) Passive fixation. In the Complex addition task, participants were presented with an equation involving two addends and asked to indicate, via a button box, whether the answer shown was correct or incorrect (e.g. “3 + 4= 8”). One operand ranged from 2 to 9, the other from 2 to 5 (tie problems, such as “5 + 5 =10”, were excluded), and answers were correct in 50% of the trials. Incorrect answers deviated by ± 1 or ± 2 from the correct sum ( Ashcraft & Battaglia, 1978 ). The Simple addition task was identical except that one of the addends was ‘1’ (e.g. “3 + 1 = 4”). Behavioral research in adults suggests that N +1 addition is solved by incremental counting ( Campbell & Metcalfe, 2007 ). Our use of this task was based on pilot studies which suggested that children are consistently faster on these problems compared to the Complex addition problems. Moreover, because stimuli in the Simple task have the same format as the Complex task, it provides a high-level control for sensory and number processing, as well as decision making and response selection. A verification, rather than verbal production, task format was used in the scanner because overt verbal responses can result in significant head movement and unusable fMRI data. In the number identification task, arithmetic symbols were replaced by alternative keyboard symbols (e.g. “4 o 5 @ 7”) and participants were asked to assess if “5” was among the presented digits. This task was intended to control for basic visual number processing and motor response. Finally, in the Passive fixation task, the symbol “*” appeared at the center of the screen and participants were asked to focus their attention on it. To aid children’s performance, specific task instructions appeared below each problem. During the Complex and Simple addition tasks, the word “Solve” appeared below the problem. In the number identification task, the word “Find” appeared on the screen, and during the passive fixation trials, the word “Look” appeared on the screen. 
 Stimuli were presented in a block fMRI design in order to optimize signal detection and task-related functional connectivity analysis ( Friston, Zarahn, Josephs, Henson, & Dale, 1999 ). In each task, stimuli were displayed for 5 seconds with an inter-trial interval of 500 milliseconds. There were 18 trials of each task condition, broken up into 4 blocks of 4 or 5 trials, thus each block lasted either 22 or 27.5 seconds. The order of the blocks was randomized across participants with the following constraints: in every set of 4 blocks, all of the conditions were presented and the Complex and Simple addition task blocks were always separated by either a “Find 5” or a Passive fixation block. All orders of addition and non-addition task conditions were equally likely. The total length of the experimental run was 6 minutes and 36 seconds. 
 
 
 fMRI data acquisition 
 Images were acquired on a 3T GE Signa scanner (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI) using a custom-built head coil at the Stanford University Lucas Center. Head movement was minimized during the scan by a comfortable custom-built restraint. A total of 29 axial slices (4.0 mm thickness, 0.5 mm skip) parallel to the AC-PC line and covering the whole brain were imaged with a temporal resolution of 2 seconds using a T2* weighted gradient echo spiral in-out pulse sequence ( Glover & Lai, 1998 ) with the following parameters: TR = 2 s, TE = 30 msec, flip angle = 80°, 1 interleave. The field of view was 20 cm, and the matrix size was 64 × 64, providing an in-plane spatial resolution of 3.125 mm. To reduce blurring and signal loss from field inhomogeneity, an automated high-order shimming method based on spiral acquisitions was used before acquiring functional MRI scans ( Kim, Adalsteinsson, Glover, & Spielman, 2002 ). 
 
 
 fMRI preprocessing 
 fMRI data were analyzed using SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ). The first 5 volumes were not analyzed to allow for T1 equilibration. A linear shim correction was applied separately for each slice during reconstruction ( Glover & Lai, 1998 ). ArtRepair software was used to correct for excessive participant movement (Mazaika et.al, 2009). Images were realigned in ArtRepair to correct for movement, smoothed with a 4 mm full width half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel and motion adjusted. Deviant volumes resulting from sharp movement or spikes in the global signal were then interpolated using the two adjacent scans. No more than 20% of the volumes were interpolated. Finally, images were corrected for errors in slice-timing, spatially normalized to standard MNI space, resampled to 2 mm isotropic voxels, and smoothed with a 4.5 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. The two step sequence of first smoothing with a 4 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel and later with 4.5 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel approximates a total smoothing of 6 mm, because total smoothing is equivalent to the square root of the sum of the squares of the individual smoothing steps. The number of volumes interpolated did not differ between the 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders (11.41% vs. 12.31%,  p  = .56), nor did movement differ between the grades in any direction of translation ( x  = 0.71 vs. 0.83,  y  = 1.47 vs. 1.67 or  z  = 2.46 vs. 2.64; all values in mm, all  p s > .5) or rotation ( pitch  = 0.047 vs. 0.066,  roll  = 0.023 vs. 0.024,  yaw  = 0.016 vs. 0.024; all values in radians, all  p s >.18). 
 
 
 Individual subject and group analyses 
 Task-related brain activation was identified using the general linear model implemented in SPM8. In the individual subject analyses, interpolated volumes flagged at the preprocessing stage were de-weighted. For the mathematical cognition task, brain activity related to each task condition was modeled using boxcar functions corresponding to the block length and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function and a temporal dispersion derivative to account for voxel-wise latency differences in hemodynamic response. Low-frequency drifts at each voxel were removed using a high-pass filter (0.5 cycle/min). Serial correlations were accounted for by modeling the fMRI time series as a first-degree autoregressive process. Voxel-wise  t -statistics maps contrasting Complex and Simple addition problems were generated for each participant. 
 For group analysis, contrast images corresponding to the Complex – Simple addition tasks were analyzed using a random effects analysis. Two group-level analyses were conducted: (i) one-way  t -tests on pooled data from all 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders (n = 90), were first used to identify areas of significant activation (Complex – Simple) and deactivation (Simple – Complex), and (ii) between-group  t -tests were used to directly compare activation between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. Significant activation clusters were determined using a height threshold of  p  < .01, with family-wise error (FWE) correction for multiple comparisons at  p  < .01 determined using Monte Carlo simulations. 
 Monte Carlo simulations were implemented in MatLab using methods similar to AFNI’s AlphaSim program ( Forman et al., 1995 ;  Ward, 2000 ). In each iteration of the Monte Carlo procedure, a 3-D image with the same resolution and dimensions as the fMRI scan was randomly generated and smoothed with a 6mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. For consistency with the inclusive mask used to report the results of the general linear model analysis, a gray matter mask was then applied to this image. The maximum cluster size at a given height threshold was recorded for each interaction, and 10,000 iterations were performed. The distribution of maximum cluster size across these 10,000 iterations was used to determine the FWE corrected extent threshold. At a height threshold of  p  < .01, less than 1% of the iterations had  maximum  cluster size greater than 128 voxels. 
 Additional analyses were conducted to examine differences in brain activation independent of any behavioral differences between 2nd and 3 rd  graders. This analysis was similar to group analysis described above, except that individual behavioral measures (accuracy or RT) were used as covariates of no interest. 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity Analysis 
 Functional connectivity assesses the similarity between the time series of two regions. Functional connectivity analyses were conducted by computing the cross-correlation between time courses, within task blocks, between specific pairs of ROIs. In each participant, fMRI time series were averaged across voxels within these ROIs after removing the mean global signal and linear drift over time in the fMRI signal. The first two TRs of each block were removed from the resulting time series and inter-regional cross-correlation was computed separately for the two main task conditions (Complex and Simple addition). The correlation coefficients between regions i and j, r i j , were transformed to a normal distribution using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation∷  z i,j  = 0.5*ln((1 +  r i,j )/(1 −  r i,j )). Grade- and task-related changes in functional connectivity were then examined using ANOVA on the resulting Z-scores. Note that because functional connectivity is computed within each task block after removing the first four seconds of transient changes in each block, our analysis captures temporal correlations within the Complex and Simple task blocks and it does not reflect transitions between high and low levels of activation across task blocks. 
 Regions of interest (ROI) used in the functional connectivity analysis were based on brain regions that showed activation differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. Two ROIs were identified in the prefrontal cortex: a vmPFC ROI based on the peak voxel where 2 nd  graders had greater activation than 3 rd  graders and a dlPFC ROI based on the peak voxel where 3 rd  graders had greater activation than 2 nd  graders. In posterior cortex, since 2 nd  graders did not show greater activation than 3 rd  graders, ROI peaks were based solely on brain regions that showed greater activation in 3 rd  graders. We considered the peak activity in two right side clusters. However, one of the clusters was very large spanning several anatomical regions, thus we also examined 3 subpeaks of this cluster which were separated by 32mm or more. ROIs were constructed using a sphere of radius 6mm centered at each peak. These 7 ROIs were used in the between group beta value plots. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Standardized cognitive measures 
 Table 1  summarizes performance on standardized cognitive measures in our sample of 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children. IQ, assessed using the Wechsler Abbreviated Scales of Intelligence, was not significantly different between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. On grade-normed scores, 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders did not differ in math and reading ability (assessed using the WIAT-II). They also did not differ on age-normed working memory measures of the central executive, phonological capacity and visuo-spatial capacity (assessed using the WMTB-C). However, 3 rd  graders had significantly higher raw scores on the Numerical Operations (14.2 vs. 19.4,  t (88) = 7.046,  p  < .001), and Mathematical Reasoning (31.6 vs. 37.5,  t (88) = 6.915,  p  < .001) subtests of the WIAT-II. Effect sizes for Numerical Operations and Mathematical Reasoning scores were 1.49 and 1.46 respectively. Thus, although the two groups were well-matched on grade- and age-normed cognitive measures, overall math abilities were significantly higher in 3 rd  grade. 
 
 
 Brain Imaging 
 
 Behavioral differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 We compared accuracy and reaction time during fMRI task performance on the Simple and Complex addition problems ( Figure 1 ). A repeated measures ANOVA with between-subject factor Grade (2 nd , 3 rd ) and within-subject factor Problem Type (Complex, Simple) was used to analyze differences in accuracy. The interaction between Grade and Problem Type was not significant ( F (1,88) = .066,  p  = .798). However, the main effects of Grade and Problem Type were both significant. Accuracy on Complex addition (73.5%) problems was lower than Simple addition (81.7%) problems ( F (1,88) = 29.089,  p  < .001) and 3 rd  graders (80.9%) were more accurate than 2 nd  graders (72.7%) ( F (1,88) = 4.080,  p  = .046). 
 A similar analysis was conducted using reaction time as the independent variable. In this case, there was a trend towards a significant interaction of Grade and Problem Type ( F (1,88) = 3.654,  p  = .059). Post-hoc  t -tests revealed this trend was driven by 3 rd  graders being marginally faster than 2 nd  graders on Simple addition problems (2.33 vs. 2.57 seconds;  t (88) = 1.979,  p  = .051), but not on Complex addition problems (2.79 vs. 2.87 seconds;  t (88) = .590,  p  = .557). There was also a significant main effect of Problem Type ( F (1,88) = 76.270,  p  < .001) with Simple addition problems being faster than Complex addition problems (2.45 vs. 2.83 seconds). 
 
 
 Brain activation in 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 To examine the overall pattern of brain activation in the combined group, we pooled data from all 90 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. Compared to Simple problems, Complex addition problems elicited significant activation of the bilateral occipital cortex, the bilateral insula, medial pre-supplementary motor area, and the cerebellum. Activation was also detected in the right inferior frontal sulcus, right caudate, left IPS and supramarginal gyrus at  p  < 0.05, FWE-corrected threshold. These activations did not meet the stringent  p  < 0.01 FWE-corrected threshold but are presented for display purposes. Complex addition problems also evoked significant deactivation relative to Simple problems in the medial PFC, posterior cingulate cortex, left lateral occipital cortex, AG, and anterior temporal pole ( Figure 2 ,  Table 2 ). 
 
 
 Differences in brain activation between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 We next examined differences in brain responses between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders by contrasting responses to Complex versus Simple addition problems ( Table 3 ,  Figures 3 - 5 ). 2 nd  graders showed greater activity in the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC); whereas 3 rd  graders had greater activity in the left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) encompassing the middle frontal gyrus. These ventral medial and dorsal lateral PFC regions showed a contrasting pattern of task-related responses in 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. In the vmPFC, 2 nd  graders showed positive values on the contrast of Complex – Simple whereas 3 rd  graders showed an opposite pattern with greater responses to Simple, compared to Complex, addition problems. In the dlPFC, 3 rd  graders showed greater responses to Complex addition problems whereas 2 nd  graders showed greater responses to Simple addition problems ( Figure 3 ,  Table 3 ). These differences remained after controlling for any differences in accuracy and reaction time between the groups (See  Supplementary Figures S1 and S2 ). 
 As depicted in  Figures 4 - 5  and  Table 3 , 3 rd  graders also showed significantly greater activity in the dorsal stream parietal and ventral visual stream areas, – right SPL extending to IPS, right AG ( Figure 4 ), right LOC and PHG and bilateral LG ( Figure 5 ). In these regions, 3 rd  graders showed greater responses to Complex relative to Simple addition problems, whereas 2 nd  graders showed either minimal differences (PHG and LG) or greater responses to Simple addition problems (SPL, AG, and LOC). All of the differences depicted in  Figures 4  and  5  remained significant after controlling for accuracy ( Figure S1 ) and reaction time ( Figure S2 ). 
 
 
 Functional connectivity differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 We next examined whether PFC connectivity with posterior brain areas also differed significantly between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. We focused on the functional connectivity of two PFC areas, the left dlPFC and the right vmPFC ( Figure 3 ,  Table 4 ) which showed differential activation in the two groups, with right posterior brain areas ( Figures 4  and  5 ,  Table 4 ). A three-way repeated measures ANOVA of dlPFC connectivity was conducted using Grade (2 nd , 3 rd ) as a between-subjects factor and Problem Type (Complex, Simple) and ROI (SPL, AG, LOC, LG, PHG) as within-subjects factors. There were no significant interactions ( p  > .05), but the main effects of Grade and ROI were both significant. Functional connectivity was significantly greater in 3 rd  graders than 2 nd  graders ( F (1,88) = 12.561,  p  < .001) ( Figure 6 ). ROI was the only other factor that showed a significant main effect ( F (4,352) = 6.631,  p  < .001). To further characterize the anatomical profile of functional connectivity changes, we grouped the posterior brain areas into dorsal stream (SPL, AG) and ventral stream (LOC, LG, PHG) ROIs. We found that functional connectivity differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades was significantly higher in dorsal than ventral stream ROIs ( F (1,88) = 4.753,  p  = .032), suggesting a differential pattern of change in functional coupling of the left dlPFC with dorsal and ventral visual stream areas between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. For the right vmPFC there was no difference between the grades ( F (1,88) = .283,  p  = .596), nor any other significant interactions ( p  > .05). There was a main effect of arithmetic difficulty ( F (1,88) = 4.314,  p  = .041), with more Complex problems having greater connectivity than Simple problems. These results indicate that functional coupling between the left dlPFC and posterior brain areas is significantly greater in 3 rd  graders, but that this difference does not generalize to other PFC areas which show differences in activation level between the two grades. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 In this study we examined neurodevelopmental changes during arithmetic problem solving over the one year interval spanning grades 2 and 3. To our knowledge, the ninety 7-9 year old children used in our study constitute the largest neuroimaging sample of mathematical reasoning and problem solving to date. In comparison, a recent meta-analysis by  Houde and colleagues (2010)  included a total of 88 participants from 7 studies. This large group allowed us to sample typically developing 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders with a wide range of abilities on several cognitive measures including IQ, reading and working memory. We show that despite being matched on these cognitive measures, 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders differed significantly in brain response and connectivity during arithmetic problem solving. Because of the closely matched arithmetic control task used in our study, our findings provide more precise information about the development of brain responses in relation to arithmetic complexity, independent of number processing, decision making and motor response. Based on the developmental literature ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Ansari, et al., 2005 ;  Cantlon, et al., 2009 ;  Kucian, et al., 2008 ;  Rivera, et al., 2005 ), we predicted that 3 rd  graders would have greater activation in posterior dorsal and ventral stream areas, whereas 2 nd  graders would have greater activation in the PFC. Consistent with our prediction, we found that 3 rd  graders had greater activity in right PPC and inferior occipitotemporal cortex. Surprisingly, 3 rd  graders had greater dlPFC responses than 2 nd  graders. Furthermore, functional connectivity of the left dlPFC with dorsal and ventral visual stream areas was also significantly greater in 3 rd  graders. We discuss these results below, emphasizing their implications for academic skill development. 
 
 Behavioral differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 The two groups were matched on grade-normed standardized measures of math ability, as assessed using the WIAT-II. However, 3 rd  graders had better overall abilities, as assessed using raw scores for both the Numerical Operations and Mathematical Reasoning, suggesting significant developmental changes in basic computation and verbal math problem solving skills over one year of schooling (effect size = 1.46-1.49). In contrast to this large effect size for general math abilities, effect sizes for in-scanner fMRI task performance were more modest. 3 rd  graders were more accurate than 2 nd  graders with about a 10% difference in accuracy on both Simple (effect size =.37) and Complex (effect size = .40) addition problems. Reaction times were marginally faster in 3 rd  graders for Simple addition problems (effect size = .42) but not on Complex addition problems (effect size = .12). Most previous behavioral studies of arithmetic abilities of children in this age group have used untimed trials ( Fuchs, et al., 2006 ;  N. C. Jordan, et al., 2010 ;  N. C. Jordan, et al., 2003a ,  2003b ) so it is not possible to directly compare them with our in-scanner results. Nevertheless, the gains are comparable to the modest improvements in accuracy reported in related studies ( Geary, et al., 2000 ;  N. C. Jordan, et al., 2003a ). Our findings suggest that changes in timed arithmetic problem solving represent just one aspect of the overall improvement in math skills between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. 
 
 
 Arithmetic complexity modulates PFC responses differently in 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 Previous studies have suggested that the development of numerical and mathematical skills between childhood and adulthood is characterized by decreased reliance on the PFC ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Ansari, et al., 2005 ;  Cantlon, et al., 2009 ;  Rivera, et al., 2005 ). We examined whether 7-9 year old children would demonstrate a similar pattern of change over a one year interval. A direct comparison of the two groups, revealed differences in the vmPFC and left dlPFC. Interestingly, the right inferior frontal cortex and bilateral anterior insula areas that showed common activation in both groups did not show significant differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. These results suggest that core regions involved in cognitive control ( Brass, Derrfuss, Forstmann, & von Cramon, 2005 ;  Bunge, Ochsner, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 2001 ;  Houde, et al., 2010 ;  Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Nelson et al., 2010 ;  Sridharan, Levitin, Chafe, Berger, & Menon, 2007 ) play an obligatory role in both grades and reductions in activity in these PFC regions likely occur only after the 3 rd  grade. 
 Interestingly, compared to 3 rd  graders, 2 nd  graders had greater activity in the medial, but not the lateral, PFC. Analysis of the magnitude and direction of signal change revealed that these vmPFC differences arose from activation in 2 nd  graders and deactivation in 3 rd  graders. The vmPFC is a key node of the default mode network which typically shows decreased activation during more difficult cognitive tasks ( Greicius, Krasnow, Reiss, & Menon, 2003 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). While 3 rd  graders showed the expected pattern of deactivation in the vmPFC, 2 nd  graders showed an opposite pattern with greater activation during Complex, compared to Simple, problems. To our knowledge, no previous studies have reported such developmental differences in deactivation of the vmPFC during arithmetic or related problem solving tasks in young children (see also  Kucian et al. (2008)  for developmental differences between children and adults in other nodes of the default mode network). Our findings suggest that task-appropriate suppression of the default mode network shows significant maturational changes between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. 
 Contrary to our prediction of a complete reduction in PFC activity between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades, we found that the left dlPFC showed greater activity in 3 rd  grade children. One possibility is that this region plays a greater role in retrieval of arithmetic facts in 3 rd  grade children. However, this region is dorsal to the left inferior frontal gyrus regions which have most consistently been implicated in domain-general controlled memory retrieval ( Badre & Wagner, 2007 ) and in domain-specific retrieval of arithmetic facts ( Kucian, et al., 2008 ;  Rosenberg-Lee, Lovett, et al., 2009 ;  Stocco & Anderson, 2008 ). An alternative possibility is that this region may be involved in more precise manipulation of the contents of working memory for Complex addition problems in 3 rd  graders. These results suggest that frontal executive processes undergo significant maturation between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades during arithmetic problem solving. It is interesting to contrast these findings with those of  Rivera and colleagues (2005)  who observed linear decreases in left dlPFC response from childhood to adulthood. Our data suggest that such analyses can miss important developmental changes that occur during key stages of learning and skill acquisition. One way to reconcile these findings is to note that the oldest children in our study were the youngest age in that study. Thus, decreases in PFC engagement during arithmetic problem solving may only show age-related reductions after 3 rd  grade. 
 
 
 Arithmetic complexity related PPC maturation between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades 
 Consistent with our prediction, 3 rd  graders showed greater activity in multiple PPC regions including the right SPL extending to IPS and the right AG. No PPC regions showed greater activation in 2 nd  graders. These developmental changes are more right lateralized than those reported by  Rivera et al. (2005) , wherein linear increases between childhood and adulthood were limited to the left supramarginal gyrus and adjoining IPS. Based on recently published cytoarchitectonic maps ( Choi et al., 2006 ;  Scheperjans et al., 2008 ), the PPC differences observed here were localized to lateral superior parietal lobule region SPL 7P (posterior) and posterior angular gyrus region PGp. Dorsal PPC regions such as SPL 7P are known to play an important and obligatory role in visuo-spatial attentional processes associated with numerical problem solving ( Andres, Pelgrims, Michaux, Olivier, & Pesenti, 2010 ;  Wu, et al., 2009 ). These findings indicate that maturation of multiple PPC regions involved in numerical reasoning starts early during the formal learning process. 
 No differences were observed in the left AG, which is surprising because this area that has been proposed to be involved in verbally mediated retrieval of arithmetic facts ( Dehaene, et al., 2003 ) and the use of verbal retrieval increases in this age range ( N. C. Jordan, et al., 2003a ). Furthermore, the left AG was deactivated in both 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders and the level of deactivation did not differ between the two grades. In contrast, the right AG showed deactivation in 2 nd  graders and activation in 3 rd  graders. These findings are consistent with the emerging view that the right AG contributes to increased task proficiency ( Andres, et al., 2010 ;  Grabner, et al., 2009 ;  Wu, et al., 2009 ). Disentangling the precise role of left and right AG deactivation in light of these developmental changes and the maturation of procedural and retrieval strategies remains an important question for future research. Taken together, our findings suggest that the PPC undergoes extensive and heterogeneous developmental changes during a period important for arithmetic skill acquisition. 
 
 
 Arithmetic complexity related maturation of ventral visual areas in 3 rd  graders 
 Although the PPC has been the most direct focus of most studies of numerical skill development, changes between childhood and adulthood in ventral visual stream activity have also been reported.  Rivera et al (2005)  found that left LOC responses increased with age.  Cantlon et al (2009)  found bilateral LOC activity for adults during both symbolic and non-symbolic number comparison tasks, but children did not display this amodal processing in the LOC. We found that 3 rd  graders had greater responses in the LG and the LOC, extending anteriorly into parahippocampal regions. Furthermore, these developmental changes are load-dependent and characterized by differential activity related to problem complexity. These results suggest that the development of numerical skills is characterized not just by a shift to dorsal PPC areas involved in visuo-spatial attention, but also to ventral visual areas that are involved in higher-order visual processing ( Menon, White, Eliez, Glover, & Reiss, 2000 ). We suggest that ventral visual areas contribute to arithmetic skill development by building improved perceptual and mnemonic representations for numerical problems. 
 
 
 Maturation of functional connectivity between dlPFC and posterior brain regions 
 Analysis of developmental changes in connectivity between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders provided additional insights into the maturation of functional circuits involved in arithmetic problem solving. Our goals in conducting this analysis were to address two questions: (1) did key brain regions that differ in activity level between the two grades also differ in inter-regional temporal coupling during arithmetic processing? and (2) were there between-grade differences in PFC connectivity to parietal compared to ventral visual areas? We focused on the functional connectivity of two PFC regions with posterior brain regions that showed significant activation differences between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. Posterior brain regions consisted of two parietal areas (SPL and AG) and three ventral visual areas (LG, LOC and PHG). We found that functional connectivity between the left dlPFC and posterior areas was significantly greater in 3 rd  graders. Interestingly, we also found that between-grade differences in connectivity were larger between the dlPFC and parietal areas, compared to differences between the dlPFC and ventral visual areas. In contrast, functional connectivity between the vmPFC and posterior brain regions did not differ between the grades, suggesting that changes in task-related temporal coupling are not global and do not generalize to other PFC areas which show differences in activation level between the two grades. Our results provide novel evidence that increased reliance on posterior brain areas is also accompanied by increased connectivity of the dlPFC between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. 
 One potential concern here is the non-independence of ROIs used in the functional connectivity analysis since they were based on PFC and posterior areas that showed group differences in activation ( Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan, & Baker, 2009 ). An alternative approach would have been to select ROIs on the basis of areas that showed significant activation in the combined group of 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders. However, we were specifically interested in understanding connectivity in regions which showed developmental changes in activation between the two groups. In this context, we acknowledge the non-independence as a legitimate concern but point to important aspects of our analysis which minimize the potential for bias. There is general consensus that when statistical effects tested are independent of the ROI selection process (such as main effects and interactions) the results are valid and meaningful ( Kriegeskorte, Lindquist, Nichols, Poldrack, & Vul, 2010 ). This was indeed the case in our study because we examined developmental changes in dlPFC connectivity with ventral and dorsal posterior areas using ROIs that were defined on the basis of activation differences between grades. Furthermore, because functional connectivity in our study is computed within each task block, our analysis is not influenced by transitions between high and low levels of activation across task blocks. Thus, for example, the ventral visual area LOC had stronger activation differences between the grades than the parietal cortex, but the latter had stronger differences in dlPFC functional connectivity between the grades. The methods used in our study therefore minimize potential bias arising from our ROI selection procedure. Taken together, our results suggest that increased dlPFC connectivity with the parietal cortex contributes to the early maturation of problem solving skills. Further studies, using independently defined PFC and parietal ROIs, are needed to examine the role of multiple fronto-parietal circuits in mathematical skill acquisition. 
 
 
 Implications for academic skill development and educational neuroscience 
 Our participants were drawn from a broad range of classrooms, schools and school districts which are likely to differ in the delivery of academic mathematics instruction. Despite this, we found that a single year of schooling has a major impact on brain function and connectivity. It is also noteworthy that 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders show reliable and consistent patterns of brain activity during mathematical problem solving in the bilateral anterior insula regions of the PFC. Importantly, these same PFC have also been implicated in reading and executive control tasks in young children spanning multiple grades ( Houde, et al., 2010 ). The profile of anatomical overlap suggests a common mechanism by which maturation of basic cognitive control can influence skill development in multiple cognitive and academic domains. 
 Importantly, our findings also suggest that pooling data from a wide age-range in children and comparing them with adults can miss major developmental changes that occur during the early stages of academic learning. For example, several previous studies of number and arithmetic processing have highlighted a consistent shift from the PFC to posterior brain areas between childhood and adulthood ( Ansari & Dhital, 2006 ;  Ansari, et al., 2005 ;  Cantlon, et al., 2009 ;  Rivera, et al., 2005 ). In contrast, we found that dlPFC responses increased in the narrow time window between 2 nd  and 3 rd  grades. Our data provides new evidence that the initial stages of learning may be accompanied by increases, rather than decreases, in PFC response. There are several possible reasons for this. One possibility is that learning may reduce variability in PFC response. A second possibility is that PFC responses may become more focal with learning and functional maturation (Durston et al., 2004). In either case, our findings suggest a nonlinear trajectory of developmental changes characterized by an initial increase in dlPFC engagement during the early stages of learning, followed by more protracted decreases in response between childhood and adulthood ( Rivera, et al., 2005 ). Precise knowledge of this trajectory is important not only for understanding the effects of various types of instruction in typically developing children but also for assessing and remediating abnormal developmental patterns in children with dyscalculia and math learning disabilities at an early age ( Geary, Bailey, & Hoard, 2009 ;  Geary et al., 2009 ;  Rykhlevskaia, Uddin, Kondos, & Menon, 2009 ). 
 Previous neurodevelopmental studies have mainly focused on localization of age-related changes, but it is becoming increasingly clear that cognition depends on interactions within and between large-scale brain networks ( Bressler & Menon, 2010 ). Our study is the first to highlight the significant and specific changes in frontal-posterior functional connectivity that take place during a time period important for arithmetic skill development. We suggest that a systems neuroscience approach, with its emphasis on networks and connectivity, rather than pure localization, is better-suited to educational neuroscience. Academic skill acquisition and mastery requires the integration of multiple cognitive processes, which in turn relies on the dynamic engagement of distal brain areas subserved by long-range connections that undergo significant changes with development ( Fair et al., 2008 ;  Supekar, et al., 2010 ). Our findings demonstrate that an exclusive focus on activity levels in a small set of brain regions identified in highly skilled adults can miss important changes in functional organization that accompany learning and development associated with schooling. 
 In this study we asked: what difference does a year of schooling make? We found robust cortical differences between children differing in a single grade. We have used “schooling” as proxy for all the things which go on in the classroom over a one year interval, including domain specific instruction and practice, as well as domain general learning. All of these factors, as well as brain maturation, are likely to contribute to the changes observed in our study. Further studies are required to disentangle the differential impact of these variables on academic learning. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 We thank Leeza Kondos and Sarah Wu for assistance with data acquisition, and Srikanth Ryali and Tianwen Chen for helpful discussions and implementation of Monte Carlo simulations. This research was supported by grants from the NIH (HD047520, HD059205, HD057610) and the NSF (DRL-0750340). 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allison 
 T 
 
 
 Puce 
 A 
 
 
 Spencer 
 DD 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 1999 
 Electrophysiological studies of human face perception. I: Potentials generated in occipitotemporal cortex by face and non-face stimuli 
 Cereb Cortex 
 9 
 5 
 415 
 430 
 10450888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andres 
 M 
 
 
 Pelgrims 
 B 
 
 
 Michaux 
 N 
 
 
 Olivier 
 E 
 
 
 Pesenti 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Role of distinct parietal areas in arithmetic: An fMRI-guided TMS study 
 Neuroimage 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 2008 
 Effects of development and enculturation on number representation in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 4 
 278 
 291 
 10.1038/nrn2334 
 18334999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Dhital 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Age-related changes in the activation of the intraparietal sulcus during nonsymbolic magnitude processing: an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 18 
 11 
 1820 
 1828 
 17069473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Garcia 
 N 
 
 
 Lucas 
 E 
 
 
 Hamon 
 K 
 
 
 Dhital 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural correlates of symbolic number processing in children and adults 
 Neuroreport 
 16 
 16 
 1769 
 1773 
 16237324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 1982 
 The Development of Mental Arithmetic - a Chronometric Approach 
 Developmental Review 
 2 
 3 
 213 
 236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashcraft 
 MH 
 
 
 Battaglia 
 J 
 
 
 1978 
 Cognitive Arithmetic - Evidence for Retrieval and Decision-Processes in Mental Addition 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Learning and Memory 
 4 
 5 
 527 
 538 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 13 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barrouillet 
 P 
 
 
 Lepine 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 Working memory and children’s use of retrieval to solve addition problems 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 91 
 3 
 183 
 204 
 10.1016/j.jecp.2005.03.002 
 15925643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 Derrfuss 
 J 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 B 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2005 
 The role of the inferior frontal junction area in cognitive control 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 9 
 7 
 314 
 316 
 10.1016/j.tics.2005.05.001 
 15927520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bressler 
 SL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Large-scale brain networks in cognition: emerging methods and principles 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 14 
 6 
 277 
 290 
 10.1016/j.tics.2010.04.004 
 20493761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruandet 
 M 
 
 
 Molko 
 N 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 A cognitive characterization of dyscalculia in Turner syndrome 
 Neuropsychologia 
 42 
 3 
 288 
 298 
 14670569 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Prefrontal regions involved in keeping information in and out of mind 
 Brain 
 124 
 Pt 10 
 2074 
 2086 
 11571223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Metcalfe 
 AWS 
 
 
 2007 
 Arithmetic rules and numeral format 
 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 
 19 
 3 
 335 
 355 
 10.1080/09541440600717610 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cantlon 
 JF 
 
 
 Brannon 
 EM 
 
 
 Carter 
 EJ 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional imaging of numerical processing in adults and 4-y-old children 
 PLoS Biol 
 4 
 5 
 e125 
 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040125 
 16594732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cantlon 
 JF 
 
 
 Libertus 
 ME 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Brannon 
 EM 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural development of an abstract concept of number 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 21 
 11 
 2217 
 2229 
 10.1162/jocn.2008.21159 
 19016605 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Case 
 R 
 
 
 1978 
 Intellectual development from birth to adulthood: A neo-Piagetian interpretation 
 
 
 Siegler 
 Robert S 
 
 
 Children’s thinking: What develops?; 37-71; Hillsdale, NJ, England : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 1978, xi, 371 
 Hillsdale, NJ, England 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choi 
 HJ 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Armstrong 
 E 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 2006 
 Cytoarchitectonic identification and probabilistic mapping of two distinct areas within the anterior ventral bank of the human intraparietal sulcus 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 495 
 1 
 53 
 69 
 10.1002/cne.20849 
 16432904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Piazza 
 M 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 2003 
 Three parietal circuits for number processing 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 20 
 3-6 
 487 
 506 
 10.1080/02643290244000239 
 20957581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 Domahs 
 F 
 
 
 Bartha 
 L 
 
 
 Brenneis 
 C 
 
 
 Lochy 
 A 
 
 
 Trieb 
 T 
 
 
 Benke 
 T 
 
 
 2003 
 Learning complex arithmetic - an fMRI study 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 18 
 1 
 76 
 88 
 10.1016/j.cogbraines.2003.09.005 
 14659499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Durston 
 S 
 
 
 Davidson 
 MC 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Spicer 
 J 
 
 
 Fossella 
 JA 
 
 
 Casey 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 A shift from diffuse to focal cortical activity with development 
 Developmental Science 
 9 
 1 
 8 
 doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00454.x 
 16445387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2008 
 The maturing architecture of the brain’s default network 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 105 
 10 
 4028 
 4032 
 18322013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magn Reson Med 
 33 
 5 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Stochastic designs in event-related fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 5 
 607 
 619 
 10.1006/nimg.1999.0498 
 10547338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuchs 
 LS 
 
 
 Fuchs 
 D 
 
 
 Compton 
 DL 
 
 
 Powell 
 SR 
 
 
 Seethaler 
 PM 
 
 
 Capizzi 
 AM 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 2006 
 The cognitive correlates of third-grade skill in arithmetic, algorithmic computation, and arithmetic word problems 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 98 
 1 
 29 
 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 Bailey 
 DH 
 
 
 Hoard 
 MK 
 
 
 2009 
 Predicting Mathematical Achievement and Mathematical Learning Disability With a Simple Screening Tool The Number Sets Test 
 Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment 
 27 
 3 
 265 
 279 
 10.1177/0734282908330592 
 20161145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 Bailey 
 DH 
 
 
 Littlefield 
 A 
 
 
 Wood 
 P 
 
 
 Hoard 
 MK 
 
 
 Nugent 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 First-grade predictors of mathematical learning disability: A latent class trajectory analysis 
 Cognitive Development 
 24 
 4 
 411 
 429 
 10.1016/j.cogdev.2009.10.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 Brown 
 SC 
 
 
 Samaranayake 
 VA 
 
 
 1991 
 Cognitive addition: A short longitudinal study of strategy choice and speed-of-processing differences in normal and mathematically disabled children 
 Developmental Psychology 
 27 
 5 
 787 
 797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 Hamson 
 CO 
 
 
 Hoard 
 MK 
 
 
 2000 
 Numerical and arithmetical cognition: A longitudinal study of process and concept deficits in children with learning disability 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 77 
 3 
 236 
 263 
 11023658 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Lai 
 S 
 
 
 1998 
 Self-navigated spiral fMRI: interleaved versus single-shot 
 Magn Reson Med 
 39 
 3 
 361 
 368 
 9498591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grabner 
 RH 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 Koschutnig 
 K 
 
 
 Reishofer 
 G 
 
 
 Ebner 
 F 
 
 
 Neuper 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 To retrieve or to calculate? Left angular gyrus mediates the retrieval of arithmetic facts during problem solving 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 2 
 604 
 608 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.10.013 
 19007800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 100 
 1 
 253 
 258 
 10.1073/pnas.0135058100 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gruber 
 O 
 
 
 Indefrey 
 P 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 2001 
 Dissociating neural correlates of cognitive components in mental calculation 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 11 
 4 
 350 
 359 
 11278198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houde 
 O 
 
 
 Rossi 
 S 
 
 
 Lubin 
 A 
 
 
 Joliot 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Mapping numerical processing, reading, and executive functions in the developing brain: an fMRI meta-analysis of 52 studies including 842 children 
 Developmental Science 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00938.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ischebeck 
 A 
 
 
 Zamarian 
 L 
 
 
 Siedentopf 
 C 
 
 
 Koppelstatter 
 F 
 
 
 Benke 
 T 
 
 
 Felber 
 S 
 
 
 Delazer 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 How specifically do we learn? Imaging the learning of multiplication and subtraction 
 Neuroimage 
 30 
 4 
 1365 
 1375 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.11.016 
 16413795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jordan 
 JA 
 
 
 Mulhern 
 G 
 
 
 Wylie 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Individual differences in trajectories of arithmetical development in typically achieving 5- to 7-year-olds 
 J Exp Child Psychol 
 103 
 4 
 455 
 468 
 10.1016/j.jecp.2009.01.011 
 19296965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jordan 
 NC 
 
 
 Glutting 
 J 
 
 
 Ramineni 
 C 
 
 
 2010 
 The Importance of Number Sense to Mathematics Achievement in First and Third Grades 
 Learn Individ Differ 
 20 
 2 
 82 
 88 
 10.1016/j.lindif.2009.07.004 
 20401327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jordan 
 NC 
 
 
 Hanich 
 LB 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 D 
 
 
 2003a 
 Arithmetic fact mastery in young children: A longitudinal investigation 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 85 
 2 
 103 
 119 
 10.1016/s0022-0965(03)00032-8 
 12799164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jordan 
 NC 
 
 
 Hanich 
 LB 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 D 
 
 
 2003b 
 A longitudinal study of mathematical competencies in children with specific mathematics difficulties versus children with comorbid mathematics and reading difficulties 
 Child Development 
 74 
 3 
 834 
 850 
 12795393 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jost 
 K 
 
 
 Khader 
 P 
 
 
 Burke 
 M 
 
 
 Bien 
 S 
 
 
 Rosler 
 F 
 
 
 2009 
 Dissociating the solution processes of small, large, and zero multiplications by means of fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 46 
 1 
 308 
 318 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.044 
 19457376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Taira 
 M 
 
 
 Okita 
 K 
 
 
 Inoue 
 K 
 
 
 Tajima 
 N 
 
 
 Yoshida 
 H 
 
 
 Fukuda 
 H 
 
 
 2004 
 A functional MRI study of simple arithmetic - a comparison between children and adults 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 18 
 3 
 227 
 233 
 14741309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Gender differences in the functional and structural neuroanatomy of mathematical cognition 
 Neuroimage 
 47 
 1 
 342 
 352 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.04.042 
 19376239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiefer 
 M 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 1997 
 The time course of parietal activation in single-digit multiplication: Evidence from event-related potentials 
 Mathematical cognition 
 3 
 1 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 DH 
 
 
 Adalsteinsson 
 E 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Spielman 
 DM 
 
 
 2002 
 Regularized higher-order in vivo shimming 
 Magn Reson Med 
 48 
 4 
 715 
 722 
 10.1002/mrm.10267 
 12353290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Vul 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Everything you never wanted to know about circular analysis, but were afraid to ask 
 Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 
 30 
 9 
 1551 
 1557 
 10.1038/jcbfm.2010.86 
 20571517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 2009 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 12 
 5 
 535 
 540 
 10.1038/nn.2303 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kucian 
 K 
 
 
 von Aster 
 M 
 
 
 Loenneker 
 T 
 
 
 Dietrich 
 T 
 
 
 Martin 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Development of neural networks for exact and approximate calculation: A fMRI study 
 Developmental Neuropsychology 
 33 
 4 
 447 
 473 
 10.1080/87565640802101474 
 18568899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazaika 
 P 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Methods and Software for fMRI Analysis for Clinical Subjects 
 Neuroimage 
 47 
 Supplement 1 
 S58 
 S58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Boyett-Anderson 
 JM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 2005 
 Maturation of medial temporal lobe response and connectivity during memory encoding 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 25 
 1 
 379 
 385 
 16122916 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Rivera 
 SM 
 
 
 White 
 CD 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 2000 
 Dissociating prefrontal and parietal cortex activation during arithmetic processing 
 Neuroimage 
 12 
 4 
 357 
 365 
 10988030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 2010 
 Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function 
 Brain Structure & Function 
 214 
 5-6 
 655 
 667 
 10.1007/s00429-010-0262-0 
 20512370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 White 
 CD 
 
 
 Eliez 
 S 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 2000 
 Analysis of a distributed neural system involved in spatial information, novelty, and memory processing 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 11 
 2 
 117 
 129 
 11061338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 ML 
 
 
 Salimpoor 
 VN 
 
 
 Wu 
 SS 
 
 
 Geary 
 DC 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Differential contribution of specific working memory components to mathematics achievement in 2nd and 3rd graders 
 Learning and Individual Differences 
 20 
 2 
 101 
 109 
 10.1016/j.lindif.2009.08.004 
 21660238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milner 
 AD 
 
 
 Goodale 
 MA 
 
 
 2008 
 Two visual systems re-viewed 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 3 
 774 
 785 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.10.005 
 18037456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 MM 
 
 
 Mazzocco 
 MM 
 
 
 Hanich 
 LB 
 
 
 Early 
 MC 
 
 
 2007 
 Cognitive characteristics of children with mathematics learning disability (MLD) vary as a function of the cutoff criterion used to define MLD 
 J Learn Disabil 
 40 
 5 
 458 
 478 
 17915500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2010 
 A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 67 
 1 
 156 
 170 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.025 
 20624599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pickering 
 S 
 
 
 Gathercole 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Working memory test battery for children 
 London 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Riviere 
 D 
 
 
 LeBihan 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 Modulation of parietal activation by semantic distance in a number comparison task 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 5 
 1013 
 1026 
 11697933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prather 
 RW 
 
 
 Alibali 
 MW 
 
 
 2009 
 The development of arithmetic principle knowledge: How do we know what learners know? 
 Developmental Review 
 29 
 4 
 221 
 248 
 10.1016/j.dr.2009.09.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2001 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 98 
 2 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rickard 
 TC 
 
 
 Romero 
 SG 
 
 
 Basso 
 G 
 
 
 Wharton 
 C 
 
 
 Flitman 
 S 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 The calculating brain: an fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 38 
 3 
 325 
 335 
 10678698 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rivera 
 SM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2005 
 Developmental changes in mental arithmetic: Evidence for increased functional specialization in the left inferior parietal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 15 
 11 
 1779 
 1790 
 10.1093/cercor/bhi055 
 15716474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Lee 
 M 
 
 
 Lovett 
 MC 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural correlates of arithmetic calculation strategies 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 9 
 3 
 270 
 285 
 10.3758/CABN.9.3.270 
 19679763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Lee 
 M 
 
 
 Tsang 
 JM 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Symbolic, numeric, and magnitude representations in the parietal cortex 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 32 
 3-4 
 350 
 351 
 10.1017/S0140525x09990860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rykhlevskaia 
 E 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Kondos 
 L 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of developmental dyscalculia: combined evidence from morphometry and tractography 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 3 
 51 
 10.3389/neuro.09.051.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheperjans 
 F 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Homke 
 L 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Hermann 
 K 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 2008 
 Probabilistic maps, morphometry, and variability of cytoarchitectonic areas in the human superior parietal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 9 
 2141 
 2157 
 10.1093/cercor/bhm241 
 18245042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegler 
 RS 
 
 
 Shrager 
 J 
 
 
 1984 
 Strategy choices in addition and subtraction: How do children know what to do? 
 
 
 Sophian 
 C 
 
 
 The origins of cognitive skills 
 229 
 293 
 Hillsdale: NJ 
 Erlbaum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sridharan 
 D 
 
 
 Levitin 
 DJ 
 
 
 Chafe 
 CH 
 
 
 Berger 
 J 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural dynamics of event segmentation in music: converging evidence for dissociable ventral and dorsal networks 
 Neuron 
 55 
 3 
 521 
 532 
 17678862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stanescu-Cosson 
 R 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 van De Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2000 
 Understanding dissociations in dyscalculia: a brain imaging study of the impact of number size on the cerebral networks for exact and approximate calculation 
 Brain 
 123 
 Pt 11 
 2240 
 2255 
 11050024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stevens 
 MC 
 
 
 2009 
 The developmental cognitive neuroscience of functional connectivity 
 Brain Cogn 
 70 
 1 
 1 
 12 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.12.009 
 19185406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stocco 
 A 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 2008 
 Endogenous control and task representation: An fMRI study in algebraic problem-solving 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 7 
 1300 
 1314 
 18284348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Prater 
 K 
 
 
 Amin 
 H 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young children 
 Neuroimage 
 52 
 1 
 290 
 301 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.009 
 20385244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 4 
 21 
 10.3389/fnsys.2010.00021 
 20577585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ward 
 BD 
 
 
 2000 
 Simultaneous Inference for FMRI Data. AFNI 3dDeconvolve Documentation: Medical College of Wisconsin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weschler 
 D 
 
 
 1999 
 Wechsler abbreviated scale of intelligence 
 SanAntonio, TX 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weschler 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 The Wechsler Individual Achievement Test — Second Edition (WIAT-II): The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 SS 
 
 
 Chang 
 TT 
 
 
 Majid 
 A 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional heterogeneity of inferior parietal cortex during mathematical cognition assessed with cytoarchitectonic probability maps 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 12 
 2930 
 2945 
 10.1093/cercor/bhp063 
 19406903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zago 
 L 
 
 
 Pesenti 
 M 
 
 
 Mellet 
 E 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 2001 
 Neural correlates of simple and complex mental calculation 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 2 
 314 
 327 
 10.1006/nimg.2000.0697 
 11162272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zbrodoff 
 NJ 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 2005 
 What everyone finds: The problem size effect 
 
 
 Campbell 
 JID 
 
 
 Handbook of mathematical cognition 
 331 
 345 
 New York 
 Psychology Press 
 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations used 
 
 
 fMRI 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 
 
 
 PFC 
 
 prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 PPC 
 
 posterior parietal cortex 
 
 
 
 IPS 
 
 intraparietal sulcus 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 
 superior parietal lobule 
 
 
 
 AG 
 
 angular gyrus 
 
 
 
 PHG 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus 
 
 
 
 LG 
 
 lingual gyrus 
 
 
 
 LOC 
 
 lateral occipital cortex 
 
 
 
 dlPFC 
 
 dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 vmPFC 
 
 ventral medial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 WIAT-II 
 
 Wechsler Individual Achievement Test – Second Edition 
 
 
 
 WMTB-C 
 
 Working Memory Test Battery for Children 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 
 region of interest 
 
 
 
 FWHM 
 
 full width half maximum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Behavioral performance in 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children on Simple and Complex addition problems 
 Children in the 3 rd  grade were more accurate ( p  = 0.046) than 2 nd  grade children on Complex and Simple addition problems and there was a trend ( p  = .051) towards 3 rd  grade children being faster than 2 nd  grade children on Simple addition problems. Both groups showed strong effects of problem type, with Simple problems being faster and more accurate than Complex problems ( p  < 0.001). *  p  < .05, ***  p  < .001. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Arithmetic complexity effects in combined data from 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children 
 Brain response related to arithmetic complexity obtained by contrasting Complex and Simple addition problems. Surface renderings and slices show significant activation (Complex > Simple, orange scale) in the pre-supplementary motor Area (preSMA), bilateral anterior insula cortex (AIC), and the visual cortex (VC). Significant deactivation (Simple > Complex, light-blue scale) was detected in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), left anterior temporal pole and left angular gyrus (AG). Differences in the AG arise from differences below “rest” baseline (negative beta values, left inset), whereas AIC differences arise from differences above “rest” baseline (positive beta values, right inset). For display purposes we have also included activity significant at the height threshold of  p  < .05 and cluster extent of  p  < .05 FWE corrected., which highlights additional activations in the right inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) and left intraparietal sulcus (IPS), and deactivation in the middle temporal gyrus. **  p  < .01,***  p  < .001. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Comparison of prefrontal cortex responses in 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children 
 Between-grade differences in prefrontal cortex response related to arithmetic complexity. ( a ) 2 nd  grade children showed greater activation in the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), compared to 3 rd  grade children (orange scale). The graph on the right shows average beta-values, contrasting the Complex and Simple addition tasks, in each group. ( b ) 3 rd  grade children showed greater activation in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) compared to 2 nd  grade children (blue scale). In the bar graphs 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders are shown in red and blue, respectively. **  p  < .01, ***  p  < .001. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Comparison of dorsal stream parietal cortex responses in 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children 
 Between-grade differences in parietal cortex response related to arithmetic complexity. Children in the 3 rd  grade (blue) showed greater activity than 2 nd  grade children (red) in the left and right intraparietal sulcus (IPS), right angular gyrus (AG) and left and right superior parietal lobule (SPL). **  p  < .01. Other details as in  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Comparison of ventral visual stream responses in 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children 
 Between-grade differences in ventral visual stream response related to arithmetic complexity. Children in the 3 rd  grade (blue) showed greater activity than 2 nd  grade children (red) in the left and right parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), left and right lingual gyrus (LG) and right lateral occipital cortex (LOC). **  p  < .01. Other details as in  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Functional connectivity of prefrontal cortex ROIs with posterior brain regions in 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders 
 ( a ) Compared to 2 nd  graders, 3 rd  graders had greater functional connectivity between the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and the posterior brain regions. ( b ) In contrast, functional connectivity between the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the posterior regions did not differ between the two grades. The anatomical locations of dlPFC, vmPFC, dorsal and ventral stream regions of interest are as shown in  Figures 3 ,  4  and  5 , respectively and  Table 4 . SPL = Superior Parietal Lobule; AG = Angular Gyrus, PHG = Parahippocampal Gyrus, LOC = Lateral Occipital Cortex, LG = Lingual Gyrus. **  p  < .01. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Standardized scores on IQ, math and reading achievement and working memory for 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grade 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 nd  (N = 45) 
 3 rd  (N = 45) 
 t 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 Measure 
 M 
 SD 
 M 
 SD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Males/Females 
 
 30/15 
 21/24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 
 7.67 
 0.40 
 8.67 
 0.40 
 -12.134 
 <0.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WASI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Verbal IQ 
 111.07 
 14.22 
 109.89 
 10.06 
 0.454 
 0.651 
 
 
  Performance IQ 
 110.04 
 12.83 
 108.53 
 11.97 
 0.578 
 0.565 
 
 
  Full Scale IQ 
 111.82 
 10.96 
 110.58 
 9.29 
 0.581 
 0.563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WIAT-II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Word Reading 
 109.84 
 12.99 
 107.91 
 10.51 
 0.776 
 0.440 
 
 
  Reading Comprehension 
 106.49 
 11.13 
 106.78 
 10.10 
 -0.129 
 0.898 
 
 
  Numerical Operations 
 102.56 
 14.42 
 103.93 
 13.75 
 -0.464 
 0.644 
 
 
  Mathematical Reasoning 
 109.24 
 9.33 
 108.53 
 10.07 
 0.348 
 0.729 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WMTB-C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Digit Recall 
 107.38 
 19.63 
 106.07 
 21.49 
 0.302 
 0.763 
 
 
  Block Recall 
 93.49 
 15.11 
 94.58 
 11.68 
 -0.382 
 0.703 
 
 
  Counting Recall 
 92.18 
 15.86 
 88.69 
 23.87 
 0.817 
 0.416 
 
 
  Backward Digit Recall 
 94.56 
 16.19 
 98.89 
 15.44 
 -1.299 
 0.197 
 
 
 
 
 
 WASI = Wechsler Abbreviated Scales of Intelligence, WIAT-II = Wechsler Individual Achievement Test – Second Edition, WMTB-C = Working Memory Test Battery for Children. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain areas that showed significant activation and deactivation in combined data from 2 nd  and 3 rd  grade children related to arithmetic complexity, obtained by contrasting Complex and Simple problems ( p  < 0.01, with  p  < 0.01 FWE corrections for multiple comparisons). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 # of Voxels 
 Peak Z-score 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Complex > Simple 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Brain Stem, Cerebellum 
 1322 
 4.48 
 0 
 -36 
 -10 
 
 
  Visual Cortex 
 2934 
 3.97 
 26 
 -94 
 -6 
 
 
  R Insula 
 248 
 3.60 
 32 
 24 
 0 
 
 
  SMA, Premotor Cortex 
 632 
 3.25 
 0 
 16 
 52 
 
 
  L Insula 
 229 
 3.19 
 -32 
 20 
 2 
 
 
 
 Simple > Complex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Dorsal Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 262 
 3.85 
 -10 
 54 
 40 
 
 
  Dorsal Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 923 
 3.83 
 -6 
 62 
 8 
 
 
  Lateral Occipital Cortex, Angular Gyrus 
 367 
 3.62 
 -58 
 -68 
 8 
 
 
  Temporal Pole 
 153 
 3.40 
 -50 
 8 
 -20 
 
 
  Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 392 
 3.18 
 8 
 -48 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMA = Supplementary Motor Area, 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain areas that showed differential activity between 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders for Complex, compared to Simple, problems ( p  < 0.01, with  p  < 0.01 FWE corrections for multiple comparisons). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 # of Voxels 
 Peak Z-score 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 nd  Grade > 3 rd  Grade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 133 
 3.75 
 22 
 48 
 2 
 
 
 
 3 rd  Grade > 2 nd  Grade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  L Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 193 
 3.95 
 -48 
 30 
 34 
 
 
  R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 2619 
 3.67 
 38 
 -86 
 -8 
 
 
   R Sup Parietal Cortex * 
 
 3.46 
 18 
 -76 
 58 
 
 
   R Angular Gyrus * 
 
 3.08 
 52 
 -70 
 20 
 
 
   R Lingual Gyrus * 
 
 2.69 
 2 
 -72 
 10 
 
 
  R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 246 
 3.23 
 36 
 -34 
 -4 
 
 
  L Cerebellum 
 191 
 3.01 
 -10 
 -74 
 -26 
 
 
  L Lingual Gyrus 
 365 
 2.86 
 -16 
 -86 
 -2 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 subpeaks separated by 32mm or more. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Peak coordinates of prefrontal and posterior regions of interest (ROI) used in the functional connectivity analysis. These regions were also used for beta values in  Figures 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  S1 and S2 . 
 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 Peak Coordinates
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prefrontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex (dlPFC) 
 -48 
 30 
 34 
 
 
  Ventral Medial Prefrontal Cortex (vmPFC) 
 22 
 48 
 2 
 
 
 
 Dorsal Stream Parietal Regions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Superior Parietal Lobule (SPL) 
 18 
 -76 
 58 
 
 
  Angular Gyrus (AG) 
 52 
 -70 
 20 
 
 
 
 Ventral Stream Visual Areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Lingual Gyrus (LG) 
 2 
 -72 
 10 
 
 
  Parahippocampal Gyrus (PHG) 
 36 
 -34 
 -4 
 
 
  Lateral Occipital Cortex (LOC) 
 38 
 -86 
 -8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 fMRI response compared in 90 2 nd  and 3 rd  graders while solving addition problems 
 
 
 Prefrontal, parietal and ventral visual cortex activity greater in 3 rd  graders 
 
 
 Fronto-parietal functional connectivity greater in 3 rd  graders 
 
 
 Significant changes in brain response and connectivity observed over 1 year 
 
 
 Pooling data across wide age ranges can miss important neurodevelopmental changes 
 
 
 
 
