
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 21840405 
 3195842 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.072 
 NIHMS317276 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Remembering forward: Neural correlates of memory and prediction in human motor adaptation 
 
 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 Robert A 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 Janice L 
 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 
 Salowitz 
 Nicole M G 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Suminski 
 Aaron J 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Mosier 
 Kristine M 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 James 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 Simo 
 Lucia 
 
 6 
 
 
 1 Biomedical Engineering, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI USA 
 2 Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL USA 
 3 Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI USA 
 4 Cognitive and Motor Learning Research Program, Louis Stokes Cleveland Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center (LSCDVAMC) Cleveland, OH USA 
 5 Radiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN USA 
 6 Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL USA 
 
 Corresponding Author: Robert A. Scheidt, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Olin Engineering Center, 303, P.O. Box 1881, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI 53201-1881, Telephone: (414) 288-6124, Fax: (414) 288-7938  robert.scheidt@marquette.edu 
 
 
 9 
 8 
 2011 
 
 
 4 
 8 
 2011 
 
 
 2 
 1 
 2012 
 
 
 2 
 1 
 2013 
 
 59 
 1 
 582 
 600 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 We used functional MR imaging (FMRI), a robotic manipulandum and systems identification techniques to examine neural correlates of predictive compensation for spring-like loads during goal-directed wrist movements in neurologically-intact humans. Although load changed unpredictably from one trial to the next, subjects nevertheless used sensorimotor memories from recent movements to predict and compensate upcoming loads. Prediction enabled subjects to adapt performance so that the task was accomplished with minimum effort. Population analyses of functional images revealed a distributed, bilateral network of cortical and subcortical activity supporting predictive load compensation during visual target capture. Cortical regions - including prefrontal, parietal and hippocampal cortices - exhibited trial-by-trial fluctuations in BOLD signal consistent with the storage and recall of sensorimotor memories or “states” important for spatial working memory. Bilateral activations in associative regions of the striatum demonstrated temporal correlation with the magnitude of kinematic performance error (a signal that could drive reward-optimizing reinforcement learning and the prospective scaling of previously learned motor programs). BOLD signal correlations with load prediction were observed in the cerebellar cortex and red nuclei (consistent with the idea that these structures generate adaptive fusimotor signals facilitating cancellation of expected proprioceptive feedback, as required for conditional feedback adjustments to ongoing motor commands and feedback error learning). Analysis of single subject images revealed that predictive activity was at least as likely to be observed in more than one of these neural systems as in just one. We conclude therefore that motor adaptation is mediated by predictive compensations supported by multiple, distributed, cortical and subcortical structures. 
 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) 
 motor adaptation 
 feedforward control 
 learning 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke  : NINDS 
 R01 NS053581-01A2 || NS 
 
 
 National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  : NICHD 
 R01 HD053727-04 || HD 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 In Lewis Carroll’s  Through the Looking Glass  ( Carroll, 1871 ) ,  the white queen remarks, “It is a poor sort of memory that only works backwards.” Indeed, if memory is to improve fitness for survival it must shape future actions to satisfy changing environmental demands. Take for example the capture and retrieval of an early-morning cup of coffee. Lifting the cup over a laptop computer requires accurate estimation of the cup’s weight. Misestimating the load can have costly consequences. As the coffee level decreases, the nervous system compensates by adjusting muscular activities through a form of motor learning known as motor adaptation ( Lackner and Dizio 1994 ;  Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi 1994 ;  Thoroughman and Shadmehr, 1999 ). Motor adaptation relies on limited memory of prior sensorimotor experiences to adjust muscle activity in anticipation of future loads ( Scheidt et al. 2001 ) so as to minimize kinematic performance errors ( Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi, 1994 ;  Flanagan and Rao, 1995 ) while also minimizing “effort” ( Nelson 1983 ;  Hasan 1986 ) or other costs of control (for a review see  Shadmehr and Krakauer 2008 ). Experimental data show that minimization of kinematic errors progresses faster than does minimization of kinetic effort in goal-directed arm movements such that overall performance is dominated by kinematic optimization ( Scheidt et al. 2000 ). The present study exploits these observations to ask “Which brain structures contribute to the processing of recent sensorimotor memories for the prediction and compensation of future environmental loads during goal-directed movement?” 
 Psychophysical studies have provided compelling evidence that motor adaptation involves compensatory responses that occur on (at least) two time scales ( Lee and Schweighofer, 2009 ;  Smith et al 2006 ), and that the different adaptive processes may have distinct neural bases ( Keisler and Shadmehr, 2010 ). In fact, three computationally distinct forms of neural plasticity have been implicated in motor learning ( Houk and Wise, 1995 ; see  Doya 1999 ,  2000  and  Hikosaka et al 2002  and  Hikosaka et al 2008  for reviews) and the extent to which each contributes to predictive load compensation is unknown. First, supervised learning within microzones of the cerebellum is thought to facilitate the estimation or modeling of the state of the limb and its environment ( Kawato and Gomi 1992 ;  Miall et al. 1993 ;  Wolpert et al. 1995 ,  1998 ;  Imamizu 2000 ;  Ito 2000 ,  2005 ;  Bursztyn et al. 2006 ), information that can be used to predict the sensory consequences of action ( Angel 1976 ;  Blakemore et al. 2001 ;  Bell et al. 2008 ). By comparing predicted and realized sensations, deviations from expectation provide a signed error signal (i.e. one that has magnitude  and  direction) that can drive both corrective actions via model reference feedback control ( Houk and Rymer, 1981 ; see also  Seidler et al. 2004 ) and internal model updating via feedback error learning ( Kawato et al 1987 ;  Kawato and Gomi 1992 ; see also  Fagg et al. 1997 ). Second, reinforcement learning within the basal ganglia is thought to improve selection of motor commands based on information of the current sensorimotor state, thereby maximizing rewards or minimizing costs associated with action (cf.  O Doherty et al., 2003 ;  Haruno and Kawato 2006 ;  Houk et al 2007 ;  Jueptner et al. 1997 ;  Schultz et al. 1997 ,  2000 ; see also  Mink 1996 ;  Graybiel 2005 ). Commonly, rewards (costs) for reinforcement learning are modeled as scalar-valued signals that are maximized (minimized) when the desired task is performed successfully ( Gurney et al 2001a ,  2001b ). Third, unsupervised learning within cerebral cortex is thought to construct arbitrary mappings (associative memories) that maximize information transmission between input/output pathways via Hebbian potentiation and activity-dependent synaptic decay (cf.  Lucke and Malsburg, 2004 ;  Sanger 1989 ; see also  Linsker 1988 ). Unsupervised learning enables the cortex to encode the current and recent state of the limb and its environment ( Andersen and Buneo 2002 ;  Buneo and Andersen 2006 ;  Gandolfo et al 2000 ;  Gribble and Scott 2002 ;  Li et al. 2001 ) as well as the subject’s own internal state in working memory ( Fuster and Alexander 1971 ;  Jonides et al 1993 ;  D’Esposito et al. 1995 ). This may provide a common representational basis for sensorimotor information processing within the cerebellum and basal ganglia ( Houk 2011 ). Are motor adaptation and the prediction of future environmental loads largely the responsibility of just one of the neural systems described above (i.e. the cerebellum, its associated pathways and their targets;  Doyon et al 2003 ;  Kawato and Gomi 1992 ;  Imamizu et al. 2000 ,  2004 ;  Spoelstra et al. 2000 ;  Wolpert et al. 1998 ), or are these important computational functions subserved by multiple distributed modules as predicted by recent models of sensorimotor learning ( Grosse-Wentrup and Contreras-Vidal 2007 ;  Houk and Wise, 1995 ; Houk 2010; see also  Doyon et al. 2003 ,  2009 ;  Hikosaka et al. 2002 )? 
 Here we examined trial-by-trial adaptation to changing mechanical loads during goal-directed wrist flexion movements. We conducted a novel neuroimaging experiment that combined human motor psychophysics, functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI), and engineering systems analysis techniques to identify neural responses (blood oxygenation level dependent BOLD signal fluctuations) that correlate with behavioral variables relating to signed performance errors (for supervised learning), unsigned errors (for reinforcement learning) and representations of current and past states (for unsupervised learning). Importantly, our approach allows us to form  a priori  estimates of each subject s prediction of impending environmental loads (i.e. the output of an internal model of the environment) and to identify neural correlates of these predictions. Population analysis of functional MR images and follow-on analyses of individual subject BOLD data test the hypothesis that activities in select regions of cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and lateral cerebellum predict changes in the limb’s mechanical environment. Implications for the adaptive real-time control of limb movement are then discussed. Portions of this work have been presented previously in abstract form ( Zimbelman et al. 2007 ,  2008 ;  Salowitz et al. 2010 ). 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1. Subjects 
 Twenty healthy volunteers participated in this study (6 female, 14 male; mean age = 29 years, range: 19 to 46 years). All subjects scored greater than 68 on the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (strongly right-handed;  Oldfield 1971 ). Potential subjects were excluded from the study if they had significant neurological, psychiatric or other medical history, or were taking psychoactive medications. Additional exclusion criteria were specific to MR scanning: pregnancy, ferrous objects within the body, low visual acuity, and a history of claustrophobia. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject in accord with the Declaration of Helsinki and institutional guidelines approved by Marquette University and the Medical College of Wisconsin. 
 
 
 2.2. Experimental Setup 
 Subjects rested supine within a GE Signa 3T EXCITE MR scanner equipped with a standard quadrature head coil. We minimized head motion within the coil using foam padding. Visual stimuli were computer-generated and projected onto an opaque screen that subjects viewed using prism glasses attached to the head coil. With arms at their sides, subjects grasped the handle of an MR-compatible, single degree-of-freedom, robotic manipulandum with their right hand ( Fig 1A ). For each subject, the handle s axis of rotation was aligned with that of the wrist, and the frame of the device was secured to the forearm for support. The manipulandum was mounted on an adjustable support structure fixed to the subject s waist, positioning the manipulandum comfortably while reducing motion of the subject s proximal arm segments. The manipulandum includes a pneumatic actuator that exerts computer-controlled torques about the wrist. Wrist position and wrist torque were monitored within 0.05° and 0.001 Nm, respectively. Analog measurements of pressure within the actuator were amplified and low-pass filtered with a cutoff frequency of 20 Hz. Joint angle measurements were also filtered at 20 Hz. Wrist angle and actuator pressure data were acquired at the control loop rate of 1000 Hz. Robot control was achieved using custom hardware and software designed to use the XPC target, real-time operating system (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA). Additional details of the device design, performance and MR-compatibility are described elsewhere ( Suminski et al. 2007b ). 
 
 2.2.1. Behavioral Task 
 Subjects made 250 goal directed wrist flexion/extension movements in five blocks of 50 trials (1 movement per trial). Prior to the start of a trial, subjects were instructed to relax and visually fixate on a central crosshair stimulus while the robot held the hand at the home position of 30° wrist extension. Trials began with the appearance of a “Go” cue that consisted of a pair of black circles (1 cm dia.) representing the home position (top) and goal target (bottom) at 10° wrist extension ( Fig 1B ; “Go”). A circular red cursor (0.5 cm dia.) representing the current wrist angle appeared within the home target along with the GO cue. Subjects were instructed to “Wait for the GO cue, then move out-and-back to the target in one fluid motion, reversing direction as accurately as possible within the target goal without pausing.” The cursor disappeared at movement onset such that no visual feedback of ongoing motion was provided during movement. This was done to minimize the occurrence of corrective movements in the neighborhood of the target. We provided knowledge of results (KR) of kinematic performance for 1.0 s immediately upon movement reversal to promote movement accuracy ( Fig 1B , “Feedback”). KR consisted of a static display of the red cursor at the location corresponding to the end of the flexion movement (i.e. at the angle where wrist flexion velocity fell below 10 °/s) on the linear scale established by the home and goal targets. A secondary graphical element provided feedback of movement duration on a linear scale that also indicated the desired movement time (400±25 ms). This information was intended to encourage consistency of movement duration across both trials and subjects. Subjects were instructed to relax after the movement. Once performance feedback had disappeared, they were to visually fixate the central cross hair while the robot maintained the hand at the start location in preparation for the next trial ( Fig 1B , “Relax”). The interval between GO cues varied randomly from 8 to 18 sec, with a mean of 10 sec. This variable inter-trial interval maximized the ability of the FMRI deconvolution analysis (described below) to extract hemodynamic response functions (see  Toni et al. 1999 ). 
 During the trials, the robot applied resistance that increased in proportion to wrist rotation in the flexion direction (i.e. a position-dependent, “spring-like” load). The first 50 trials (the practice block) were conducted prior to functional MR imaging and were performed against a load stiffness ( K ) of 0.13 Nm/°. This was done to familiarize subjects with the temporal and spatial accuracy requirements of the task. These initial practice trials were excluded from subsequent analyses. The next four blocks (the test blocks) were performed while undergoing concurrent functional MR imaging (one block per functional imaging ‘run’). Here, the load was sampled from a uniform distribution between 0.05 and 0.21 Nm/° such that  K  varied pseudorandomly from trial to trial about a mean value of 0.13 Nm/°. This mean value corresponded to information about the perturbation sequence that the subject might learn. All subjects experienced the same sequence of loads ( Fig 1C ). The sequence was designed to ensure insignificant correlation between loads on consecutive trials (required by the systems identification analysis described below). The total time to complete all 250 trials was about 45 minutes. Subjects rested 2 to 5 minutes between test blocks. 
 
 
 2.2.2. MR Imaging 
 After the initial block of practice trials and prior to functional imaging, we acquired 146 high-resolution spoiled GRASS (gradient-recalled at steady-state) axial anatomic images on each subject (TE = 3.9 ms, TR = 9.5 ms, flip angle = 12°, NEX = 1, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, FOV = 240 mm, 256 × 224 matrix). These images allowed localization of functional activity and spatial co-registration between subjects. Functional echo planar (EP) images were collected using a single-shot, blipped, gradient echo EP pulse sequence (TE = 25 ms, TR = 2 s, FOV = 240 mm, 64 × 64 matrix). Thirty-five contiguous axial 4 mm thick slices were selected in order to provide coverage of the entire brain (3.75 × 3.75 × 4.00 mm voxel size). An additional 4 images were collected at the beginning of each run to allow the FMRI signal to equilibrate and 7 more were added to the end of each run to accommodate the rise and fall of the hemodynamic response. 
 
 
 
 2.3. Behavioral Data Analysis 
 We computed four kinematic measures of task performance from the flexion phase of each movement.  Movement onset  occurred when wrist flexion velocity first exceeded 10°/s. Flexion  movement offset  occurred when wrist flexion velocity subsequently dropped below 10°/s.  Movement error ,  ε , was defined as the angular deviation from the target at flexion movement offset.  Absolute error , | ε |, was defined as the absolute magnitude of the quantity ( ε i -  ε̄ ) where  ε̄  was the across-trials average movement error in the last 100 trials (i.e. at steady-state). We next computed secondary performance measures including  reaction time RT  (the time delay between GO cue presentation and movement onset) and flexion  movement duration  (the time between flexion movement s onset and offset). Movements were considered unsuccessful if they were less than half the desired extent, if movement occurred in anticipation of the GO cue (RT < 100 ms) or if subjects were inattentive ( RT  > 800 ms). Unsuccessful movements were excluded from further analysis. 
 
 2.3.1. Adaptation Modeling 
 We constructed three behavioral time series from the four test blocks performed by each subject. These included the environmental load  K i  as a function of trial number  i  (1 ≤  i  ≤ 200), a directional or signed kinematic error  ε i , and the absolute error | ε i |, which is uncorrelated with  ε i  as a result of nonlinear rectification. As we will show below,  K i  and  ε i  both provide information relevant to the current state of the limb and its environment. Because | ε i | is zero when performance is successful and increasingly positive otherwise, it is inversely proportional to task success regardless of whether subjects over- or under-shot the target. For the purpose of our analysis, we consider | ε i | a suitable proxy for a graded reward signal that might drive reinforcement learning. Note that | ε i | may be correlated with other signals of importance for reinforcement learning such as the magnitude of a prediction error (assuming subjects expect to hit the target on each trial), salience (more noticeable error, more “fast” learning; cf.  Keisler and Shadmehr, 2010 ) and, possibly, mechanisms supporting procedural learning and/or error correction processes that are themselves dependent on the magnitude but not sign of kinematic errors. 
 The sequence of environmental loads was uncorrelated from one trial to the next. Therefore, history-dependent changes in performance errors could not have originated from the perturbation sequence itself but rather must have originated from the processing of sensorimotor memories within the neuromotor controller (i.e. learning). Studies of motor adaptations during goal-directed movements of the arms ( Scheidt et al 2001 ;  Takahashi et al., 2001 ;  Scheidt and Stoeckmann 2007 ), legs ( Emken and Reinkensmeyer 2005 ) and fingers (Liu et al 2010) have shown that this learning is well-described by a family of limited-memory, autoregressive models with external inputs: 
 [1] ε ^ i = ∑ m = 1 N a m ε i − m + ∑ p = 0 Q b p K i − p ,  where the  a’s  and  b’s  are constant coefficient factors scaling the influence of prior performance errors  ε i-m  as well as current ( K i ) and previous ( K i-p ) perturbations, respectively. Constants  N  and  Q  correspond to the minimum number of memory elements needed to describe the evolution of trial-by-trial errors. The family of model structures described by  Eqn 1  can represent processes having very limited memory requirements (e.g. when both  N  and  Q  are small), as well as processes having more complex dynamics. 
 We sought to determine the most parsimonious model structure characterizing adaptive performance changes in our wrist flexion task. We first averaged movement error across subjects on a trial-by-trial basis, thus reducing the effect of inter-subject execution variability on the structure estimation procedure. We then used the systems identification toolbox (ident) within the Matlab computing environment to fit all model structures of moderate complexity ( N  and  Q  ≤ 10) to one half of the data (the estimation dataset), and evaluate the models’ abilities to predict the sequence of errors in the other half (the cross-validation dataset). We used the minimum descriptor length (MDL) criterion ( Ljung 1999 ) to identify the structure most consistent with the information filtering manifest in the sequence of errors observed during adaptation. Of all models considered, the MDL model is the one that minimizes a modified mean-square-error (MSE) function: 
 [2] MSE MDL = MSE ( 1 + n log ( k ) / k )  where  n  is the total number of parameters in the model being considered ( N + Q ) and  k  is the number of data points in the estimation data set. The MDL criterion offers an efficient compromise between model complexity and the quality of fit to the data. We then re-fit the resulting model to each individual subject’s time series to obtain individualized estimates of model coefficients  a m  and b p . 
 An important observation from prior studies of adaptation to stochastic loads is that the relationship between current performance error and magnitude of current load is often linear about the adapted load magnitude  K̂ : 
 [3] ε ^ i = b 0 ( K i − K ^ ) . 
 As shown in ( Scheidt et al. 2001 ), it is possible to obtain a trial-by-trial estimate of each subject s prediction of upcoming perturbation amplitudes,  K̂ i , based on the model coefficients derived from  Eqns [1]  and  [3]  above. For example, if the adaptation model includes a single memory term for both kinematic error and environmental load (as in horizontal planar reaching;  Scheidt et al., 2001 ;  Scheidt and Stoeckmann, 2007 ), we obtain: 
 K ^ i = − a 1 b 0 ε i − 1 − b 1 b 0 K i − 1 . 
 Likewise, if the adaptation model were to include two memory terms for load, but no memory of prior errors: 
 [4] K ^ i = − b 1 b 0 K i − 1 − b 2 b 0 K i − 2 . 
 Of course, subjects cannot actually predict future loads because the sequence  K i  is unpredictable by design, but this in no way precludes subjects from attempting to use recent sensorimotor memories to minimize errors.  K̂ i  is ideally suited for neuroimaging analyses of motor adaptation because it provides a trial-by-trial signature of the subject s prediction of future load based solely on memories of observable behavioral variables. 
 
 
 
 2.4 Image Analysis 
 Functional imaging datasets were generated and analyzed using the Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) software package ( Cox 1996 ). Slice values were time shifted to the midpoint of the corresponding volume using Fourier interpolation. The first 4 volumes were removed from each imaging run (test block) and the 4 imaging runs were concatenated together for each subject to yield the functional imaging datasets analyzed using sequential multilinear regression ( Draper and Smith, 1998 ). The rationale for this analysis is based on the fundamental geometry of least squares, which permits the partitioning of a multilinear regression into separate (sequential) regressions when the input regressors are mutually independent (orthogonal). We modeled BOLD signal fluctuations within each voxel as a combination of four independent sources of variability: a) nuisance variables (cofactors) typical of FMRI data collection; b) factors related generally to the performance of the visuomotor task (i.e. factors that do not change from one trial to the next, including the processing of visual stimuli and production of wrist flexion movements); c) factors related to how current-trial performance variables change from one trial to the next (eg. | ε i |,  K i ); and d) factors identified by adaptation modeling to be related to  memories  of prior events (eg.  K i-1 ,  K i-2 ), including memory-based predictions of upcoming environmental loads (eg.  K̂ i  ). We therefore performed a sequential multilinear regression analysis wherein the unmodeled (residual) signal variations that remained after an initial  Level-1  analysis became the dependent variables to be predicted by a subsequent  Level-2  analysis. Similarly, the unmodeled signal variations that remained after the  Level-2  analysis became the dependent variables to be predicted by two subsequent  Level-3  analyses ( Fig 2A ). Thus, four regression analyses were performed in total. By separating analysis of current-trial regressors from memory-related regressors, differences in the degrees of freedom inherent to the two  Level-3  models could not influence the distribution of data variance attributed to the  Level-1  and  Level-2  regressors. That is, by splitting our regression into stages or Levels, we can fairly compare the relative merits of the two  Level-3  models (see Section 2.5 below) without potential confound due to re-partitioning of variance for the earlier Level regressors, as would occur if we had instead performed separate nonsequential multilinear regressions for the memory- and prediction-model analyses (see  Supplemental Information  online). 
 
 2.4.1 Baseline Noise Model and the Level 1 Analysis: Main Effect of Task 
 We sought to eliminate from the functional image dataset those BOLD signal modulations correlated with covariate factors expected to mask signal changes of interest and to identify the task-related BOLD signal components that did not vary from one trial to the next. We considered as noise all baseline drift (modeled as the linearly-weighted set of orthogonal Legendre polynomials inclusive to order 4) as well as head motion parameters identified using an interactive, linear, least squares method for spatial registration of the image time series (AFNI program 3dvolreg;  Cox 1996 ). Registration yielded six scalar head motion indices per functional imaging interval (period: 1 TR): rotation about the superior-inferior S/I, anterior-posterior A/P, and left-right L/R axes along with translation along each of those axes. The across-subjects average magnitude of head rotation was 0.12° ± 0.07° (mean ± 1 SD, here and elsewhere), 0.17° ± 0.12° and 0.35° ± 0.28° about the S/I, A/P, and L/R axes, respectively. Average translations were 0.34 ± 0.35, 0.91 ± 0.28 and 0.08 ± 0.05 mm in the superior, posterior, and left directions (range: 0.03 mm and 1.51 mm); no subject was excluded from analysis due to head motion. 
 We considered as a main effect of the subject’s task those BOLD signal fluctuations related only generally with task performance. We therefore created a trial onset time reference function using a comb function (a series of 1 s and 0 s) with 1 s assigned to TR times of trial onset (the GO cue) and 0 s assigned to the remaining imaging intervals. This time series was then convolved with a gamma variate function resembling the canonical hemodynamic response ( Cohen 1997 ). Note that the Legendre polynomials modeling baseline drift were fit only to functional data from TRs wherein the estimated hemodynamic response to the GO reference function fell below 1% of its maximum value, thereby removing the approximate mean of the raw BOLD signal while preserving those signal components having potential correlation with trial-by-trial fluctuations in the behavioral regressors in this and subsequent analyses. 
 Because the visuomotor task was persistently challenging, we expected to find robust GO-related activity in brain regions known to engage in visuomotor tasks, including primary and non-primary sensorimotor cortices, visual and parietal association cortices as well as regions of the cerebellum (CER), thalamus (TH) and basal ganglia (BG). 
 
 
 2.4.2 Level 2 Analysis: Current-Trial Dependencies 
 The purpose of this analysis was to identify BOLD signal fluctuations that correlated significantly in time with small, trial-by-trial fluctuations in specific behavioral variables of interest ( ε i , | ε i |, and  K i ). Because the signed kinematic error  ε i  generally demonstrates strong correlation with  K i ,  K i  can be interpreted as representing both environmental load  and  performance error, equivocally. Thus, the BOLD signal residuals resulting from the  Level-1  analysis were modeled as a linearly weighted combination of input reference functions corresponding to the state variable  K i  and the absolute value of kinematic error | ε i | (representing a reinforcement reward signal). The choice to use  K i  as a current-trial regressor as opposed to  ε i  was further motivated by the appearance of  K i  (and not  ε i ) in the time series model of error we obtained from the systems identification analysis of behavioral data described below (see  Eqn 6  below). As with the GO cue events, each behavioral reference function was constructed using a comb function with (typically) non-zero values assigned to TR times of trial onset and 0 s assigned to the remaining imaging intervals. Unlike the GO reference function, the non-zero values were drawn sequentially from the trial-by-trial behavioral time series resulting from the kinematic analysis performed for each subject. These subject-specific reference functions were convolved with a gamma-variate function prior to multilinear regression ( Fig 2B , zoomed panel). Note that correlations between | ε i | and  K i  are negligible because of the nonlinearity introduced by rectification. 
 
 
 2.4.3 Level 3 Analyses: Memory and Prediction Models 
 We performed two separate  Level-3  analyses to assess the strength of neuroimaging evidence supporting the participation of the cerebellum, basal ganglia and cerebral cortices in memory-based motor adaptation. The first  Level-3  analysis (the  Memory Model Analysis ) was motivated by the results of our systems identification efforts (see  Fig 4C  and section 3.1 of RESULTS): BOLD signal residuals resulting from the  Level-2  analysis were modeled as a linear combination of reference functions corresponding to  memories  of prior trial performance variables ( K i-1  and  K i-2 ). The second event-related analysis (the  Prediction Model Analysis ) was motivated by  Eqn [4] , which was also based on the results of system identification and describes how these memories may be combined to predict upcoming environmental loads. For this analysis, we evaluated the extent to which the  Level-2  residuals correlated with  K̂ i . Because  K̂ i  is a particular, subject-specific, weighted combination of  K i-1  and  K i-2 , the two analyses differed in the degrees of freedom available for partitioning the variability within the  Level-2  residual and therefore addressed different questions. Whereas the first assessed whether and how BOLD signal fluctuations correlated generally with trial-by-trial variations in sensorimotor memories of behavioral significance, the second analysis asked whether and how BOLD signal changes correlated with the  one particular combination  of sensorimotor memories that emulates trial-by-trial changes in the subject’s prediction of upcoming load. In both analyses, model reference functions were convolved with a gamma-variate function prior to regression analysis. The means of all Level-2 and Level-3 regressors were removed prior to entering into the regression analyses to minimize the potential for spurious correlation between them and any steady-state bias missed by the noise model and Level-1 analysis. 
 
 
 
 2.5 Statistical Inference 
 Prior to performing multilinear regression (AFNI program 3dDeconvolve), we verified the independence of all input regressors for each subject to ensure that the analyses would be free from confound due to multicollinearity. 
 Subject-specific anatomical and functional images were cubically interpolated to 1 mm 3  voxels, co-registered and converted to stereotaxic coordinate space following the method of Talairach and Tournoux ( Talairach and Tournoux 1988 ). Functional images were blurred using a 4 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian filter to compensate for subject-to-subject anatomical variations. For each analysis, voxel-wise t-tests were performed to compare the deconvolution fit coefficients to zero. These across-subject comparisons identified voxels with statistically significant correlation between the hemodynamic response and the input regressors. A cluster-size and thresholding technique was used to correct for multiple comparisons in the group analysis. Appropriate cluster size and individual voxel p-value thresholds were estimated by performing 10,000 iterations in a Monte-Carlo simulation using the 3dClustSim tool included within the AFNI toolkit ( Cox 1996 ). For the  Level-1  analysis, we used a minimum cluster size of 113 μl and an individual voxel probability of t = 7.407 (p= 1×10 −6 ) to yield a whole brain family-wise error threshold of α = 0.0001. For the  Level-2  and  Level-3  analyses, where the regressors of interest were small trial-by-trial fluctuations in performance, this approach was unduly conservative. For these analyses, we used a lower individual voxel probability of t = 3.950 (p = 0.001) to identify regions of ‘significant’ activation (minimum cluster size of 20 μl). To further ascertain the level of confidence in our behavioral correlates, we performed a jackknife analysis (df = 16) repeating the population t-test analysis 18 times, each time removing a different subject from the pool. We compared the resulting clusters to the original 18-subject analysis and report the number of times each cluster dropped from significance in the jackknife analysis. We consider as high-confidence those activation regions that dropped from significance rarely (≤ 1 time) whereas low-confidence activations dropped from significance frequently (≥ 10 times). 
 We visualized the relationship between each regressor and the residual BOLD signals within selected, masked, brain regions of interest (ROI). We identified the centroids of the selected ROIs and warped these locations back onto each individual subject s dataset. We then extracted a trial sequence of scalars ( α i ,  β i ) from each centroid voxel. The trial sequences consisted of regressor magnitude  α  on trial  i  and the raw BOLD signal  β  at the approximate peak of the hemodynamic response on that same trial. We then plotted the relationship between the regressor of interest and the residual BOLD signal values computed by subtracting the contributions of  all  other regressor variables, excepting the variable of interest, from the raw BOLD signal. To do so, we sorted the data pairs into five bins of equal width and ascending values of  α  before averaging within subjects for each bin. We then computed the across-subjects correlation coefficients between regressor magnitude and the residual BOLD signal. 
 Finally, for regions of overlap between the two Level-3 models (memory and prediction), we compared the ability of each model to account for variance in the individual-subject BOLD signal using a maximum power test ( Bohlin, 1978 ; cf.  Ljung, 1999  p. 508). The null hypothesis stated that the data were generated by the model with fewest free parameters (i.e. the prediction model). The test compared the MSE computed from the residuals of each model while correcting for the difference ( d  = 1) in degrees-of-freedom between the two models. The correction factor was  k d (α)/N  with  α =  0.95 for a  χ 2  distribution  k d (α)  with  d  degrees-of-freedom and  N  data points. Here,  N  was the number of trials with a full set of valid data [i.e. no unsuccessful movements for trials  i ,  i  -1 and  i- 2; across subjects, N averaged 177 ± 15; range: 144 to 195]. Data were taken from the local voxel having greatest within-subject correlation so as to maximize the BOLD signal:noise ratio for this comparison (one datum per trial). The null hypothesis is rejected if the following holds true: 
 [5] MSE pred − MSE mem ≥ MSE mem ∗ 1 N k d ( α ) 
 Error bars in figures represent ± 1 SEM. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral results 
 As shown for a representative subject ( Fig 3 ), wrist angle trajectories out and back to the target were performed smoothly with an across-subject average reaction time of 490±62 ms and an average flexion duration of 400±18 ms. Both average values were well within their respective desired ranges. Few trials were unsuccessful (see section 2.3 in Methods), averaging only 8±5 trials across subjects. Unpredictable changes in spring-like load produced considerable trial-to-trial variability in the peak extent of movement ( Fig 3  top, grey traces). However, performance was reasonably accurate on average ( Fig 3  top, black trace); this was true for all subjects. Angular velocities peaked at about 80°/s during flexion ( Fig 3 , middle). The extensor torque applied by the manipulandum varied smoothly in time ( Fig 3 , bottom), in approximate proportion to wrist angle displacement. As desired, peak torque scaled linearly with commanded load (across-subject average  r 2  = 0.82). 
 On average, subjects overshot the target at the beginning of the testing session, giving rise to initial movement errors that were positively biased in the first test block ( Fig 4A , first eleven trials). This is consistent with a modest fatigue-dependent reduction in force production at the end of the baseline block, and subsequent recovery during anatomical scanning (cf.  Bigland-Ritchie and Woods 1984 ). If the same descending commands were applied initially after the rest as were applied before, slight overshoot would be expected at the beginning of the test blocks. We fit a falling exponential to the movement error time series, which decreased with a time constant of 31 trials ( Fig 4A , red). Asymptotic performance was approached within 100 trials; final error within the last 100 trials averaged -0.47±2.46° across subjects. This value closely matched the minimum movement extent (−0.50°) for which the cursor fully penetrated the target ( Fig 4A , inset). Movement errors were clearly load-dependent, varying in approximate proportion to load stiffness ( Fig 4B ). When the perturbation strength was strong, the hand undershot its target whereas when the load was weak, the hand overshot its goal. This relationship was approximately linear (r 2  = 0.75). The intersection of the regression line with the asymptotic error value represents the perturbation to which subjects had adapted on average (  K̂  = 0.129 Nm/°). 
 We considered whether trial-by-trial changes in kinematic error might reflect the influence of prior performance on subsequent movement attempts (cf.  Scheidt et al. 2001 ;  Scheidt and Stoeckmann 2007 ;  Takahashi et al., 2001 ). We therefore analyzed a family of linear adaptation models of moderate complexity (see  Eqn 1  in section 2.3.1 in Methods) and found the model of  Eqn 6  to be the minimum descriptor length structure ( Ljung 1999 ): 
 [6] ε ^ i = b 0 K i + b 1 K i − 1 + b 2 K i − 2  with 86.6% of cross-validation data variance accounted for (VAF) in the average response ( Fig 4C ). While other structure selection techniques were also evaluated (including the Akaike s Information Criterion choice, AIC) ( Ljung 1999 ), the best improvement in data VAF over the MDL choice was 0.37% at a cost of considerable model complexity (i.e. 8 additional memory terms: 3 for perturbations and 5 for errors). Thus,  Eqn [6]  parsimoniously describes the average trial-by-trial changes in wrist flexion movements, demonstrating that only recent sensorimotor memories influence the updating of motor commands on subsequent trials in this task.  Table 1  details the model coefficients obtained by refitting  Eqn [6]  to each individual subject’s time series. We used these coefficients and the subject-specific behavioral time series to estimate the trial-by-trial fluctuations in each subject’s prediction of the upcoming environmental load ( Eqn [4] ). The time series | ε i |,  K i ,  K i-1 ,  K i-2 , and  K̂ i  obtained from these analyses were used as input regressors in the sequential analysis of functional images. 
 
 
 3.2. Functional imaging results 
 To obtain reliable model coefficients, sequential regression analysis requires statistical independence of its input regressors. We assessed pair-wise correlations between the behavioral regressor time series (GO, | ε i |,  K i ,  K i-1 ,  K i-2 ) for each subject and found spurious, but statistically significant, correlations between | ε i | and  K i  in two subjects, who were excluded from further analysis (see  Table 1 ). Because  K̂ i  is by definition a linear combination of  K i-1  and  K i-2 , it also was uncorrelated with the GO, | ε i |,  K i  regressors. 
 
 3.2.1. Level-1 Analysis - Main Effect of Task 
 We sought to identify those BOLD signal components related generally to task performance (recall that the GO signal waveform was identical on each trial). Target capture elicited widespread and distributed BOLD activation changes correlated in time with the production of goal-directed wrist movements ( Fig 5 ;  Table 2 ). As expected for a right-handed visuomotor task (cf.  Kawashima et al. 1995 ;  Toni et al 1999 ) requiring substantial muscle force production ( Dai et al. 2001 ), large activation volumes spanned the central sulcus in the left hemisphere, encompassing primary sensorimotor (S1 and M1), dorsal and ventral premotor (PMd and PMv), and posterior parietal cortices (PPC). Because the subjects’ target was presented visually, we expected and found widespread and distributed cortical activities in areas that contribute to visual perception, processing of visuospatial instruction cues and the encoding of visual targets relative to the initial position of the hand: middle occipital gyrus (MOG), middle temporal gyrus (MTG), fusiform gyrus (FG), lingual gyrus (LG) and anterior intraparietal sulcus/supramarginal gyrus (BA 40). Smaller cortical activation volumes were located bilaterally in cingulate, inferior parietal and insular cortices, areas thought to be involved in motor response selection in the presence of uncertainty and errors ( Paus 2001 ;  Seidler et al. 2006 ;  Kayser et al. 2010 ;  Picard and Strick 1996 ;  Grinband 2006 ; see also  Singer et al. 2009 ). By construction, our task minimized the importance of online feedback stabilization of wrist posture because the ballistic motions emphasized spatial accuracy at mid-movement. Nevertheless, transcortical feedback mechanisms probably were active during the initial “ballistic” phase of the reach ( Prablanc and Martin 1992 ;  Seidler et al. 2004 ;  Grafton 2008 ; see also  Desmurget et al. 1999 ,  2001 ). Consistent with so-called long-loop reflex actions ( Evarts and Fromm 1981 ;  Evarts and Tanji 1976 ;  Miall et al. 1993 ;  Strick 1978 ), we observed general task-dependent activations ( Fig 5 ) in cortical and subcortical areas previously implicated in the closed-loop feedback compensation for limb positional errors during wrist postural stabilization ( Suminski et al. 2007a , their  Fig. 6 ) and movement ( Diedrichsen et al, 2005 ;  Grafton et al, 2008 ;  Seidler et al, 2004 ). These included subcortical activations spanning anterior (lobule V) and posterior (lobule VI) regions of right lateral cerebellar cortex, deep cerebellar nuclei (interposed and/or dentate), bilateral red nucleus and bilateral activations in the cingulate motor areas that extended into the superior frontal gyri: left supra-adjacent supplementary motor area (SMA), and right pre-SMA. 
 Although the task was persistently novel, subjects did optimize performance by adapting to the approximate mean of the load distribution ( Fig 4B ) and thus, we expected BOLD activation in areas previously implicated in the feedforward compensation for altered kinematic or kinetic behavior of a hand-held tool ( Grafton et al. 2008 ;  Imamizu et al. 2000 ,  2004 ;  Jueptner et al. 1997 ;  Krakauer et al. 2004 ;  Seidler et al. 2004 ,  2006 ;  Shadmehr and Holcomb, 1997 ; see also  Desmurget et al. 2004 ). Indeed, the primary-, pre-, supplementary- and cingulate-motor area activities highlighted above could reflect these areas’ contributions to motor learning (cf.  Sanes, 2003 ). The observed activity in lobule VI of the left posterior cerebellum was in an area frequently implicated in visuospatial motor learning ( Imamizu et al. 2003 , their  Fig 4 ;  Krakauer et al. 2004 ;  Diedrichsen et al. 2005 ; see also  Boyd and Winstein, 2004 ;  Gilbert and Thach 1977 ). Additional subcortical activations were observed in motor regions of the left striatum (posterior putamen) and bilateral thalamic nuclei: ventrolateral (VL), dorsomedial (DM) and lateralposterior (LP), structures thought to be part of cortico-thalamo-striatal-cortical loops important for procedural and motor skill learning ( Doyon et al., 2003 ;  Graybiel 1995 ;  Houk 2011 ;  Houk and Wise 1995 ; see also  Seidler et al. 2006 ). Smaller cortical activation volumes were located in the right hippocampal/parahippocampal region, areas thought to be important for the formation and maintenance of sensorimotor and spatial memory ( Burguess et al. 2002 ;  Rolls 1991 ,  1999 ;  Fuster 2009 ;  Nadel, 1991 ) as well as other functions supporting sensorimotor integration and learning (see  Bland and Oddie, 2001 ;  Cohen and Eichenbaum 1991 ;  Dypvik and Bland, 2004 ). 
 
 
 3.2.2 Level-2 and Level-3 Analyses 
 The sequential  Level-2  and  Level-3  analyses were intended to identify small signal modulations superimposed on the average task-related activity removed by the  Level-1  analysis. Based on  Eqn [6] , we hypothesized that the  Level-1  residual BOLD time series would reflect trial-by-trial fluctuations in environmental load and kinematic performance ( Level-2 ) as well as fluctuations related to memories of prior loads and performances ( Level-3 ). 
 Altogether, the  Level-2  and  Level-3  analyses revealed robust activity in multiple areas previously implicated in processing motor performance errors and the acquisition of compensatory responses reducing such errors ( Table 3 ) ( Desmurget et al. 1999 ;  Doyon et al. 2009 ;  Graybiel 2005 ;  Hikosaka et al. 1999 , 2000;  Imamizu et al. 2003 ;  Jueptner and Weiller, 1998 ;  Miall et al. 2001 ;  Seidler et al. 2006 ;  Tunik et al. 2005 ). Confidence in the activity within each region was further assessed by a post-hoc jackknife analysis ( Table 3 ), which counted the number of times a region dropped from significance when each subject, in turn, was excluded from analysis. Note that many regions with “small” activation volumes (< 50 μl) were robust against dropout in the jackknife analysis. 
 Level-2  analysis identified two large clusters of activation correlated with trial-by-trial fluctuations in K i  ( Fig 6A ): left sensorimotor cortex and right cerebellar hemisphere lobule V/VI. Smaller clusters were identified in areas previously implicated in the spatial planning and execution of visually-directed movements ( Boussaoud 2001 ;  Dieber et al. 1998 ;  Taira et al. 1990 ; see also  Paus 2001 ): left pre-PMd, right PMd and PMv, anterior cingulate and inferior parietal cortices. BOLD signal changes in the basal ganglia correlated with trial-to-trial fluctuations in unsigned errors |ε i | ( Fig 6B ): bilateral anterior dorsal putamen (rostral to the anterior commissure), left globus pallidus and right substantia nigra. These areas are thought to support reinforcement learning and the conditional selection of spatially-directed motor actions and sequences of actions ( Graybiel 1998 ;  Graybiel and Kimura 1995 ;  Gurney et al. 2001 ). We also found |ε i |-correlated activities distributed throughout neocortical areas with reciprocal connections to the basal ganglia ( Middleton and Strick, 2001b ;  Alexander et al. 1986 ; see also  Selemon and Goldman-Rakic 1985 ,  1988 ): left hemispheric pre-frontal (BA 10) and inferior parietal (BA 39) cortices; right hemispheric pre-PMd (per the convention of  Picard and Strick, 2001 ), anterior cingulate, superior parietal and superior temporal cortices; bilateral activity in PMv, posterior cingulate, fusiform and precuneate cortices. We also found |ε i |-correlated activity within the pontomedullary tegmentum, an area that includes the inferior olive, serotonergic raphe nuclei and reticulospinal projections. 
 Both of the  Level-3  analyses modeled the  Level-2  residuals as a weighted combination of prior trial perturbation K i-1  and K i-2  reference waveforms. In the  memory model  analysis ( Fig 7 ), the regression treated the memories independently and so they competed to capture variability within the residual BOLD data. Signal components that correlated with  K i-1  ( Fig 7A ) were located cortically, broadly distributed throughout right hemispheric regions associated with the formation and maintenance of sensorimotor memories ( Lenartowicz and McIntosh 2005 ;  Gazzaley et al. 2004 ): in dorsal prefrontal cortex (pre-PMd) and in anterior cingulate, middle temporal, and fusiform cortices, areas thought to interconnect with the basal ganglia and/or cerebellum (eg.  Bostan et al. 2010 ;  Goldman–Rakic, 1988 ;  Hoshi et al. 2005 ;  Hoover and Strick, 1993 ,  1999 ;  Kelly and Strick 2003 ; Middleton and Strick 1998,  2001 ;  Selemon and Goldman-Rakic 1988 ). Moreover, memory-related activity in the septal area is consistent with engagement of a septo-hippocampal system important for maintenance of spatial memories ( Olton, 1977 ). BOLD signal components correlating with K i-2  also spanned neocortex ( Fig 7B ): right superior- (i.e. pre-SMA, BA 6) and inferior- (BA 44) frontal gyri, pre-PMd (BA 6), middle temporal (BA 21) and fusiform cortices; left prefrontal (BA 46), superior parietal, middle temporal (BA 37) and posterior cingulate cortices (BA 23). Areas with activities correlated with K i-2  did not overlap with those correlated with K i-1 . We also observed memory-model correlations with both K i-1  and K i-2  in the right parahippocampal cortex (BA 36); parahippocampal cortex is part of an interconnected network of prefrontal and hippocampal formation regions ( Goldman-Rakic et al 1984 ) thought to play a critical role in the encoding/retrieval ( Burgess et al. 2002 ) and maintenance of novel, short-term sensorimotor memories ( Ranganath and D’Esposito 2001 ;  Hasselmo and Stern 2006 ; for a review see  Eichenbaum 2000 ), particularly those of spatial locations within a visual scene (but see also  Eichenbaum et al. 1999 ). 
 In the  prediction model  ( Fig 8 ), K i-1  and K i-2  entered the regression in a subject-specific proportion corresponding to our best estimate of his or her prediction of the upcoming load ( Eqn. [4] ) and so the two memory terms did not compete for data variance in the analysis. We found high-confidence correlation with  K̂ i  in the left cerebellar hemisphere (lobules VI and VIII/IX), regions thought to contribute to internal representation of novel hand-held tool behaviors ( Imamizu et al. 2000 ,  2003 ;  Diedrichsen et al. 2005 ; for a review see  Wolpert et al. 1998 ), reward-based behavioral learning ( Haruno et al. 2004 ) and, potentially, the prediction of neural events ( Dugas and Smith 1992 ; see also  Coenen and Sejnowski 1996 ; for a review see  Courchesne and Allen 1997 ). High confidence clusters were also located bilaterally in the region of the red nuclei, which receive cerebellar output through the deep cerebellar nuclei ( Courville 1966 ; cf.  Glickstein et al. 2011 ; for review and discussion see  Kennedy 1990 ) and which influence spinal gamma motor neurons via the rubrospinal and rubrobulbospinal tracts ( Appelberg 1962a ,  1962b ;  Appelberg et al. 1975 ;  Johansson 1988 ). The red nuclei also send projections back to the cerebellum via the principal olive ( Appelberg 1967 ;  Jeneskog 1974 ;  Nathan and Smith 1982 ), a pathway that appears to play an important role in the control of limb posture ( Kennedy et al. 1982 ) and movement ( Jeneskog 1974 ). Several smaller clusters were observed in the right substantia nigra, globus pallidus and centromedian nucleus of the thalamus. These nuclei contribute to cortico-striatal and thalamo-striatal “loops” ( Ilinsky et al. 1985 ;  Matsumoto et al. 2001 ;  Glimcher and Lau 2005 ) thought to be involved in reward-optimizing behaviors ( Schultz et al. 1993 ;  Middleton and Strick 2001b ; see also  Schultz et al. 1995 ) and the selection of actions in response to unexpected stimuli ( Matsumoto et al. 2001 ;  Minamimoto et al. 2005 ,  2009 ; see also  Tunik et al. 2009 ). Additional BOLD signal correlations with  K̂ i  were found in the region of the hippocampus, an area thought to be important for the formation of spatial memories ( Mahut 1971 ), maps of the body in space (Nadel and MacDonald 1982;  Nadel 1991 ) and “memory spaces” ( Eichenbaum et al. 1999 ), as well as in the anterior and posterior intraparietal sulcus, areas involved in the estimation of dynamic limb state and prediction of the sensorimotor consequences of motor commands ( Desmurget et al. 1999 ;  Tunik et al. 2005 ), the on-line feedback control of goal-directed actions ( Tunik et al. 2005 ) and the multimodal sensory integration ( Beuchamp et al., 2010 ) required for a mixed body- and gaze-centered spatial encoding of motor goals ( Bernier and Grafton, 2010 ). 
 BOLD signal components correlating with  K̂ i  overlapped with two regions identified in the memory model analysis [right pre-PMd and middle temporal gyrus (BA 21)] but were distinct in other cortical areas including the right hippocampus, right superior parietal lobule (anterior and posterior intraparietal sulcus, IPS; BA 7) and left fusiform gyrus (BA 37). In pre-PMd, a comparison of MSE values from the two models revealed a slight explanatory advantage for the memory model over the prediction model (memory model: median MSE = 343 % 2 , range: 81 to 1235 % 2 ; prediction model: median MSE = 345 % 2 , range: 82 to 1242 % 2 ; 1-sample sign test on the intrasubject difference between MSE values: p<0.0005). However, when we account for the memory model’s additional degree of freedom ( Bohlin, 1978 ; cf.  Ljung, 1999  p. 508), we find no compelling evidence to reject the prediction model as the most parsimonious explanation of the data variance. Based on this equivocal outcome, we cannot conclude whether activity in pre-PMd corresponds to the storage/recall of sensorimotor memories needed to compose a prediction of upcoming loads or the composition of that prediction itself. We also found equivocal results for the MTG overlap region. 
 In regions of interest throughout the brain, the relationship between the regressor magnitude and BOLD signal change was approximately linear ( Fig 9 ). The linearization of kinematic performance about the operating point defined by the currently predicted load ( Fig 4B ) was matched by a corresponding linear relationship between BOLD signal change and the behavioral variables contributing to that prediction. For example, the BOLD signal varied by 3.5%±6.2% across the range of  K i  values in the cerebellar cortex (across-subjects mean ± SD, n=18), by 1.9%±4.9% across the range of  K i-1  values in MFG, by 1.4%±7.7% with variation in  K i-2  in FG, by 4.8%±8.7% with variation in | ε i | in the PUT and by 4.5%±6.7% with variation in  K̂  in the GP. We then evaluated the extent to which the population trends of  Figures 8  and  9  reflected predictive neural activity within individual subjects ( Table 4 ). We performed within-subject fits of a linear equation to the binned (regressor  α i , response  β i ) data within GP, HIP and CER. We considered as significant those fits with linear trends with p ≤0.1. Out of 18 subject datasets analyzed, three demonstrated predictive activity in all three regions of interest (GP, HIP and CER), four subjects had predictive activity in two out of the three regions whereas seven subjects had predictive activity in just one of them. We found no compelling evidence of predictive BOLD signals in four subjects. Thus, subjects were just as likely to exhibit predictive activity in multiple neuroadaptive systems as they were to have it in just one. Subjects were unlikely to exhibit no predictive activity in any of these regions. There was no clear grouping of subjects according to which regions displayed predictive signals: For subjects exhibiting multiple predictive responses at p ≤0.1, four displayed the combination GP and HIP, four had the combination GP and CER, whereas five had the combination HIP and CER. Although the absolute counts differ somewhat if we instead use a significance threshold that is more strict (p ≤ 0.05) or more liberal (p ≤ 0.15), the relative frequency of single vs. multiple predictive responses would not change meaningfully. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Subjects performed goal-directed wrist movements against spring-like loads that varied randomly from one trial to the next. Although the loads were in fact unpredictable, subjects tried to use sensorimotor memories from recent movements to predict and compensate for upcoming loads ( Fig 4C ). These predictions enabled subjects to adapt performance so that the task was accomplished, on average, with a minimum of effort ( Fig 4A , inset). Using an approach proposed by Scheidt and colleagues ( Scheidt et al. 2001 ), we estimated each subject’s prediction of upcoming load based solely on performance variables observed during the most recent trials. We used these estimates to identify neural correlates of memory-based sensorimotor prediction - a subject-specific ‘signature’ of prediction within the neuromotor system ( Eqn 4 ). We used this time series, along with others reflecting trial-by-trial modulations in perturbation strength and performance errors, as inputs to a set of event-related analyses of the functional MR images obtained as subjects practiced the visual target capture task. The input time series were crafted (and verified) to be statistically independent, thereby enabling us to decompose, sequentially, the overall BOLD signal into components related only generally to performance of the task ( Fig 5 ), components correlating with current-trial variations in performance ( Fig 6 ), and components related to the storage/recall ( Fig 7 ) and integration ( Fig 8 ) of sensorimotor memories. The analyses revealed a distributed, bilateral network of cortical and subcortical activity supporting predictive compensation for changing environmental loads during visual target capture. Cortical regions exhibited trial-by-trial fluctuations in BOLD signal consistent with the associative storage and recall of task-relevant sensorimotor memories or “states” ( Figs 6A  and  7 ); bilateral activations in associative regions of the striatum were consistent with reward-optimizing reinforcement learning ( Fig 6B ); activity in the cerebellar cortex implicated this structure in both the online ( Figs 5  and  6A ) and predictive ( Fig 8 ) compensation for environmental disturbances. These results suggest active engagement of each of the three primary neuroadaptive mechanisms thought to contribute to motor learning and adaptation ( Houk and Wise, 1995 ;  Doya, 1999 ,  2000 ). Importantly, BOLD signatures of memory-based prediction of upcoming load were not limited to the cerebellum, but were also observed in an output pathway of the basal ganglia and in several cortical areas, including the hippocampus and posterior parietal cortex. Analysis of individual subject images in these regions found that subjects were just as likely to exhibit predictive activity in multiple regions, as they were to display it in one. Although the multiplicity of predictive activity might have been due, in part, to the highly-constrained nature of our task (discussed in section 4.2.1 below), the results demonstrate that compensation for environmental load relies on contributions from multiple neuroadaptive mechanisms. 
 
 4.1. BOLD signal correlates of current sensorimotor state 
 By design, the applied load  K i  correlated strongly with peak torque applied to the subject’s hand during wrist flexion. Because neuromuscular control of the wrist is compliant,  K i  also correlated with “signed” kinematic error: subjects undershot the goal (a negative error) when the load was stiffer than average and overshot the goal (positive error) when the load was more compliant than average ( Fig 4B ). A limitation of the regression analyses we used is that they cannot determine whether BOLD signals that correlate with  K i  actually depend on load, error, or some combination of factors that co-vary with load. The  Level-2  analysis identified  K i -related activities in areas previously implicated in the representation and online (moment-by-moment) compensation for kinematic performance errors, including left primary sensorimotor and right inferior parietal and anterior cingulate cortices as well as right cerebellar lobules V–VI (cf.  Diedrichsen et al. 2005 ;  Suminski et al. 2007a ; see also  Jueptner et al. 1997 ). The same analysis also identified activities in areas implicated in the production of graded force at the hand: primary sensorimotor, premotor, and anterior cingulate cortices (cf.  Cramer et al., 2002 ;  Dai et al., 2001 ;  Vaillancourt et al. 2003 ,  Ward et al. 2008 ). Although the question of whether cortical neurons encode information related to movement kinematics or kinetics has received great interest ( Georgopoulos et al. 1989 ;  Georgopoulos et al. 1992 ;  Kalaska et al. 1989 ;  Moran and Schwartz 1999 ; but see also  Hatsopoulos et al. 2007 ), recent theoretical and experimental evidence suggests that the brain adjusts its neural tunings (feedback sensitivities) according to prevailing task demands (i.e. optimal feedback control: cf.  Loeb et al. 1990 ;  Loeb and Marks 1985 ;  Todorov and Jordan 2002 ;  Scott 2004 ). Consistent with this idea, a recent FMRI study found that separate brain regions contribute to the moment-by-moment feedback regulation of wrist angle during a stabilization task and the adjustment of feedback set-point and/or sensitivity on a longer time scale when the moment-by-moment control fails to achieve subjective performance criteria ( Suminski et al. 2007a ). The fact that the regressor  K i  (commanded load) correlates with signed kinematic error ( ε i ) is not a limitation in our analysis, but rather makes  K i  an ideal proxy for whatever kinematic or kinetic sensorimotor states contribute to feedback control in our task. 
 
 
 4.2. Mechanisms supporting predictive compensation during visually-directed movement 
 Predictive compensations must be guided by past experience if they are to be effective in improving performance. Even trial-and-error exploration requires storage of recent performance information so that actions with greater reward are repeated. Behavioral analysis ( Fig 4 ) identified  K i-1  and  K i-2  as a minimal set of memories/states contributing to trial-by-trial evolution of performance observed in our task. Image analysis found  K i-1  and  K i-2  represented in multiple, widely-separated, and non-overlapping regions in the right hemisphere, including prefrontal (pre-PMd) and temporal (MTG) association areas, cingulate cortex, septum and parahippocampal areas. These results are consistent with the idea that a fundamental role of cortex is to encode states of behavioral significance ( Houk and Wise 1995 ;  Doya 1999 ,  2000 ). More specifically, they are consistent with studies exploring the neural basis of working memory (for reviews see  Eichenbaum 2000 ;  Fuster 2009 ; see also  Ullman 2004 ), which implicate reentrant cortical-cortical and cortico-subcortical loops in the storage and maintenance of memoranda. Unit recording evidence in animals and functional imaging and lesion studies in humans demonstrate that memory networks are “largely interregional, linking neuron assemblies and smaller networks in separate and noncontiguous areas of the cortex” ( Fuster 2009 ). Procedural memory, which facilitates the learning and adaptation of sensorimotor skills, is mediated by prefrontal and middle temporal cortices, in connection with anterior putamen and caudate ( Knowlton et al. 1996 ;  Miyachi et al. 2002 ). In contrast, prefrontal, parietal, septal, parahippocampal and thalamic areas contribute to the formation and maintenance of episodic memories (of personal experience) and spatial memories, (of object location; for reviews see  Aggleton and Brown 1999 ;  Burgess et al. 2002 ;  Fuster 2009 ) and to the consolidation of new declarative memories (memories that can be held in consciousness; cf.  Tulving 1987 ). Because these forms of memory may be important during the initial stages of adapting to a novel visuomotor perturbation (cf.  Anguera et al. 2009 ;  Keisler and Shadmehr, 2010 ; see also  Redding and Wallace 2002 ), both may have contributed importantly to subject performance in our persistently novel task. 
 Although activation sites for  K i-1  were adjacent to those for  K i-2  in executive and sensory association cortices (pre-PMd and MTG), they were non-overlapping in other areas (cingulate, fusiform and inferior frontal cortices, septum). This result implies a distributed network encoding of serial order in goal-directed reaching. That is, as information cascades through working memory, it shifts from circuits associated with the most recent movement attempt to circuits representing events further in the past. 
 Predictive BOLD signals based on these memories were located in cerebral cortex [including right hippocampus, right posterior parietal (anterior IPS) and right PMd cortices], in the right globus pallidus and centromedian nucleus of the thalamus (an output pathway of the basal ganglia) and in the left cerebellar cortex (lobule VI) and bilaterally in the red nucleus. These regions are thought to play very different roles in the planning and control of sensory-guided movements. In addition to it’s role in declarative memory formation in general, the right hippocampal system is also believed important for forming spatial memories and/or “maps of the body in space” ( Piekema et al. 2006 ; but see also  Eichenbaum et al. 1999 ), information that is conveyed to neocortical association areas via cingulate cortex ( Sutherland et al. 1988 ) for possible use in determining which joints to move, in which direction. In contrast, anterior intraparietal cortex plays a critical role in the estimation of dynamic limb state for use in the prediction of the sensorimotor consequences of motor commands ( Desmurget et al. 1999 ;  Tunik et al. 2005 ) and the on-line feedback control of goal-directed actions ( Tunik et al. 2005 ; see also  Suminski et al. 2007 ). The basal ganglia play a critical role in selecting movements ( Graybiel 1998 ;  Gurney et al 2001a ,  2001b ; Houk 2010;  Tunik et al. 2009 ) and in the scaling of movement amplitudes ( Desmurget et al. 2004 ;  Krakauer et al. 2004 ; see  Jueptner and Weiller 1998 ). The cerebellum is implicated in the ongoing feedback regulation of limb position ( Eccles 1967 ;  Mackay and Murphy 1979 ), in the predictive cancelation of sensory afference ( Blakemore et al. 1998 ,  2001 ; see also  Serrien and Wiesendanger 1999 ) and in the adaptation to novel visuomotor ( Imamizu et al. 2000 ,  2003 ,  2004 ,  2007 ;  Seidler et al. 2004 ;  Tseng et al. 2007 ) and dynamic environments ( Diedrichsen et al. 2005 ;  Shadmehr and Holcomb 1997 ) that require complex adjustments in the coordination of phasic activations in muscles driving limb motion (see  Krakauer et al. 2004 ; see also  Liu et al. 2011 ). How might these predictive signals have contributed to adaptive control in the present experiments? 
 
 4.2.1. Strategies… 
 At least three different adaptive strategies could have been used to solve the visual target capture task. First, subjects could have implemented a spatial remapping strategy to capture the target. Here, the appropriate response to overshoot (undershoot) would be to move the internal representation of the target closer to (farther from) the starting point of the hand. As the right hippocampus is thought to be involved in storing and maintaining the topographic memory (spatial map) needed to move to a remembered goal ( Maguire et al. 1996 ,  1998 ;  Nadel and MacDonald 1980 ;  Vargha-Khadem et al. 1997 ; for a review see  Burgess et al. 2002 ), our data suggest that subjects may have recruited the hippocampus to remap the visuospatial relationship between visually-perceived target distance and desired movement extent. Cingulate cortex conveys hippocampal information to neocortical association areas ( Sutherland et al. 1988 ), thus providing a means by which the hippocampus could influence the spatial planning of subsequent movements (cf.  Anderson and Buneo 2002 ). We also found two clusters of predictive activity in the right SPL around the IPS, one located near the parieto-occipital junction and the other located more anteriorly - areas previously shown to display reach-related activity ( Filimon et al. 2009 ;  Bernier and Grafton 2010 ). Our observations are consistent with the idea that posterior parietal cortex plays a critical role in multimodal sensory integration for spatially directed action ( Avillac et al. 2005 ; Prevosto et al. 2009;  Bisley and Goldberg 2003 ,  2010 ). Spatial remapping could be part of a ‘fast’ compensatory response to kinematic error that shares critical resources with the declarative memory system ( Keisler and Shadmehr, 2010 ) 
 Second, because the manipulandum constrained the wrist in all dimensions except the task-relevant degree-of-freedom, subjects could have compensated for target overshoot (undershoot) by decreasing (increasing) the amplitude of any preexisting pattern of feed-forward motor commands inducing wrist flexion. A large body of evidence suggests that the basal ganglia play a vital role in selecting which movement to make in a given circumstance and in planning/controlling the selected movement’s amplitude ( Desmurget et al. 2003 ,  2004 ;  Krakauer 2004 ; see also Houk 2010). In our experiments, anterior putamen, globus pallidus and substantia nigra all demonstrated strong activity related to reward, prediction error and/or other error correction processes that are dependent on the magnitude but not sign of kinematic errors. Moreover, the observation of predictive activity in right CM thalamus is suggestive because this structure receives projections from the globus pallidus and sends reciprocal projections back to striatum ( Glimcher and Lau 2005 ;  Matsumoto et al. 2001 ;  McLardy 1948 ), thus providing a way for load predictions in the basal ganglia to influence movement selection and/or amplitude planning on the subsequent movement attempt (see  Schultz et al. 1995 ; see also  Minamimoto 2005 ). 
 Third, subjects could have adapted to the novel spring-like dynamics of the manipulandum by adjusting coordination among the multiple muscles spanning the wrist. Numerous experimental, lesion, and theoretical/modeling studies implicate the cerebellum in the sensorimotor adaptation and learning of coordinated movement (for example:  Martin et al. 1996 ;  Thach 1996 ;  Imamizu et al. 2000 ,  2003 ,  2004 ;  Bastian 1996 ; see also Miller and Sinkjaer 1997;  Tseng et al. 2007 ). In one model of cerebellar function ( Kawato and Gomi 1992 ;  Wolpert et al. 1998 ;  Imamizu et al. 2003 ), a feedback controller, in conjunction with an inverse model of the controlled object, transforms a desired trajectory of the arm into an appropriate set of motor commands. Learning an accurate inverse model is facilitated by action of the feedback controller, which transforms trajectory error into a feedback motor command that can both augment the ongoing movement and train the inverse model used to generate the commands in the first place. The controller also includes a forward model that takes as input the current state of the arm and an efferent copy of motor commands ( von Holst and Mittelstadt 1950 , as cited in  von Holst 1996 ) and produces an estimate of the new state of the arm. One possible use for the predictions provided by a forward model is to serve as an estimate of sensory signals during the delay associated with sensory transduction and transport ( Wolpert et al. 1995 ;  Miall et al. 1993 ;  Bell et al. 2008 ;  Ebner and Pasalar 2008 ). 
 The observation of bilateral predictive activity in the mesodiencephalic area of the red nucleus in the current study suggests another use for predictive signals. Recall that the red nuclei are an important output channel of the cerebellum that receives projections from the deep cerebellar nuclei ( Courville 1966 ; cf.  Glickstein et al. 2011 ) and send projections back to the cerebellar nuclei and cortex via the principal olive ( Appelberg 1967 ;  Nathan and Smith 1982 ;  Onodera 1984 ;  DeZeeuw et al. 1998 ). The red nuclei also send descending projections to the spinal cord, where they act primarily on gamma motor neurons γMNs ( Appelberg et al. 1975 ;  Johansson 1988 ) to encode the dynamics of limb muscle activity ( Miller and Sinkjaer 1998 ). Whereas the reciprocal connections may provide a way for current load predictions to influence cerebellar feedback control of ongoing movement, the descending projections provide a means for the cerebellum to assert  conditional feedback control  over the movement (see  Houk and Rymer 1981 ). Accordingly, the cerebellum need not produce the primary motor commands that drive limb motion via extrafusal muscle fiber activation (although it may play a primary role in the learning of these commands). Instead, we take the traditional view that the cerebellum serves as an “accessory adjustor” to primary motor commands generated elsewhere, for example primary motor cortex ( MacKay and Murphy 1979 ). Based on our observations, we speculate that predictive mechanisms in lateral cerebellar cortex compute motor commands sent to γMNs, which innervate intrafusal muscle fibers that give rise to muscle spindle afferents. As noted by  Houk and Rymer (1981) , the intrinsic parallel configuration of intrafusal and extrafusal muscle fibers make muscle spindles ideal model reference error detectors - elements designed to “cancel” expected sensory feedback signals under conditions in which the controlled system (the extrafusal muscle fibers) responds precisely as does the model (the intrafusal fibers). 
 In conditional feedback control, movement control is exclusively feed-forward except when disturbances interfere with ideal performance, thus producing a model reference error signal (see  Houk and Rymer, 1981 ). For this to work, however, γ-drive to the intrafusal fibers must predict the response of the limb as coupled to its (variable) external load - which can only occur if the γ command is itself adaptive. The cerebellar and red nucleus activity we observed ( Fig 8 ) could be the origins of this adaptive command. Since spindle feedback projects back to the cerebellum via the spinocuneocerebellar tract, it is possible that conditional error signals originating from muscle spindles could be used to drive online feedback corrections (the conditional feedback control of  Houk and Rymer 1981 ) and/or to update the forward and inverse models that may have been used to learn the commands in the first place ( Fagg et al. 1997 ;  Kawato and Gomi 1992 ). 
 
 
 4.2.2. …speculations… 
 All three of these compensatory strategies are viable solutions to our visual target capture task. To the extent that predictive BOLD activity in the hippocampal and posterior parietal cortices, basal ganglia and cerebellum reflect the different adaptive approaches, the pattern of activations displayed in  Table 4  suggests that all three may have been recruited to compensate for the imposed loads. For example, movement planning in frontal parietal networks may have been conducted within a spatial reference frame established by the hippocampus and associated structures. The basal ganglia may then have selected one particular sequence and scaling of muscle activations (a feedforward motor program) likely to realize that plan. Finally, the cerebellum may have monitored the ongoing movement by predicting the sensory consequences of the evolving action and by initiating feedback corrections and internal model updates when the realized sensations deviated from expectation. Future studies should examine how the brain might integrate multiple predictive compensations to achieve a final overall motor response and whether the multiple predictive mechanisms identified here compete or cooperate to compensate for imposed environmental loads. 
 We observed two regions of overlap in the two Level-3 analyses (right pre-PMd and right middle temporal gyrus). When we accounted for differences in model degrees of freedom, we found no compelling evidence to accept one model over the other in these areas and so, this activity equivocally corresponds to the representation of sensorimotor memories needed to compose a prediction of upcoming loads and/or the composition of that prediction itself. A previous PET study of motor adaptation and consolidation ( Shadmehr and Holcomb, 1997 ) found activity “specific to the recall of a recently acquired internal model of the field” at nearly the same pre-PMd location as observed in our level-3 analyses, except in the  left , not right, hemisphere (their  Figure 3B ). In the experiments of Shadmehr and Holcomb, subjects were required to adapt to the novel dynamics of a viscous curl force field while moving a planar, 2-joint manipulandum in 8 different directions and so, they could not have adapted using either a simple rescaling of existing coordination patterns or a spatial remapping of the target relative to the hand’s starting location. In contrast, a PET study by Krakauer and colleagues ( Krakauer et al. 2004 ) and an FMRI study by Imamizu and colleagues ( Imamizu et al. 2007 ) both found right-hemispheric premotor activity associated with visuomotor adaptation of right-handed movements in the presence of cursor rotation. Given the hemispheric difference between dynamic and visuomotor adaptations revealed by these previous studies and others ( Sainburg 2002 ;  Sainburg and Kalakanis 2000 ), the fronto-parietal activity observed in our Level-3 analysis may well indicate that subjects in our study adopted a visuospatial solution to the movement task rather than a dynamic adaptation. Indeed, subjects may have been predisposed to this kind of solution because they were already forced to solve a novel visuospatial transformation: they were required to lay recumbent in a scanner while making flexion/extension movements of the wrist, movements that were translated into vertical motions of a visual cursor. 
 
 
 4.2.3. … and implications 
 This study provided direct experimental evidence that prediction of hand-held load is a distributed computation supported by a bilateral network of cortical and subcortical activity, thus reflecting active engagement of three neuroadaptive mechanisms previously implicated in motor learning and adaptation (cf.  Houk and Wise, 1995 ;  Doya, 1999 ,  2000 ): cortical regions for the storage and recall of task-relevant sensorimotor and visuospatial memories, basal-ganglionic networks for selecting and scaling movements to optimize reward or a related signal, and cerebellar pathways for both the online and predictive compensation for environmental disturbances. Based on neurophysiological considerations and evidence from the literature, we concluded that these predictions likely represent distinct computations within cerebellar, basal ganglionic and hippocampal loops that engage cortical working memory. Although multiplicity of representations of predictive activity may have been facilitated by the highly constrained nature of our task, the results nevertheless demonstrate that compensations for environmental load can recruit multiple neuroadaptive mechanisms. By disambiguating load prediction from the processing, storage/recall, and weighted integration of recent sensorimotor memories, the present study demonstrates a new experimental approach that can be exploited to advance understanding of how the neural systems supporting motor adaptation are altered by experience, neurologic disease and pharmacological intervention. 
 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation BES0238442 and National Institutes of Health NICHHD R01HD053727, NINDS R01NS053581 and NCRR GCRC M01RR00058. We are deeply grateful to Steve Rao of the Cleveland Clinic, who contributed extensive discussion and insight to a prior version of this manuscript. We would also like to thank Doug Ward and Sally Durgerian from the Medical College of Wisconsin for assistance in the statistical analysis of fMRI data. 
 
 
 References Cited 
 
 
 
 
 Aggleton 
 JP 
 
 
 Brown 
 MW 
 
 
 1999 
  Episodic memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal-anterior thalamic axis 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 22 
 425 
 489 
 11301518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 DeLong 
 MR 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 1986 
 Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 357 
 381 
 3085570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 Buneo 
 CA 
 
 
 2002 
 Intentional maps in posterior parietal cortex 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 25 
 189 
 220 
 12052908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angel 
 RW 
 
 
 1976 
 Efference copy in the control of movement 
 Neurology 
 26 
 12 
 1164 
 1168 
 1033484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anguera 
 JA 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 Willingham 
 DT 
 
 
 Seidler 
 RD 
 
 
 2009 
 Contributions of spatial working memory to visuomotor learning 
 J Cog Neurosci 
 22 
 9 
 1917 
 1930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appelberg 
 B 
 
 
 1962a 
 The effect of electrical stimulation of nucleus ruber on the gamma motor system 
 Acta Physiol Scand 
 55 
 150 
 159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appelberg 
 B 
 
 
 1962b 
 The effect of electrical stimulation in nucleus ruber on the response to stretch in primary and secondary muscle spindle afferents 
 Acta Physiol Scand 
 56 
 140 
 151 
 14013465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appelberg 
 B 
 
 
 1967 
 A rubro-olivary pathway. II. Simultaneous action on dynamic fusimotor neurones and the activity of the posterior lobe of the cerebellar cortex 
 Exp Brain Res 
 3 
 1967 
 382 
 390 
 6031168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appelberg 
 B 
 
 
 Jeneskog 
 T 
 
 
 Johansson 
 H 
 
 
 1975 
 Rubrospinal control of static and dynamic fusimotor neurones 
 Acta Physiol Scand 
 95 
 431 
 440 
 1211199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avillac 
 M 
 
 
 Deneve 
 S 
 
 
 Olivier 
 E 
 
 
 Pouget 
 A 
 
 
 Duhamel 
 J-R 
 
 
 2005 
 Reference frames for representing visual and tactile locations in parietal cortex 
 Nature Neurosci 
 8 
 941 
 949 
 15951810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Jesmanowicz 
 A 
 
 
 Wong 
 EC 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 1993 
  Processing strategies for time-course data sets in functional mri of the human brain 
 Mag Res in Med 
 30 
 2 
 161 
 173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bastian 
 AJ 
 
 
 Martin 
 TA 
 
 
 Keating 
 JG 
 
 
 Thach 
 WT 
 
 
 1996 
 Cerebellar ataxia: Abnormal control of interaction torques across multiple joints 
 J Neurophysiol 
 76 
 1 
 492 
 509 
 8836239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 Pasalar 
 S 
 
 
 Ro 
 T 
 
 
 2010 
  Neural substrates of reliability-weighted visual-tactile multisensory integration 
 Frontiers Syst Neurosci 
 4 
 25 
 1 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bell 
 CC 
 
 
 Han 
 V 
 
 
 Sawtell 
 NB 
 
 
 2008 
 Cerebellum-like structures and their implications for cerebellar function 
 Ann Rev Neursoci 
 31 
 1 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bernier 
 P-M 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2010 
 Human posterior parietal cortex flexibly determines reference frames for reaching based on sensory context 
 Neuron 
 68 
 776 
 788 
 21092865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bigland-Ritchie 
 B 
 
 
 Woods 
 JJ 
 
 
 1984 
 Changes in muscle contractile properties and neural control during human muscular fatigue 
 Musc Nerv 
 7 
 691 
 699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bisley 
 JW 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 ME 
 
 
 2003 
 Neuronal activity in the lateral intraparietal area and spatial attention 
 Science 
 299 
 81 
 86 
 12511644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bisley 
 JW 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 ME 
 
 
 2010 
 Attention, intention, and priority in the parietal lobe 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 33 
 1 
 21 
 20192813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 2001 
 The cerebellum is involved in predicting the sensory consequences of action 
 NeuroReport 
 12 
 1879 
 1884 
 11435916 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 1998 
  Central cancellation of self-produced tickle sensation 
 Nature Neurosci 
 1 
 7 
 635 
 640 
 10196573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bland 
 BH 
 
 
 Oddie 
 SD 
 
 
 2001 
 Theta band oscillation and synchrony in the hippocampal formation and associated structures: the case for its role in sensorimotor integration 
 Behav Brain Res 
 127 
 119 
 136 
 11718888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bohlin 
 T 
 
 
 1978 
 Maximum-power validation of models without higher-order fitting 
 Automatica 
 14 
 137 
 146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bostan 
 A 
 
 
 Dum 
 R 
 
 
 Strick 
 P 
 
 
 2010 
 The basal ganglia communicates with the cerebellum 
 PNAS 
 107 
 18 
 8452 
 8456 
 20404184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 2001 
 Attention versus intention in the primate premotor cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 14 
 S40 
 S45 
 11373131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boyd 
 LA 
 
 
 Winstein 
 CJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Cerebellar stroke impairs temporal but not spatial accuracy during implicit motor learning 
 Neurorehabil Neural Repair 
 18 
 134 
 143 
 15375273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buneo 
 CA 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 2006 
 The posterior parietal cortex: Sensorimotor interface for the planning and online control of visually guided movements 
 Neuropsychol 
 44 
 2594 
 2606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 The human hippocampus and spatial and episodic memory 
 Neuron 
 35 
 625 
 641 
 12194864 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bursztyn 
 LLCD 
 
 
 Ganesh 
 G 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 Flanagan 
 JR 
 
 
 2006 
  Neural correlates of internal-model loading 
 Curr Biol 
 16 
 2440 
 2445 
 17174919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carroll 
 L 
 
 
 1871 
 Through the looking-glass, and what Alice found there 
 Random House 
 New York 
 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coenen 
 OJMD 
 
 
 Sejnowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 1996 
 Learning to make predictions in the cerebellum may explain the anticipatory modulation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) gain with vergence 
 Proc 3rd Joint Symp Neural Comp 
 Pasadena CA 
 1 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 1997 
 Parametric analysis of fMRI data using linear systems methods 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 93 
 103 
 9299383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 1991 
 The theory that wouldn’t die: A critical look at the spatial mapping theory of hippocampal function 
 Hippocampus 
 1 
 3 
 265 
 268 
 1669304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 Allen 
 G 
 
 
 1997 
 Prediction and preparation, fundamental functions of the cerebellum 
 Learn Mem 
 4 
 1 
 35 
 10456051 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Courville 
 J 
 
 
 1966 
 Somatotopical organization of the projection from the nucleus interpositus anterior of the cerebellum to the red nucleus. An experimental study in the cat with silver impregnation methods 
 Exp Brain Res 
 2 
 191 
 215 
 4163693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 1996 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cramer 
 SC 
 
 
 Weisskoff 
 RMJD 
 
 
 Nelles 
 G 
 
 
 Foley 
 M 
 
 
 Finklestein 
 SP 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 2002 
 Motor Cortex Activation Is Related to Force of Squeezing 
 Hum Brain Map 
 16 
 197 
 205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dai 
 TH 
 
 
 Liu 
 JZ 
 
 
 Sahgal 
 V 
 
 
 Brown 
 RW 
 
 
 Yue 
 GH 
 
 
 2001 
 Relationship between muscle output and functional MRI-measures brain activation 
 Exp Brain Res 
 140 
 290 
 300 
 11681304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmurget 
 M 
 
 
 Epstein 
 CM 
 
 
 Turner 
 RS 
 
 
 Prablanc 
 C 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 1999 
 Role of the posterior parietal cortex in updating reaching movements to a visual target 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2 
 563 
 567 
 10448222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmurget 
 M 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Vindras 
 P 
 
 
 Grea 
 H 
 
 
 Turner 
 RS 
 
 
 2003 
 Basal ganglia network mediates the control of movement amplitude 
 Exp Brain Res 
 153 
 197 
 209 
 13680045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmurget 
 M 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Vindras 
 P 
 
 
 Grea 
 H 
 
 
 Turner 
 RS 
 
 
 2004 
 The basal ganglia network mediates the planning of movement amplitude 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 19 
 2871 
 2880 
 15147320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desmurget 
 M 
 
 
 Grea 
 H 
 
 
 Grethe 
 JS 
 
 
 Prablanc 
 C 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2001 
 Functional anatomy of nonvisual feedback loops during reaching: a positron emission tomography study 
 J Neurosci 
 21 
 2919 
 2928 
 11306644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 MD 
 
 
 Detre 
 JA 
 
 
 Alsop 
 DC 
 
 
 Shin 
 RK 
 
 
 Atlas 
 S 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 1995 
 The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory 
 Nature 
 378 
 279 
 281 
 7477346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeZeeuw 
 CI 
 
 
 Simpson 
 JI 
 
 
 Hoogenraad 
 CC 
 
 
 Galjart 
 N 
 
 
 Koekkoek 
 SKE 
 
 
 Ruigrok 
 TJH 
 
 
 1998 
  Microcircuitry and function of the inferior olve 
 Trends Neurosci 
 21 
 391 
 400 
 9735947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dieber 
 M-P 
 
 
 Ibanez 
 V 
 
 
 Honda 
 M 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Raman 
 R 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Cerebral processes related to visuomotor imagery and generation of simple finger movement studies with positron emission tomography 
 NeuroImage 
 7 
 73 
 85 
 9571132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 Hashambhoy 
 Y 
 
 
 Rane 
 T 
 
 
 Shadmer 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural correlates of reach errors 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 9919 
 9931 
 16251440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doya 
 K 
 
 
 1999 
 What are the computations of the cerebellum, the basal ganglia and the cerebral cortex? 
 Neural Networks 
 12 
 961 
 974 
 12662639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doya 
 K 
 
 
 2000 
 Complementary roles of basal ganglia and cerebellum in learning and motor control 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 10 
 732 
 739 
 11240282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 Karni 
 A 
 
 
 Lalonde 
 F 
 
 
 Adams 
 MM 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2002 
 Experience-dependent changes in cerebellar contributions to motor sequence learning 
 PNAS 
 99 
 2 
 1017 
 1022 
 11805340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Penhune 
 V 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2003 
  Distinct contribution of the cortico-striatal and cortico-cerebellar systems to motor skill learning 
 Neuropsychol 
 41 
 252 
 262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Amsel 
 R 
 
 
 Penhune 
 V 
 
 
 Monchi 
 O 
 
 
 Carrier 
 J 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Benali 
 H 
 
 
 2009 
 Contributions of the basal ganglia and functionally related brain structures to motor learning 
 Behav Brain Res 
 199 
 61 
 75 
 19061920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Draper 
 NR 
 
 
 Smith 
 H 
 
 
 1998 
 Applied Regression Analysis 
 3 
 Wiley 
 New York 
 429 
 430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dugas 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 AM 
 
 
 1992 
  Responses of cerebellar Purkinje cells to slip of a hand-held object 
 J europhysiol 
 67 
 3 
 483 
 495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dypvik 
 AT 
 
 
 Bland 
 BH 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional connectivity between the red nucleus and the hippocampus supports the role of hippocampal formation in sensorimotor integration 
 J Neurophysiol 
 92 
 2040 
 2050 
 15175366 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ebner 
 TJ 
 
 
 Pasalar 
 S 
 
 
 2008 
 Cerebellum predicts the future motor state 
 Cerebellum 
 7 
 583 
 588 
 18850258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eccles 
 JC 
 
 
 1967 
 Circuits in the cerebellar control of movement 
 PNAS 
 58 
 1 
 336 
 343 
 5231614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 2000 
 A cortical-hippocampal system for declarative memory 
 Nature Rev Neurosci 
 1 
 41 
 50 
 11252767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Dudchenko 
 P 
 
 
 Wood 
 E 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 M 
 
 
 Tanila 
 H 
 
 
 1999 
 The Hippocampus, Memory, and Place Cells: Is It Spatial Memory or a Memory Space? 
 Neuron 
 23 
 209 
 226 
 10399928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Emken 
 JL 
 
 
 Reinkensmeyer 
 DJ 
 
 
 2005 
  Robot-enhanced motor learning: Accelerating internal model formation during locomotion by transient dynamic amplification 
 IEEE Trans Neur Syst Rehab Eng 
 13 
 1 
 33 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evarts 
 EV 
 
 
 Fromm 
 C 
 
 
 1981 
 Transcortical reflexes and servo control of movement 
 Can J Physiol Pharmacol 
 59 
 757 
 775 
 6459153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evarts 
 EV 
 
 
 Tanji 
 J 
 
 
 1976 
 Reflex and intended responses in motor cortex pyramidal tract neurons of monkey 
 J Neurophysiol 
 39 
 1069 
 1080 
 824410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fagg 
 AH 
 
 
 Sitkoff 
 N 
 
 
 Barto 
 AG 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 1997 
 Cerebellar learning for control of a two-link arm in muscle space 
 Proc. IEEE Intern Conf Robot Automat 
 Albuquerque, NM 
 2638 
 2644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Filimon 
 F 
 
 
 Nelson 
 JD 
 
 
 Huang 
 R-S 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 2009 
 Multiple parietal reach regions in humans: cortical representation for visual and proprioceptive feedback during on-line reaching 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 2961 
 2971 
 19261891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flannagan 
 JR 
 
 
 Rao 
 AK 
 
 
 1995 
 Trajectory adaptation to a nonlinear visuomotor transformation: Evidence of motion planning in visually perceived space 
 J/Neurophysiol 
 74 
 2174 
 2178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuster 
 JM 
 
 
 2009 
 Cortex and memory: Emergence of a new paradigm 
 J Cog Neurosci 
 21 
 11 
 2047 
 2072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuster 
 JM 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 1971 
 Neuron activity related to short-term memory 
 Science 
 173 
 652 
 654 
 4998337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandolfo 
 F 
 
 
 Li 
 C-SR 
 
 
 Padoa-Schioppa 
 C 
 
 
 Bizzi 
 E 
 
 
 2000 
 Cortical correlates of learning in monkeys adapting to a new dynamical environment 
 PNAS 
 97 
 5 
 2259 
 2263 
 10681435 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
  Functional connectivity during working memory maintenance 
 Cog Affect Behavioral Neurosci 
 4 
 4 
 580 
 599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Georgopoulos 
 AP 
 
 
 Ashe 
 J 
 
 
 Smyrnis 
 N 
 
 
 Taira 
 M 
 
 
 1992 
 The motor cortex and the coding of force 
 Science 
 256 
 1692 
 1695 
 1609282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Georgopoulos 
 AP 
 
 
 Lurito 
 JT 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 AB 
 
 
 Massey 
 JT 
 
 
 1989 
 Mental rotation of the neuronal population vector 
 Science 
 243 
 234 
 236 
 2911737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 PFC 
 
 
 Thach 
 WT 
 
 
 1977 
 Brain Res 
 128 
 309 
 328 
 194656 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glickstein 
 M 
 
 
 Sultan 
 F 
 
 
 Voogd 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 Functional localization in the cerebellum 
 Cortex 
 47 
 59 
 80 
 19833328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Lau 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Rethinking the thalamus 
 Nature Neurosci 
 8 
 8 
 983 
 984 
 16047025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Selemon 
 LD 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 ML 
 
 
 1984 
 Dual pathways connecting the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with the hippocampal formation and parahippocampal cortex in the rhesus monkey 
 Neurosci 
 12 
 3 
 719 
 743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1988 
 Topography of cognition: Parallel distributed networks in primate association cortex 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 11 
 137 
 156 
 3284439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 P 
 
 
 Van Harn 
 J 
 
 
 Biedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural substrates of visuomotor learning based on improved feedback control and prediction 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 1383 
 1395 
 18032069 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 1995 
  Building action repertoires: memory and learning functions of the basal ganglia 
 Curr Op Neurobiol 
 5 
 733 
 741 
 8805417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 1998 
 The basal ganglia and chunking of action repertoires 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 70 
 119 
 136 
 9753592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 2005 
  The basal ganglia: learning new tricks and loving it 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 15 
 638 
 644 
 16271465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 James C 
 
 
 Davis 
 Joel L 
 
 
 Beiser 
 David G 
 
 
 1995 
 Adaptive neural networks in the basal ganglia 
 Models of Information Processing in the Basal Ganglia 
 MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gribble 
 PL 
 
 
 Scott 
 SH 
 
 
 2002 
 Overlap of internal models in motor cortex for mechanical loads during reaching 
 Nature 
 417 
 938 
 941 
 12087402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grinband 
 J 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 Ferrera 
 VP 
 
 
 2006 
 A neural representation of categorization uncertainty in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 49 
 757 
 763 
 16504950 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grosse-Wentrup 
 M 
 
 
 Contreras-Vidal 
 JL 
 
 
 2007 
  The role of the striatum in adaptation learning: a computational model 
 Biol Cybern 
 96 
 377 
 388 
 17364182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gurney 
 K 
 
 
 Prescott 
 TJ 
 
 
 Redgrave 
 P 
 
 
 2001a 
 A computational model of action selection in the basal ganglia. I. A new functional anatomy 
 Biol Cybern 
 84 
 401 
 410 
 11417052 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gurney 
 K 
 
 
 Prescott 
 TJ 
 
 
 Redgrave 
 P 
 
 
 2001b 
 A computational model of action selection in the basal ganglia. II. Analysis and simulation of behavior 
 Biol Cybern 
 84 
 411 
 423 
 11417053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haruno 
 M 
 
 
 Kuroda 
 T 
 
 
 Doya 
 K 
 
 
 Toyama 
 K 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 Samejima 
 K 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 A neural correlate of reward-based behavioral learning in caudate nucleus: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of a stochastic decision task 
 J Neurosci 
 24 
 7 
 1660 
 1665 
 14973239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haruno 
 M 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Heterarchical reinforcement-learning model for integration of multiple cortico-striatal loops: fMRI examination in stimulus-action-reward association learning 
 Neur Network 
 19 
 1242 
 1254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hasan 
 Z 
 
 
 1986 
 Optimized movement trajectories and joint stiffness in unperturbed, inertially loaded movements 
 Biol Cybern 
 53 
 373 
 382 
 3697407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hasselmo 
 ME 
 
 
 Stern 
 CE 
 
 
 2006 
 Mechanisms underlying working memory for novel information 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 11 
 487 
 493 
 17015030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hatsopoulos 
 NG 
 
 
 Xu 
 Q 
 
 
 Amit 
 Y 
 
 
 2007 
  Encoding of Movement Fragments in the Motor Cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 19 
 5105 
 5114 
 17494696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 Nakahara 
 H 
 
 
 Rand 
 M 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Lu 
 X 
 
 
 Nakamura 
 K 
 
 
 Miyachi 
 S 
 
 
 Doya 
 K 
 
 
 1999 
 Trends Neurosci 
 22 
 464 
 471 
 10481194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 Nakamura 
 K 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Nakahara 
 H 
 
 
 2002 
 Central mechanisms of motor skill learning 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 12 
 217 
 222 
 12015240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hikosake 
 O 
 
 
 Bromberg-Martin 
 E 
 
 
 Hong 
 S 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 New insights on the subcortical representation of reward 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 18 
 203 
 208 
 18674617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Holst 
 E 
 
 
 
 
 Houck 
 Lynne D 
 
 
 Drickamer 
 Lee C 
 
 
 1996 
 Relations between the central nervous system and the peripheral organs 
 Foundations of animal behavior: classic papers with commentaries 
 University of Chicago Press 
 Chicago, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Holst 
 E 
 
 
 Mittelstaedt 
 H 
 
 
 1950 
 Das Reafferenzprinzip (Wechselwirkungen zwichen zentralnervensystem und peripherie) 
 Naturwissenschaften 
 37 
 20 
 464 
 476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoover 
 JE 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 1993 
 Multiple output channels in the basal ganglia 
 Science 
 259 
 819 
 821 
 7679223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoover 
 JE 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 1999 
 The organization of cerebellar and basal ganglia outputs to primary motor cortex as revealed by retrograde transneuronal transport of herpes simplex virus type 1 
 J Neurosci 
 19 
 4 
 1446 
 1463 
 9952421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoshi 
 E 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 L 
 
 
 Féger 
 J 
 
 
 Carras 
 PL 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2005 
  The cerebellum communicates with the basal ganglia 
 Nat Neurosci 
 8 
 11 
 1491 
 1493 
 16205719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 
 
 Seth 
 AK 
 
 
 Bryson 
 J 
 
 
 Prescott 
 TJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Chapter 8: Action selection and refinement in subcortical loops through basal ganglia and cerebellum 
 Modeling Natural Action Selection 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 Basrianen 
 C 
 
 
 Fansler 
 D 
 
 
 Fishbach 
 A 
 
 
 Fraser 
 D 
 
 
 Reber 
 PJ 
 
 
 Roy 
 SA 
 
 
 Simo 
 LS 
 
 
 2007 
 Action selection and refinement in subcortical loops through basal ganglia and cerebellum 
 Phil Trans R Soc B 
 362 
 1573 
 1583 
 17428771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 Rymer 
 WZ 
 
 
 
 
 Brooks 
 VB 
 
 
 1981 
 Neural control of muscle length and tension 
 Handbook of Physiology 
 Baltimore 
 American Physiological Society 
 257 
 323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 1995 
  Distributed modular architectures linking basal ganglia, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex: Their role in planning and controlling action 
 Cerebr Cortex 
 2 
 95 
 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ilinsky 
 IA 
 
 
 Jouandet 
 ML 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1985 
 Organization of the nigrothalamocortical system in the rhesus monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 236 
 315 
 330 
 4056098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Higuchi 
 S 
 
 
 Toda 
 A 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Reorganization of brain activity for multiple internal models after short but intensive training 
 Cortex 
 43 
 338 
 349 
 17533757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Kuroda 
 T 
 
 
 Miyauchi 
 S 
 
 
 Yoshioka 
 T 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Modular organization of internal models of tools in the human cerebellum 
 PNAS 
 100 
 9 
 5461 
 5466 
 12704240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Kuroda 
 T 
 
 
 Yoshioka 
 T 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional magnetic resonance imagine examination of two modular architectures for switching multiple internal models 
 J Neurosci 
 24 
 5 
 1173 
 1181 
 14762135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Miyauchi 
 S 
 
 
 Tamada 
 T 
 
 
 Sasaki 
 Y 
 
 
 Takino 
 R 
 
 
 Putz 
 B 
 
 
 Yoshioka 
 T 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2000 
 Human cerebellar activity reflecting an acquired internal model of a new tool 
 Nature 
 403 
 192 
 195 
 10646603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ito 
 M 
 
 
 2000 
 Mechanisms of motor learning in the cerebellum 
 Brain Res 
 886 
 237 
 245 
 11119699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ito 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
  Bases and implications of learning in the cerebellum–adaptive control and internal model mechanism 
 Prog Brain Res 
 148 
 95 
 109 
 15661184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jeneskog 
 T 
 
 
 1974 
 Parallel activation of dynamic fusimotor neurones and a climbing fiber system from the cat brain stem. I. Effects from the rubral region 
 Acta Physiol Scand 
 91 
 223 
 242 
 4276943 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jueptner 
 M 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Brooks 
 DJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 1997 
 Anatomy of motor learning. II. Subcortical structures and learning by trial and error 
 J Neurophysiol 
 77 
 1325 
 1337 
 9084600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jueptner 
 M 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 1998 
 A review of differences between basal ganglia and cerebellar control of movements as revealed by functional imaging studies 
 Brain 
 121 
 1437 
 1449 
 9712006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johansson 
 H 
 
 
 1988 
 Rubrospinal and rubrobulbospinal influences on dynamic and static gamma-motoneurones 
 Behav Brain Res 
 28 
 97 
 107 
 2838044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Koeppe 
 RA 
 
 
 Awh 
 E 
 
 
 Minoshima 
 S 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 1993 
 Spatial working memory in humans as revealed by PET 
 Nature 
 363 
 623 
 625 
 8510752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kalaska 
 JF 
 
 
 Cohen 
 DA 
 
 
 Hyde 
 ML 
 
 
 Prudhomme 
 M 
 
 
 1989 
 A comparison of movement direction-related versus load direction-related activity in primate motor cortex, using a two-dimensional reaching task 
 J Neurosci 
 9 
 2080 
 2102 
 2723767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kayser 
 AS 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 BR 
 
 
 Erickson 
 DT 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 The functional anatomy of a perceptual decision in the human brain 
 J Neurophysiol 
 103 
 1179 
 1194 
 20032247 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 O’Sullivan 
 BT 
 
 
 1995 
 Functional anatomy of reaching and visuomotor learning: a positron emission tomography study 
 Cereb Cortex 
 5 
 2 
 111 
 122 
 7620288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 Furukawa 
 K 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 R 
 
 
 1987 
  A hierarchical neural-network model for control and learning of voluntary movement 
 Biol Cybern 
 57 
 169 
 185 
 3676355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 Gomi 
 H 
 
 
 1992 
 A computational model of four regions of the cerebellum based on feedback-error learning 
 Biol Cybern 
 68 
 95 
 103 
 1486143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 Kuroda 
 T 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 Nakano 
 E 
 
 
 Miyauchi 
 S 
 
 
 Yoshioka 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 Prablanc 
 C 
 
 
 Pelisson 
 D 
 
 
 Rossetti 
 Y 
 
 
 2003 
 Internal forward models in the cerebellum: fMRI study on grip force and load force coupling 
 Progress in Brain Research 
 142 
 171 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keisler 
 A 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 A shared resource between declarative memory and motor memory 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 44 
 14817 
 14823 
 21048140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 RM 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2003 
  Cerebellar loops with motor cortex and prefrontal cortex of a nonhuman primate 
 J Neurosci 
 23 
 23 
 8432 
 8444 
 12968006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 PR 
 
 
 1990 
 Corticospinal, rubrospinal and rubro-olivary projections: a unifying hypothesis 
 Trends Neurosci 
 12 
 474 
 479 
 1703677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 PR 
 
 
 Ross 
 H-G 
 
 
 Brooks 
 VB 
 
 
 1982 
 Participation of the principal olivary nucleus in neocerebellar motor control 
 Exp Brain Res 
 47 
 95 
 104 
 7117442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 S 
 
 
 Ashe 
 J 
 
 
 Hendrick 
 K 
 
 
 
 1993 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of motor cortex: hemispheric asymmetry and handedness 
 Science 
 261 
 615 
 617 
 8342027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Mangels 
 JA 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 1996 
 A neostriatal habit learning system in humans 
 Science 
 273 
 1399 
 1402 
 8703077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koerding 
 KP 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 2004 
 The loss function of sensorimotor learning 
 PNAS 
 101 
 26 
 9839 
 9842 
 15210973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krakauer 
 JW 
 
 
 Ghilardi 
 M-F 
 
 
 Mentis 
 M 
 
 
 Barnes 
 A 
 
 
 Veytsman 
 M 
 
 
 Eidelberg 
 D 
 
 
 Ghez 
 C 
 
 
 2004 
 Differential cortical and subcortical activations in learning rotations and gains for reaching: A PET study 
 J Neurophysiol 
 91 
 924 
 933 
 14523069 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lackner 
 JR 
 
 
 Dizio 
 P 
 
 
 1994 
  Rapid adaptation to Coriolis force perturbations of arm trajectory 
 J Neurophysiol 
 72 
 299 
 313 
 7965013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 J-Y 
 
 
 Schweighofer 
 N 
 
 
 2009 
  Dual adaptation supports a parallel architecture of motor memory 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 33 
 10396 
 10404 
 19692614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenartowicz 
 A 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 2005 
 The role of anterior cingulate cortex in working memory is shaped by functional connectivity 
 J Cog Neurosci 
 17 
 1026 
 1042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 C-SR 
 
 
 Padoa-Schioppa 
 C 
 
 
 Bizzi 
 E 
 
 
 2001 
 Neuronal correlates of motor performance and motor learning in the primary motor cortex of monkeys adapting to an external force field 
 Neuron 
 30 
 593 
 607 
 11395017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linsker 
 R 
 
 
 1988 
 Self-organization in a perceptual network 
 Computer 
 21 
 105 
 117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Mosier 
 KM 
 
 
 Mussa-Ivaldi 
 FA 
 
 
 Casadio 
 M 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 2011 
  Reorganization of finger coordination patterns during adaptation to rotation and scaling of a newly-learned sensorimotor transformation 
 J Neurophysiol 
 105 
 454 
 473 
 20980541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ljung 
 L 
 
 
 System Identification—Theory for the User 
 2 
 Upper Saddle River, NJ 
 Prentice Hall 
 1999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loeb 
 GE 
 
 
 Levine 
 WS 
 
 
 He 
 J 
 
 
 1990 
  Understanding sensorimotor feedback through optimal control 
 Cold sSpring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biol 
 LV 
 791 
 803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loeb 
 GE 
 
 
 Marks 
 WB 
 
 
 
 
 Boyd 
 IA 
 
 
 Gladden 
 MH 
 
 
 1985 
 Optimal control principles for sensory transducers 
 The Muscle Spindle 
 MacMillan 
 London 
 409 
 415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luecke 
 J 
 
 
 von der Malsburg 
 C 
 
 
 2004 
 Rapid processing and unsupervised learning in a model of the cortical macrocolumn 
 Neur Comp 
 16 
 3 
 501 
 533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacKay 
 WA 
 
 
 Murphy 
 JT 
 
 
 1979 
  Cerebellar modulation of reflex gain 
 Prog Neurobol 
 13 
 361 
 417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Burke 
 T 
 
 
 Phillips 
 J 
 
 
 Staunton 
 H 
 
 
 1996 
 Topographical disorientation following unilateral temporal lobe lesions in humans 
 Neuropsychologia 
 34 
 993 
 1001 
 8843066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 Donnett 
 JG 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 Knowing where things are: Parahippocampal involvement in encoding object locations in virtual large-scale space 
 J Cog Neurosci 
 10 
 1 
 61 
 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahut 
 H 
 
 
 1971 
 Spatial and object reversal learning in monkeys with partial temporal lobe ablation 
 Neruopsychologia 
 9 
 409 
 429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 TA 
 
 
 Keating 
 JG 
 
 
 Goodkin 
 HP 
 
 
 Bastian 
 AJ 
 
 
 Thach 
 WT 
 
 
 1996 
 Throwing while looking through prisims I. Focal olivocerebellar lesions impair adaptation 
 Brain 
 119 
 1183 
 1198 
 8813282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 N 
 
 
 Minamimoto 
 T 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Neurons in the thalamic CM-Pf complex supply striatal neurons with information about behaviorally significant sensory events 
 J Neurophysiol 
 85 
 960 
 976 
 11160526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McLardy 
 T 
 
 
 1948 
 Projection of the centromedian nucleus of the human thalamus 
 Brain 
 71 
 3 
 290 
 303 
 18099552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 Reckess 
 GZ 
 
 
 Imamizu 
 H 
 
 
 2001 
 The cerebellum coordinates eye and hand tracking movements 
 Nature Neurosci 
 4 
 6 
 638 
 644 
 11369946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 Weir 
 DJ 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Stein 
 JF 
 
 
 1993 
 Is the cerebellum a smith predictor? 
 J Mot Behav 
 25 
 3 
 203 
 216 
 12581990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middleton 
 FA 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2001a 
  Cerebellar output: motor and cognitive channels 
 Trends Cog Sci 
 2 
 9 
 348 
 354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middleton 
 FA 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 
 
 Lichter 
 David G 
 
 
 Cummings 
 Jeffrey L 
 
 
 2001b 
 A revised neuroanatomy of frontal-subcortical circuits 
 Frontal-Subcortical Circuits in Psychaitric and Neurological Disorders 
 Guifford Publications Ltd 
 New York, NY 
 44 
 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 LE 
 
 
 Sinkjaer 
 T 
 
 
 1998 
  Primate red nucleus discharge encodes the dynamics of limb muscle activity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 80 
 59 
 70 
 9658028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minamimoto 
 T 
 
 
 Hori 
 Y 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Complementary process to response bias in the centromedian nucleus of the thalamus 
 Science 
 308 
 1798 
 1801 
 15961671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minamimoto 
 T 
 
 
 Hori 
 Y 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Roles of the thalamic CM-PF complex – Basal ganglia circuit in externally driven rebias of action 
 Brain Res Bull 
 78 
 75 
 79 
 18793702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miyachi 
 S 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 Lu 
 X 
 
 
 2002 
 Differential activation of monkey striatal neurons in the early and late stages of procedural learning 
 Exp Brain Res 
 146 
 122 
 126 
 12192586 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mink 
 JW 
 
 
 1996 
  The basal ganglia: Focused selection and inhibition of competing motor programs 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 50 
 4 
 381 
 425 
 9004351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moran 
 DW 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 AB 
 
 
 1999 
 Motor cortical representation of speed and direction during reaching 
 J Neurophysiol 
 82 
 2676 
 2692 
 10561437 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 1991 
 The hippocampus and space revisited 
 Hippocampus 
 1 
 3 
 221 
 229 
 1669368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 L 
 
 
 1980 
 Hippocampus: Cognitive map or working memory? 
 Behavioral and Neural Biology 
 29 
 405 
 409 
 7417203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PW 
 
 
 Smith 
 MC 
 
 
 1982 
 The rubrospinal and central tegmental tracts in man 
 Brain 
 105 
 223 
 269 
 7082990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 WL 
 
 
 1983 
  Physical principles for economies of skilled movements 
 Biol Cybern 
 46 
 135 
 147 
 6838914 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Critchley 
 H 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Temporal difference models and reward-related learning in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 28 
 329 
 337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 1971 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olton 
 DS 
 
 
 1977 
  The function of septo-hippocampal connections in spatially organized behavior 
 Ciba Found Symp 
 58 
 327 
 49 
 252445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Onodera 
 S 
 
 
 1984 
  Olivary projections from the mesodiencephalic structures in the cat studied by means of axonal transport of horseradish peroxidase and titrated amino acids 
 J Comp Neurol 
 227 
 1 
 37 
 49 
 6470209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 2001 
  Primate anterior cingulate cortex: Where motor control, drive and cognition interface 
 Nature Rev Neurosci 
 2 
 417 
 424 
 11389475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 P 
 
 
 1996 
 Motor areas of the medial wall: A review of their location and functional activation 
 Cereb Cortex 
 6 
 342 
 353 
 8670662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2001 
  Imaging the premotor areas 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 11 
 663 
 672 
 11741015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Piekema 
 C 
 
 
 Kessels 
 RPC 
 
 
 Mars 
 RB 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 The right hippocampus participates in short-term memory maintenance of object-location associations 
 Neuroimage 
 33 
 374 
 382 
 16904344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prablanc 
 C 
 
 
 Martin 
 O 
 
 
 1992 
  Automatic control during hand reaching at undetected two-dimensional target displacements 
 J Neurophysiol 
 67 
 2 
 455 
 469 
 1569469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prevosto 
 V 
 
 
 Graf 
 W 
 
 
 Ugolini 
 G 
 
 
 2010 
 Cerebellar inputs to intraparietal cortex areas LIP and MIP: functional frameworks for adaptive control of eye movements, reaching, and arm/eye/head movement coordination 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 20 
 214 
 228 
 19465740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Medial temporal lobe activity associated with active maintenance of novel information 
 Neuron 
 31 
 865 
 873 
 11567623 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redding 
 GM 
 
 
 Wallace 
 B 
 
 
 2002 
 Strategic calibration and spatial alignment: A model from prism adaptation 
 J Mot Behav 
 34 
 2 
 126 
 138 
 12057886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolls 
 ET 
 
 
 
 
 Paillard 
 J 
 
 
 1991 
 Functions of the primate hippocampus in spatial processing and memory 
 Brain and Space 
 Oxford University Press 
 Oxford 
 353 
 376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolls 
 ET 
 
 
 1999 
 Spatial view cells and the representation of place in the primate hippocampus 
 Hippocampus 
 9 
 467 
 480 
 10495028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sainburg 
 RL 
 
 
 2002 
 Evidence for a dynamic-dominance hypothesis of handedness 
 Exp Brain Res 
 142 
 241 
 258 
 11807578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sainburg 
 RL 
 
 
 Kalakanis 
 D 
 
 
 2000 
 Differences in control of limb dynamics during dominant and nondominant arm reaching 
 J Neurophysiol 
 83 
 2661 
 2675 
 10805666 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salowitz 
 NMG 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 J 
 
 
 Simo 
 L 
 
 
 Suminski 
 AJ 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 2010 
 Behavioral regression in functional magnetic resonance image analysis of sensory-motor learning 
 Soc Neurosci 
 San Diego CA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanes 
 JN 
 
 
 2003 
 Neocortical mechanisms in motor learning 
 Curr Opinion in Neurobiol 
 13 
 225 
 231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanger 
 TD 
 
 
 1989 
 Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-layer linear feedback neural network 
 Neur Networks 
 2 
 459 
 473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 Conditt 
 MA 
 
 
 Reinkensmeyer 
 DJ 
 
 
 Mussa-Ivaldi 
 FA 
 
 
 2000 
 Persistence of motor adaptation during constrained, multi-joint, arm movements 
 J Neurophysiol 
 84 
 853 
 862 
 10938312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 Dingwell 
 JB 
 
 
 Mussa-Ivaldi 
 FA 
 
 
 2001 
 Learning to move amid uncertainty 
 J Neurophysiol 
 86 
 971 
 985 
 11495965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 Stoeckmann 
 T 
 
 
 2007 
  Reach adaptation and final position control amid environmental uncertainty following stroke 
 J Neurophysiol 
 97 
 2824 
 2836 
 17267755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Apicella 
 P 
 
 
 Romo 
 R 
 
 
 Scarnati 
 E 
 
 
 
 
 Houk 
 James C 
 
 
 Davis 
 Joel L 
 
 
 Beiser 
 David G 
 
 
 1995 
 Context-dependent activity in primate striatum reflecting past and future behavioral events 
 Models of Information Processing in the Basal Ganglia 
 MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Apicella 
 P 
 
 
 Ljungberg 
 T 
 
 
 1993 
  Conditioned stimuli during successive steps of learning a delayed response task 
 J Neurosci 
 13 
 3 
 900 
 913 
 8441015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Read-Montague 
 P 
 
 
 1997 
 A neural substrate of prediction and reward 
 Science 
 275 
 1593 
 1599 
 9054347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 L 
 
 
 Hollerman 
 JR 
 
 
 2000 
 Reward processing in primate orbitofrontal cortex and basal ganglia 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 10 
 272 
 283 
 10731222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scott 
 SH 
 
 
 2004 
  Optimal feedback control and the neural basis of volitional motor control 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 5 
 534 
 546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidler 
 RD 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Thiers 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
  Feedforward and feedback processes in motor control 
 NeuroImage 
 22 
 1775 
 1783 
 15275933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidler 
 RD 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Chintalapati 
 P 
 
 
 2006 
  Bilateral basal ganglia activation associated with sensorimotor adaptation 
 Exp Brain Res 
 175 
 544 
 555 
 16794848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selemon 
 LD 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1985 
  Longitudinal topography and interdigitation of corticostriatal projections in the Rhesus monkey 
 J Neurosci 
 5 
 3 
 776 
 794 
 2983048 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selemon 
 LD 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1988 
  Common cortical and subcortical targets of the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices in the rhesus monkey: evidence for a distributed neural network subserving spatially guided behavior 
 J Neurosci 
 8 
 11 
 4049 
 4068 
 2846794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serrien 
 DJ 
 
 
 Wiesendanger 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
  Grip-load force coordination in cerebellar patients 
 Exp Brain Res 
 128 
 76 
 80 
 10473743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 HH 
 
 
 1997 
 Neural correlates of motor memory consolidation 
 Science 
 277 
 821 
 825 
 9242612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 HH 
 
 
 1999 
  Inhibitory control of competing motor memories 
 Exp Brain Res 
 126 
 235 
 251 
 10369146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Krakauer 
 JW 
 
 
 2008 
  A computational neuroanatomy for motor control 
 Exp Brain Res 
 185 
 359 
 381 
 18251019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Mussa-Ivaldi 
 FA 
 
 
 1994 
 Adaptive representation of dynamics during learning of a motor task 
 J Neurosci 
 14 
 3208 
 3224 
 8182467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Preuschoff 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
  A common role of insula in felings, empathy and uncertainty 
 Trends in Cog Sci 
 13 
 8 
 334 
 340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 
 
 Desmedt 
 JE 
 
 
 1978 
 Cerebellar Involvement in volitional muscle responses to load changes 
 Cerebral Motor Control in Man: Long Loop Mechanisms 
 Basel 
 Karger 
 85 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Ghazizadeh 
 A 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
  Interacting adaptive processes with different timescales underlie short-term motor learning 
 PLoS Biol 
 4 
 6 
 e179 
 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040179 
 16700627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spoelstra 
 J 
 
 
 Schweighofer 
 N 
 
 
 Arbib 
 MA 
 
 
 2000 
 Cerebellar learning of accurate predictive control for fast-reaching movements 
 Biol Cybern 
 82 
 321 
 333 
 10804064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suminski 
 AJ 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Mosier 
 KM 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 2007a 
 Neural and electromyographic correlates of wrist posture control 
 J Neurophysiol 
 97 
 1527 
 1545 
 17135464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suminski 
 AJ 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 JL 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 2007b 
  Design and validation of a MR-compatible pneumatic manipulandum 
 J Neurosci Meth 
 163 
 255 
 266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sutherland 
 RJ 
 
 
 Whishaw 
 IQ 
 
 
 Kolb 
 B 
 
 
 1988 
 Contributions of cingulate cortex to two forms of spatial learning and memory 
 J Neurosci 
 8 
 6 
 1863 
 1872 
 3385478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taira 
 M 
 
 
 Mine 
 S 
 
 
 Georgopoulos 
 AP 
 
 
 Murata 
 A 
 
 
 Sakata 
 H 
 
 
 1990 
 Parietal cortex neurons of the monkey related to the visual guidance of hand movement 
 Exp Brain Res 
 83 
 29 
 36 
 2073947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 CD 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 Reinkensmeyer 
 DJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Impedance control and internal model formation when reaching in a randomly varying dynamical environment 
 J Neurophysiol 
 86 
 1047 
 51 
 11495973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain 
 Stuttgart 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thach 
 WT 
 
 
 1996 
  On the specific role of the cerebellum in motor learning and cognition: clues from PET activation and lesion studies in humans 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 19 
 411 
 431 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thoroughman 
 KA 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 1999 
 Electromyographic correlates of learning an internal model of reaching movements 
 J Neurophysiol 
 19 
 19 
 8573 
 8588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Todorov 
 E 
 
 
 Jordan 
 MI 
 
 
 2002 
 Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination 
 Nature Neurosci 
 5 
 11 
 1226 
 1235 
 12404008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toni 
 L 
 
 
 Schluter 
 ND 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 1999 
 Signal, set- and movement-related activity in the human brain: An event-related fMRI study 
 Cereb Cortex 
 9 
 34 
 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tseng 
 Y 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 Krakauer 
 JW 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Bastian 
 AJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Sensory prediction errors drive cerebellum-dependent adaptation of reaching 
 J Neurophysiol 
 98 
 54 
 62 
 17507504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 1987 
 Multiple memory systems and consciousness 
 Human Neurobiol 
 6 
 67 
 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tunik 
 E 
 
 
 Frey 
 SH 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2005 
 Virtual lesions of the anterior intraparietal area disrupt goal-dependent on-line adjustments of grasp 
 Nature Neurosci 
 4 
 505 
 511 
 15778711 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tunik 
 E 
 
 
 Houk 
 JC 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2009 
 Basal Ganglia contribution to the initiation of corrective submovements 
 NeuroImage 
 47 
 1757 
 1766 
 19422921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullman 
 MT 
 
 
 2004 
 Contributions of memory circuits to language: the declarative/procedural model 
 Cognition 
 92 
 231 
 270 
 15037131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vaillancourt 
 DE 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Corcos 
 DM 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural basis for the processes that underlie visually guided and internally guided force control in humans 
 J Neurophysiol 
 90 
 3330 
 3340 
 12840082 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vargha-Khadem 
 F 
 
 
 Gadian 
 DG 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Connelly 
 A 
 
 
 Van Paesschen 
 W 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 1997 
 Differential effects of early hippocampal pathology on episodic and semantic memory 
 Science 
 277 
 376 
 380 
 9219696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ward 
 NS 
 
 
 Swayne 
 OBC 
 
 
 Newton 
 JM 
 
 
 2008 
 Age-dependent changes in the neural correlates of force modulation: An fMRI study 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 29 
 9 
 1434 
 1446 
 17566608 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Ghahramani 
 Z 
 
 
 Jordan 
 MI 
 
 
 1995 
 An internal model for sensorimotor integration 
 Science 
 269 
 1880 
 1882 
 7569931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Multiple paired forward and inverse models for motor control 
 Neural Netrorks 
 11 
 1317 
 1329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolpert 
 DM 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
  Internal models in the cerebellum 
 Trends Cog Sci 
 2 
 9 
 338 
 347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 J 
 
 
 Suminski 
 A 
 
 
 Rao 
 S 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 R 
 
 
 2007 
 Predicting the future: neural correlates of internal models in the cerebellum and anterior cingulate 
 Neural Cont Movement Soc 
 Seville Spain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 JL 
 
 
 Suminski 
 AJ 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Scheidt 
 RA 
 
 
 2008 
  Neural correlates of internal models for adapting goal-directed wrist movements 
 Abstr Am Phys Therapy Assn 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 (A) Schematic representation of the one-degree of freedom pneumatic manipulandum. (B) Illustration of the visual cues, summary feedback and instructions provided to subjects. Trials began with a “Go” cue wherein a black target appeared near the bottom of the screen. There was a one-to-one correspondence between the subject’s actual wrist angle and the location of a red cursor on the screen. No visual feedback was provided during the movement. Instead, feedback of peak wrist angle and movement duration was presented after movement completion (“Feedback”; see METHODS for details). Subjects then relaxed and visually fixated between trials (“Relax”). (C) The environmental load applied to the hand varied from trial-to-trial. For the purpose of this study, the sampling interval of behavioral data sets is 1 trial. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Description of functional imaging analyses. (A) Two models were investigated using a sequential regression analysis comprised of three levels. Image preprocessing removed from the raw BOLD signal those signal components correlated with nuisance variables of no interest. Level-1 analysis identified and removed from the baseline-corrected BOLD signal the general task-related activity. Level-2 analysis identified and removed from the Level-1 residual those signal components related to current-trial performance variables of interest. Separate Level-3 analyses identified BOLD signal components related to memory processing and load prediction. (B) Schematic representation of the statistical model comprising our “Memory Model” analysis. Individual behavioral regressors (mean removed) were convolved with a gamma-variate function approximating the canonical hemodynamic response. These time series were scaled and summed to best fit the raw BOLD signal using multi-linear regression. The gray band (left) illustrates the expanded region (right) with “GO” cue timings shown by vertical dashed lines. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Time profiles of wrist displacements (top), velocities (middle) and torques (bottom) obtained during testing of a representative subject. Individual trial profiles are presented in gray whereas the average profiles over the entire testing session are presented in black. Wrist displacement target tolerance is shown by the horizontal bar. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Group behavioral results. (A) Time series of average movement error (black) and the line of best fit (red). Gray band indicates target tolerance. Inset shows target (black) and cursor (red) corresponding to the average subject performance at steady-state (i.e. within the last 100 trials of the experiment). (B) Average movement error plotted as a function of load stiffness on a trial-by-trial basis. The best fit linear regression is shown in red. The intersection of the regression line with the lower bound of the target tolerance indicates the mean perturbation strength that subjects had adapted to,  K̂ i . (C) Comparison of performance (data variance  not  accounted for) for models of increasing structural complexity (number of model terms, or parameters). Unexplained variance decreases dramatically with the inclusion of additional model terms up until the MDL choice model (blue) after which improvement is incremental, if at all. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Voxel-wise t-tests compared fit coefficient values versus 0.0, identifying regions that showed a statistically significant correlation between the hemodynamic response and the “GO” cue regressor. Lateral, medial and dorsal surface plots (top) and axial views (bottom) indicate cortical regions with BOLD signal components generally correlated with task execution. Here and elsewhere, left hemispheric activities are shown to the left of each panel. Abbreviations: aIPS anterior intraparietal sulcus; CgC cingulate cortex; FG fusiform gyrus; HIP hippocampus; INS insula; IPG inferior parietal gyrus; LG lingual gyrus; M1 primary motor cortex; MOG middle occipital gyrus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; PMd dorsal premotor cortex; PMv ventral premotor cortex; PostCG post central gyrus; PUT putamen; RN red nucleus; S1 primary sensory cortex; TH thalamus; V cerebellar lobule V; V1 cerebellar lobule V1. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 FMRI results: current state regressors. (A) K i , current trial perturbation amplitude and (B) |ε i | current absolute value of trial error. See  Table 2 . Abbreviations: aCgC anterior cingulate cortex; aPUT anterior putamen; CS central sulcus, pre/post central gyrus; FG fusiform gyrus; GP globus pallidus; MFG middle frontal gyrus; pCgC posterior cingulate cortex; PMv ventral premotor cortex; SMG supramarginal gyrus; SN substantia nigra; SPL superior parietal lobule; V–VI cerebellar lobule V, VI. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 FMRI results: regions with BOLD signal changes correlated with memory model terms: (A) K i-1  and (B) K i-2 . Abbreviations: aCgC anterior cingulate cortex; FG fusiform gyrus; IFG inferior frontal gyrus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; pCgC posterior cingulate cortex; PMd dorsal premotor cortex; SP septal area. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 FMRI results: regions with BOLD signal changes correlated with prediction model term  K̂  i . Abbreviations: GP globus pallidus; HIP hippocampus; IPS intraparietal sulcus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; PMd dorsal premotor cortex; RN red nucleus; VI cerebellar lobule VI. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 BOLD activity versus binned parameter magnitude, averaged across subjects. Vertical error bars: ±1 SEM. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Model coefficients of behavioral time series 
 
 
 
 
 Subject 
 b 0 
 b 1 
 b 2 
 r 2 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 −42.7 
 24.1 
 3.5 
 35.2% 
 
 
 2 
 −28.4 
 3.9 
 −0.1 
 31.4 
 
 
 3 
 −33.0 
 27.1 
 4.4 
 23.0 
 
 
 4 
 −43.0 
 7.8 
 −1.6 
 30.5 
 
 
 5 
 −43.4 
 14.3 
 1.7 
 34.2 
 
 
 6 
 −32.8 
 4.0 
 9.5 
 28.9 
 
 
 7 
 −25.7 
 8.9 
 −1.8 
 16.6 
 
 
 8 
 −27.0 
 17.0 
 6.8 
 28.4 
 
 
 9 
 −47.5 
 21.2 
 2.4 
 54.6 
 
 
 10 
 −46.7 
 15.3 
 8.6 
 41.2 
 
 
 11 
 −28.0 
 5.1 
 10.3 
 14.4 
 
 
 12 
 −40.2 
 10.3 
 6.7 
 44.6 
 
 
 13 * 
 −69.0 
 −0.4 
 −4.2 
 47.3 
 
 
 14 
 −45.7 
 25.5 
 12.2 
 44.6 
 
 
 15 
 −38.8 
 8.1 
 14.6 
 34.6 
 
 
 16 
 −39.9 
 1.4 
 9.9 
 35.9 
 
 
 17 
 −26.0 
 5.5 
 8.5 
 14.2 
 
 
 18 
 −38.2 
 14.6 
 13.1 
 20.7 
 
 
 19 * 
 −33.7 
 17.7 
 14.7 
 38.2 
 
 
 20 
 −44.1 
 −5.8 
 −4.4 
 29.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 mean±SE 
 −39±2.3 
 11±2.0 
 5.7±1.4 
 32±2.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Subjects excluded from image analysis due to spurious correlation between |ε i | and K i 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Location (center of mass) and volume of activations related to Level-1 Go cue 
 
 
 
 
 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomy Label 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cortical 
 
 
 
  PreCG (BA 6) (PMd) 
 L 
 209 
 −32 
 −10 
 51 
 11.8 
 
 
   (PMv) 
 L 
 324 
 −52 
 1 
 38 
 10.8 
 
 
  PostCG (BA 3); SPL (BA 5,7); PreCG (BA 4) 
 L 
 4349 
 −40 
 −26 
 52 
 15.1 
 
 
  SPL (BA 5,7) (IPS) 
 L 
 2405 
 −31 
 −46 
 50 
 11.6 
 
 
  IPL (BA 39, 40) 
 R 
 1309 
 54 
 −37 
 40 
 12.7 
 
 
 
 L 
 227 
 −52 
 −19 
 27 
 9.8 
 
 
 
 L 
 832 
 −45 
 −33 
 23 
 13.5 
 
 
  CgC (BA 32, 24); SFG (BA 6) 
 R/L 
 2421 
 3 
 6 
 40 
 13.2 
 
 
  pCgC (BA 31, 23); SFG (BA 6) 
 L/R 
 1255 
 −5 
 −25 
 45 
 12.0 
 
 
  aINS 
 L 
 587 
 −27 
 18 
 12 
 11.8 
 
 
  pINS 
 L ‡ 
 1163 
 −34 
 −3 
 10 
 16.9 
 
 
 
 R 
 241 
 39 
 −5 
 4 
 11.5 
 
 
  HIP 
 R 
 165 
 23 
 −34 
 3 
 9.2 
 
 
  MTG (BA 37) 
 L 
 120 
 −45 
 −57 
 7 
 9.1 
 
 
  MOG (BA 19); LG (BA 18); FG (BA 20) 
 L * 
 8084 
 −30 
 −69 
 −5 
 14.2 
 
 
  MOG (BA 19); MTG (BA 37); FG (BA 20) 
 R † 
 15328 
 31 
 −61 
 −11 
 13.7 
 
 
  LG (BA 18) 
 L 
 181 
 −2 
 −68 
 0 
 9.8 
 
 
 
 L/R 
 144 
 −4 
 −83 
 −4 
 8.9 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
  pPUT; claustrum 
 L 
 
 see 
 ‡ 
 
 
 
  TH(VL, DM, LP), RN 
 L 
 2654 
 −8 
 −20 
 6 
 11.0 
 
 
 
 R 
 323 
 10 
 −20 
 −1 
 8.9 
 
 
  TH(VL, DM, LP) 
 R 
 624 
 14 
 −17 
 12 
 9.8 
 
 
  CER(lob VI) 
 L 
 see   * 
 
 
  CER(lob V, VI); dentate; vermis(IV, V, VI, VIII) 
 R 
 
 see 
 † 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *,†, ‡ 
 indicates activities that extend between cortical and subcortical regions 
 
 
 Abbreviations: H Hemisphere; L left; R right; Vol Volume; Coord Coordinates; T peak T; BA Brodmann’s area; a anterior; p posterior; lob lobule 
 
 
 CER cerebellum; CgC cingulate cortex; DM dorsomedial nucleus; FG fusiform gyrus; HIP hippocampus; IPL inferior parietal lobule; IPS intraparietal sulcus; INS insula; LG lingual gyrus; LP lateral posterior nucleus; MOG middle occipital gyrus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; PMd dorsal premotor cortex; PMv ventral premotor cortex; PostCG post-central gyrus; PreCG pre-central gyrus; PUT putamen; RN red nucleus; SFG superior frontal gyrus; SPL superior parietal lobule; TH thalamus; VL ventrolateral nucleus 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Location (center of mass) and volume of activations related to Level-2 and Level-3 terms 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomy Label 
 
 |ε i | 
 
 
 K i 
 
 
 K i - 1 
 
 
 K i - 2 
 
 
 K̂ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 H 
 Vol 
 Coord 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 μl 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cortical 
 
 
 
    SFG (BA 6) {pre-SMA} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 51 
 6 
 9 
 62 
 4.3 
 R ↓ 
 
 21 
 
 
 7 
 
 − 1 
 
 68 
 
 
 4.6 
 
 
 
    MFG (BA 6) {pre-PMd} 
 R ↓ 
 
 21 
 
 
 31 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 4.3 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 69 
 
 − 41 
 
 5 
 
 
 42 
 
 
 4.9 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 121 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 5.6 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 67 
 
 
 51 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 47 
 
 
 5.1 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 126 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 5.5 
 
 
 
    MFG (BA 9,46,10) {prefrontal Ctx} 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 44 
 
 − 32 
 
 37 
 
 
 19 
 
 
 4.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 65 
 
 − 26 
 
 32 
 
 
 21 
 
 
 4.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 55 
 −32 
 45 
 10 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  IFG (BA 44) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 36 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 4.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    PreCG (BA 6) {PMd} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 78 
 
 
 35 
 
 − 16 
 
 65 
 
 
 4.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    PreCG (BA 6) {PMv} 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 52 
 
 − 37 
 − 9 
 
 37 
 
 
 5.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L ↓ 
 
 24 
 
 − 27 
 − 7 
 
 35 
 
 
 4.3 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 26 
 
 
 59 
 
 − 1 
 
 37 
 
 
 4.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 40 
 
 
 54 
 
 − 9 
 
 32 
 
 
 5.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    PreCG, CS, PostCG, (BA3,4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 372 
 
 − 37 
 − 28 
 
 50 
 
 
 5.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Precuneus (BA 7) 
 R 
 67 
 5 
 −50 
 34 
 4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    SPL 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 80 
 
 − 18 
 − 50 
 
 40 
 
 
 5.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L ↓ 
 
 34 
 
 − 17 
 − 71 
 
 41 
 
 
 4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 19 
 
 − 59 
 
 40 
 
 
 5.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 126 
 
 
 23 
 
 − 47 
 
 37 
 
 
 4.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    IPS (BA7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 71 
 29 
 −65 
 46 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 52 
 28 
 −72 
 36 
 4.6 
 
 
    AG (BA 39) 
 L 
 44 
 −49 
 −63 
 30 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L ↓ 
 
 23 
 
 − 51 
 − 62 
 
 26 
 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    SMG (BA 40) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 57 
 
 
 46 
 
 − 34 
 
 42 
 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    STG (BA 21) 
 R ↓ 
 
 22 
 
 
 64 
 
 − 30 
 
 5 
 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MTG (BA 21) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 41 
 
 
 69 
 
 − 20 
 − 3 
 
 5.7 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 24 
 
 
 53 
 
 − 22 
 − 7 
 
 4.3 
 
 R 
 24 
 69 
 −20 
 −2 
 5.6 
 
 
    MTG (BA 37) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 43 
 
 − 37 
 − 58 
 
 1 
 
 
 6.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    FG (BA 20,37) 
 R 
 22 
 36 
 −58 
 −9 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 38 
 38 
 −42 
 −18 
 4.8 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 76 
 
 
 35 
 
 − 34 
 − 14 
 
 5.6 
 
 L   ↑ 
 see *   below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 72 
 
 − 44 
 − 58 
 − 13 
 
 5.1 
 
 
 
    FG (BA 19) 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 58 
 
 − 32 
 − 72 
 − 4 
 
 6.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    aCgC (BA 32) 
 R ↓ 
 
 22 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 34 
 
 
 29 
 
 
 4.4 
 
 R 
 31 
 3 
 47 
 1 
 4.7 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 87 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 42 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 5.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 335 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 23 
 
 
 29 
 
 
 6.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 27 
 
 
 7 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    pCgC (BA 23) 
 R 
 37 
 2 
 −31 
 38 
 4.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 60 
 
 − 23 
 − 36 
 
 32 
 
 
 5.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 26 
 −13 
 −24 
 29 
 4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 53 
 
 − 17 
 − 41 
 
 28 
 
 
 5.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 53 
 5 
 −25 
 23 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 23 
 
 
 8 
 
 − 34 
 
 21 
 
 
 5.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 36 
 −24 
 −67 
 11 
 5.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    IST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 11 
 
 − 33 
 − 10 
 
 5.3 
 
 
 
    SP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 - ↓ 
 
 26 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    PHIP (BA 36) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 24 
 27 
 −33 
 −9 
 4.3 
 R 
 61 
 35 
 −34 
 −14 
 5.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    HIP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 21 
 
 
 35 
 
 − 16 
 − 7 
 
 4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 122 
 
 
 32 
 
 − 25 
 − 11 
 
 5.5 
 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
  aPUT 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 332 
 
 − 20 
 
 5 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 4.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 229 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  GP 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 179 
 
 − 16 
 
 5 
 
 − 2 
 
 5.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 64 
 
 
 15 
 
 
 0 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 5.3 
 
 
 
  SN 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 39 
 
 
 20 
 
 − 15 
 − 4 
 
 5.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 37 
 10 
 −20 
 −10 
 4.6 
 
 
  TH (CM) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 38 
 9 
 −25 
 7 
 4.6 
 
 
  RN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 ↑ 
 
 
 63 
 
 − 3 
 − 26 
 − 3 
 
 4.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 178 
 
 
 11 
 
 − 25 
 − 3 
 
 5.1 
 
 
 
  CER (lob V, VI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 182 
 
 
 25 
 
 − 47 
 − 19 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 L 
 
 
 273 
 
 − 34 
 − 52 
 − 16 
 
 5.2 
 
 
 
  CER (lob VIIIB, IX) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L ↑ 
 65 
 −15 
 −47 
 −43 
 4.6 
 
 
  CER vermis (lob VI–VII) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R ↓ 
 
 32 
 
 
 5 
 
 − 64 
 − 20 
 
 4.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  PMJd 
 
 R 
 ↑ 
 
 
 136 
 
 
 4 
 
 − 40 
 − 36 
 
 4.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 indicates activities that extend between cortical and subcortical regions. 
 
 
 Bootstrap results: ↑ : high confidence  (dropped 0–1 times); ↓ : lower confidence  (dropped 10–14 times). No region dropped 15 or more times from significance. 
 
 
 Abbreviations: H Hemisphere; L left; R right; Vol Volume; Coord Talairach coordinates; T peak T; BA Brodmann’s Area; a anterior; p posterior; lob lobule; Ctx cortex AG angular gyrus; CER cerebellum; CgC cingulate cortex; CM centromedian nucleus; CS central sulcus; FG fusiform gyrus; GP globus pallidus; HIP hippocampus; IFG inferior frontal gyrus; IST isthmus; IPS intraparietal sulcus; MFG middle frontal gyrus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; PHIP parahippocampal gyrus; PMd dorsal premotor cortex; PMv ventral premotor cortex; PMJ ponto-medullary juntion; PostCG post-central gyrus; PreCG pre-central gyrus; PUT putamen; RN red nucleus; SFG superior frontal gyrus; SMA supplementary motor area; SMG supramarginal gyrus; SN substantia nigra; SP septum; SPL superior parietal lobule; STG superior temporal gyrus; TH thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Single-subject analysis of predictive BOLD activity. Significance of linear term (slope) 
 
 
 
 
 Subject 
 GP 
 HIP 
 CER 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 *** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 * 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 8 
 
 ** 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 9 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 
 * 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 11 
 
 * 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 14 
 
 ** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 *** 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 20 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** 
 p ≤ 0.05; 
 
 
 ** 
 p ≤ 0.10; 
 
 
 * 
 p ≤ 0.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We used FMRI, a robot and time series analysis to study motor adaptation 
 
 
 People use limited memory from recent movements to predict and cancel imposed loads 
 
 
 Image analysis used state variables and predictions estimated from behavioral data 
 
 
 BOLD correlates of prediction in: cerebellum, basal ganglia,several cortical areas 
 
 
 Prediction is a distributed computation served by cortical/subcortical memory systems 
 
 
 
 
