
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8102140 
 5035 
 J Neurosci 
 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 
 0270-6474 
 1529-2401 
 
 
 21880922 
 3172893 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0152-11.2011 
 NIHMS321959 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Dissociable effects of top-down and bottom-up attention during episodic encoding 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 Melina R. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Hutchinson 
 J. Benjamin 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 Anthony D. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2130 
 2 Neurosciences Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2130 
 
 Correspondence to: Melina R. Uncapher, Stanford Memory Laboratory, Jordan Hall, Building 420, Stanford, CA 94305-2130.  melina.u@stanford.edu 
 
 
 2 
 9 
 2011 
 
 
 31 
 8 
 2011 
 
 
 29 
 2 
 2012 
 
 31 
 35 
 12613 
 12628 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 It is well established that the formation of memories for life’s experiences—episodic memory—is influenced by how we attend to those experiences, yet the neural mechanisms by which attention shapes episodic encoding are still unclear. We investigated how top-down and bottom-up attention contribute to memory encoding of visual objects in humans by manipulating both types of attention during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of episodic memory formation. We show that dorsal parietal cortex—specifically, intraparietal sulcus (IPS)—was engaged during top-down attention and was also recruited during the successful formation of episodic memories. By contrast, bottom-up attention engaged ventral parietal cortex—specifically, temporoparietal junction (TPJ)—and was also more active during encoding failure. Functional connectivity analyses revealed further dissociations in how top-down and bottom-up attention influenced encoding: while both IPS and TPJ influenced activity in perceptual cortices thought to represent the information being encoded (fusiform/lateral occipital cortex), they each exerted opposite effects on memory encoding. Specifically, during a preparatory period preceding stimulus presentation, a stronger drive from IPS was associated with a higher likelihood that the subsequently attended stimulus would be encoded. By contrast, during stimulus processing, stronger connectivity with TPJ was associated with a lower likelihood the stimulus would be successfully encoded. These findings suggest that during encoding of visual objects into episodic memory, top-down and bottom-up attention can have opposite influences on perceptual areas that subserve visual object representation, suggesting that one manner in which attention modulates memory is by altering the perceptual processing of to-be-encoded stimuli. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health  : NIMH 
 R01 MH080309-04 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 The creation of new memories for life’s experiences is intimately linked to how we attend ( Craik & Lockhart, 1972 ). During an event, we may willfully direct attention to information relevant to ongoing goals (‘top-down’ attention) or our attention may be captured by salient information (‘bottom-up’ attention) ( Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ;  Kastner & Ungerleider, 2000 ); how such attentive acts shape event encoding is unclear. 
 The neurobiology of top-down and bottom-up attention is posited to consist of separable yet interacting fronto-parietal networks ( Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ), and recent work has begun to consider how the parietal components of these networks are engaged during event encoding ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). During attention paradigms, functional imaging data indicate that dorsal posterior parietal cortex (dPPC) activity tracks demands on top-down attention, and ventral posterior parietal cortex (vPPC) activity tracks recruitment of bottom-up attention (reviewed in  Corbetta et al., 2008 ). During event encoding, fMRI signal in frontal and parietal regions frequently predicts whether the event will be subsequently remembered or forgotten (‘subsequent memory effects’) (reviewed in  Paller & Wagner, 2002 ;  Rugg et al., 2002 ;  Blumenfeld & Ranganath, 2006 ;  Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). A recent across-study analysis of the encoding literature raised the possibility that PPC subsequent memory effects anatomically overlap with PPC correlates of attention ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). Moreover, the majority of PPC foci demonstrating enhanced activity for events later remembered vs. forgotten (‘positive’ subsequent memory effects) localized to dPPC, whereas foci demonstrating enhanced activity for events later forgotten vs. remembered (‘negative’ subsequent memory effects) localized exclusively to vPPC. 
 These data motivated the ‘dual-attention encoding hypothesis’, which posits that top-down and bottom-up attention may differentially foster encoding success and failure, respectively ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). This hypothesis builds on evidence that top-down attention enhances cortical representations of attended information (e.g.,  Corbetta et al., 1990 ; reviewed in  Beck & Kastner, 2008 ;  Noudoost et al., 2010 ), and thus may increase the probability that attended information ultimately projects to the medial temporal lobe (MTL) for encoding (e.g.,  Moscovitch & Umilta, 1990 ;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2009 ). From this perspective, positive subsequent memory effects emerge when dPPC-mediated top-down attention is directed towards information that will be relevant to later remembering. By contrast, engagement of vPPC-mediated bottom-up attention may lead to later memory failure when attention is captured by information not relevant or helpful to later remembering ( Otten & Rugg, 2001b ;  Wagner & Davachi, 2001 ;  Cabeza et al., 2008 ;  Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). 
 Because consideration of PPC attention mechanisms on event encoding has largely come from across-study comparisons, it remains unclear whether parietal fluctuations that predict the mnemonic fate of events reflect the influence of top-down and bottom-up attention on episodic encoding. Here we implemented a paradigm that provides independent assays of attention and encoding, within-subjects, to determine (a) whether dPPC and vPPC show attention-sensitive activity that is also predictive of subsequent memory success or failure, and (b) whether the manner in which these attention-sensitive regions dynamically interact with the rest of the brain predicts the mnemonic fate of an event. 
 
 Experimental Procedures 
 
 Participants 
 Data are reported from 18 right-handed, native-English speaking volunteers (9 female; age range: 18–27 yrs; mean = 20.4, SD = 2.9), each of whom gave written informed consent in accordance with procedures approved by the Institutional Review Board of Stanford University. All participants were recruited from the Stanford community, reported no history of neurological trauma or disease, and were remunerated at a rate of $20/hr. Data from two additional participants were acquired but excluded from analyses, due to their failure to exhibit a behavioral reorienting effect (see below). 
 
 
 Stimulus materials 
 Stimuli consisted of 660 black-and-white line drawings of common objects and 80 artificial ‘greeble’ objects ( Gauthier & Tarr, 1997 ). Common objects were drawn from the International Picture Naming Project ( Szekely et al., 2004 ) and from a set previously used by  Uncapher & Rugg (2009) . Greebles and common objects were transformed into black-and-white line drawings in Photoshop CS v8.0 (Adobe Systems Inc.). For the purpose of counterbalancing, common objects were divided into 33 sets of 20 objects each, and greebles into five sets of 16 objects each. Object sets were rotated across study and test lists across subjects, and greebles across study lists. For each subject, 10 study lists were created from these sets, each containing 40 objects and 16 greebles. In each study list, 46 stimuli were presented in the cued location (‘valid’ trials, see below; 32 objects and 14 greebles) and the remaining 10 in the non-cued location (‘invalid’ trials; 8 objects and 2 greebles), yielding an 18% probability that a stimulus would be invalidly cued. 
 Of the 400 common objects encountered during the study phase, 350 were carried forward into the test phase (to minimize test list length). Thus, in each of 10 sessions, 35 common objects served as the critical study items (27 valid and 8 invalid). In the later memory test, 180 common objects served as foils. A separate set of 10 common objects and 3 greebles were used to create a practice study list. 
 
 
 Behavioral task 
 Within the present task context, ‘top-down attention’ refers to the goal-directed allocation and maintenance of visuospatial attention evoked by a preparatory cue (described below), and ‘bottom-up attention’ refers to a shift of visuospatial attention evoked by an object occurring outside the focus of attention. We are agnostic as to whether bottom-up shifts of attention occur by means of automatic, involuntary, or ‘exogenous’ processes vs. goal-directed, voluntary, or ‘endogenous’ processes (for a review and discussion see  Corbetta et al., 2008 ; see also  Posner & Cohen, 1984 ;  Downar et al., 2001 ;  de Fockert et al., 2004 ;  Kincade et al., 2005 ;  Serences et al., 2005 ;  Indovina & Macaluso, 2007 ;  Burrows & Moore, 2009 ). 
 The experiment consisted of 10 scanned incidental study sessions followed by one non-scanned memory test. Each study session lasted approximately 6.5 min, and the memory test lasted approximately 40 min. The interval between the end of the study phase and the start of test phase was approximately 10–15 min. Participants received instructions and practiced the study task prior to entering the scan suite; study task performance was analyzed during this training session to ensure that participants understood and complied with the task instructions (see below). Moreover, eye movements were visually monitored by two investigators and feedback was given to the participant to ensure participants could perform the study task while maintaining fixation; participants were trained to ceiling level, continuing until no visually detectable saccades occurred at any point during the training session. We acknowledge that this training does not ensure that eye movements did not occur during scanning. However, given recent studies of overt vs. covert attentional shifts that demonstrate that the same fronto-parietal regions are engaged when eye movements occur and when they do not (e.g.,  Ikkai & Curtis, 2008 ), we believe the possible presence of eye movements in the present study does not alter the interpretation of the findings. We also note that eye movements were not recorded during scanning in many prior studies of Posner attention cueing, including the study to which we compare our attention-related effects ( Corbetta et al., 2000 ). 
 During each study session, participants viewed a black screen containing two white boxes (subtending 5° horizontal and vertical angles) appearing to the right and left of a white central fixation crosshair ( Fig. 1 ). The nearest edges of the boxes subtended 1° horizontal angle from central fixation. The beginning of each trial was indicated by the appearance of a green arrow cue, which replaced the central fixation for 1 s. The arrow pointed to the left or right, cuing subjects to covertly shift their attention (without moving their eyes) to the corresponding box. After a variable cue-to-stimulus interval (CSI)—either 1, 3, or 5 s—an object appeared for 500 ms in one of the two boxes. On 82% of trials, the object appeared in the cued box (‘valid’ trials), while on the remaining trials it appeared in the non-cued box (‘invalid’ trials). Upon appearance of the object, participants were to indicate whether the stimulus represented a real object or belonged to the artificial object class of greebles (index and middle finger key press, respectively); response hand was counterbalanced across subjects. Speed and accuracy were given equal emphasis in the task instructions. A variable intertrial interval (ITI) of 1.5, 3.5, or 5.5 s separated the offset of the object stimulus from the onset of the following cue. The variable CSIs and ITIs were pseudo-randomly distributed across trials such that the regressors in the General Linear Model (see fMRI data analysis) that estimated the neural responses to cues and objects were minimally correlated (< 0.13), thus allowing activity elicited by each phase in the trial (cue and object) to be independently assessed. Stimuli were presented in pseudo-random order, with no more than three trials of one item-type (objects/greebles) occurring consecutively. Stimuli were projected onto a mirror mounted on the MRI headcoil. 
 Immediately following the final study session, participants were transferred from the scanner to a neighboring testing suite and received instructions for the surprise memory test. The test list comprised 350 studied (old) and 180 unstudied (new) common objects, centrally presented, individually, in pseudo-random order. For each test object, participants were to indicate whether or not they had encountered the item in any of the study sessions, and to indicate their level of confidence. One of four responses (sure old, unsure old, unsure new, sure new) was made with the index or middle fingers of each hand. Old and new responses were made using separate hands, with high and low confidence indicated by middle and index fingers, respectively. The mapping of hands to old or new responses was counterbalanced across participants. 
 Each test trial began when the white fixation crosshair changed to red for 500 ms ( Fig. 1 ), after which the test object was presented and remained onscreen until a response was made or until 4 s elapsed (if no response was made). If the object was judged to be new, the test advanced to the next trial. If the object was judged old, it remained onscreen for up to 4 more seconds, during which time participants attempted to recollect the location at which the object had appeared during study (cued with the appearance of a “Left?”, “Right?” prompt;  Fig. 1 ). Participants made a left or right index finger button press to indicate memory for the object appearing on the left or right side of the screen, respectively, and made their best guess when uncertain. A 1.5 s ITI (displaying a white fixation crosshair) separated test trials. To mitigate fatigue, participants were given a self-paced break after each third of the test. 
 
 
 fMRI data acquisition 
 Whole-brain imaging was performed on a 3T Signa MR scanner (GE Medical Systems). Anatomical images were collected using a high-resolution T 1  –weighted spoiled gradient recalled (SPGR) pulse sequence (130 slices; 1.5 mm thick; 256 × 256 matrix; .86 mm 2  in-plane resolution). Functional images were obtained from 30 4mm-thick axial slices, aligned to the AC-PC plane and positioned to give full coverage of the cerebrum and most of the cerebellum, using a T 2 *  –weighted two-dimensional gradient-echo spiral-in/out pulse sequence [repetition time (TR) = 2 s; echo time (TE) = 30 ms; flip angle 75°; 64 × 64 matrix; 3.44 mm 2  in-plane resolution]. Data were acquired in 10 sessions, comprised of 190 volumes each. Volumes within sessions were acquired continuously in a descending sequential order. The first four volumes were discarded to allow tissue magnetization to achieve a steady state. 
 
 
 fMRI data analysis 
 Data preprocessing and statistical analyses were performed with Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK:  http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm5/ ), implemented in MATLAB 7.7 (The Mathworks, Inc.). For each participant, all volumes were realigned spatially to the first volume, and then to the across-run mean volume. All volumes were corrected for differences in acquisition times between slices (temporally realigned to the acquisition of the middle slice). The anatomical volume was coregistered to the mean functional volume, and then a unified segmentation procedure ( Ashburner and Friston, 2005 ) was applied to segment the anatomical volume into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid. The segmented images were deformed to probabilistic maps of each tissue type in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space, and the resulting deformation parameters were applied to the functional images for normalization. Functional images were resampled into 3-mm 3  voxels using non-linear basis functions ( Ashburner and Friston, 1999 ). Functional images were concatenated across sessions. Normalized functional images were smoothed with an isotropic 8-mm full width half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. 
 
 Univariate analyses 
 Statistical analyses were performed in two stages of a mixed effects model. In the first stage, neural activity was modeled by a delta function (impulse event) at the onset of each cue and each stimulus. These functions were convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) and its temporal and dispersion derivatives ( Friston et al., 1998 ) to yield regressors in a General Linear Model (GLM) that modeled the BOLD response to each event type. The two derivatives modeled variance in latency and duration, respectively. Analyses of the parameter estimates pertaining to the dispersion derivative of cue-related effects are reported below (parameter estimates pertaining to the derivatives of other items contributed no theoretically meaningful information beyond that contributed by the canonical HRF, and thus are not reported). 
 The timeseries were high-pass filtered to 1/128 Hz to remove low-frequency noise and scaled to a grand mean of 100 across both voxels and scans. As described below, parameter estimates for events of interest were estimated using one of two GLMs. Nonsphericity of the error covariance was accommodated by an AR(1) model, in which the temporal autocorrelation was estimated by pooling over suprathreshold voxels ( Friston et al., 2002 ). The parameters for each covariate and the hyperparameters governing the error covariance were estimated using Restricted Maximum Likelihood (ReML). Effects of interest were tested using linear contrasts of the parameter estimates. These contrasts were carried forward to a second stage in which subjects were treated as a random effect. Unless otherwise specified, whole-brain analyses were employed when no strong regional  a priori  hypothesis was possible; in these cases, only effects surviving an uncorrected threshold of p < .001 and including four or more contiguous voxels were interpreted. When we held an  a priori  hypothesis about the localization of a predicted effect, we corrected for multiple comparisons by employing a small volume correction (SVC) using family-wise error (FWE) rate based on the theory of random Gaussian fields ( Worsley et al., 1996 ). The peak voxels of clusters exhibiting reliable effects are reported in MNI coordinates. 
 Regions of overlap between the outcomes of two contrasts were identified by inclusively (or ‘conjunctively’) masking the relevant SPMs. When two contrasts are independent, the statistical significance of the resulting SPM can be computed using Fisher’s method of estimating the conjoint significance of independent tests ( Fisher, 1950 ;  Lazar et al., 2002 ). For each inclusive masking procedure, the constituent contrasts were determined to be independent with tests of orthogonality for linear contrasts. This test concludes that two linear contrasts are statistically independent if the sum of the products of the coefficients is equal to zero; i.e., for contrasts A and B: if a 1 b 1  + a 2 b 2  + a 3 b 3  + a 4 b 4  = 0, then contrasts are orthogonal. The goal of inclusive masking in the present study was to search within regions that exhibited one pattern of activity to identify whether any voxels also showed a second pattern. As such, we maintained the original threshold of the contrast identifying the first pattern (p < .001), using a threshold of p < .05 for the masking contrast, to give a conjoint significance of p < .0005. Exclusive (or ‘disjunctive’) masking was employed to identify voxels where effects were not shared between two contrasts. The SPM constituting the exclusive mask was thresholded at p < .10, whereas the contrast to be masked was thresholded at p < .001. Note that the more liberal the threshold of an exclusive mask, the more conservative is the masking procedure. 
 To identify the relationship between attention effects and encoding effects, we orthogonalized the two factors in our design: (a) top-down attention effects were identified by interrogating cue-related activity for all items, collapsing over subsequent memory status, (b) bottom-up attention effects were identified by comparing validly cued vs. invalidly cued items, and (c) positive and negative subsequent memory effects were identified by comparing subsequently remembered vs. forgotten items. To accommodate these analyses, two GLMs were estimated. The first was optimized to model stimulus-related effects (i.e., subsequent memory effects and bottom-up attention effects). Study trials were segregated according to subsequent memory [ high confidence hits  (HCH),  low confidence hits  (LCH),  misses  (M)] and cue validity ( valid, invalid ), resulting in six object-related regressors. Two additional regressors modeled greebles (validly and invalidly cued). Objects for which memory was not later tested were modeled as events of no interest, as were objects for which a response was omitted at test. Nine additional regressors modeled the cue-related activity associated with each of the aforementioned stimulus types. Finally, six regressors modeled movement-related variance (three rigid-body translations and three rotations determined from the realignment stage), and session-specific constant terms modeled the mean over scans in each session. 
 The second GLM implemented a parametric modulation analysis designed to detect top-down attention effects. Previous Posner cueing studies (e.g.,  Corbetta et al., 2000 ) identified top-down attention effects by isolating activity elicited by cues to shift covert attention. In order to separately estimate neural responses associated with cues vs. stimuli, prior studies employed ‘catch trials’ in which no stimulus appeared post-cue (e.g.,  Corbetta et al., 2000 ). Here we opted to de-correlate cue- and stimulus-related activity by parametrically varying the cue-to-stimulus interval (CSI: 1, 3, or 5 s). Furthermore, because cue-related activity could reflect not only top-down attention effects but also low-level visual responses to the cue itself, we used a parametric modulation analysis to distinguish activity transiently responding to the cue, from that responding across the duration the variable CSIs. In other words, by isolating BOLD responses that were elicited by the cue to shift attention and that were also sustained throughout the variable interval over which attention was to be maintained, we could rule out the possibility that any cue-related effects were simply a reflection of low-level visual responses. To accomplish this, we included an orthogonal variable in the GLM to isolate top-down effects, identifying cue-related activity that increased with increasing CSI duration. It should be noted that because the HRF effectively integrates the total activity over a period of a few seconds, parametric modulators identify activity that is modulated in duration or magnitude (or both). As we discuss below, the obtained data suggest that the parametric modulator captured variance in duration of the cue-related HRF. In sum, for this second GLM, one regressor modeled all cue-related activity, and a second regressor parametrically modulated the first according to the CSI following each cue. Thus, the second regressor for each subject in this GLM was of equal length to the first regressor and comprised a vector of values where each value represented the duration of the CSI for the corresponding cue. This regressor identified voxels in which cue-related activity varied as a linear function of the duration over which attention was to be maintained. To accommodate the remainder of the known variance, a third regressor modeled all stimulus-related activity (not segregated according to subsequent memory or validity), and movement and session effects were modeled as described above. 
 An alternative method of interrogating sustained BOLD responses across the CSI is to analyze effects associated with the dispersion derivative of the cue-related HRF. In the present design, cue-related attention effects (but not cue-related visual effects) might show a more sustained response, which would be captured by significant loading on the dispersion derivative. Accordingly, below we report the cue-related dispersion derivative outcome, which confirmed the parametric modulator outcome. However, we note that a dispersion derivative analysis is less optimal than a parametric modulation analysis for our design for two reasons. First, a dispersion derivative analysis can only accommodate variance in the duration of the HRF up to approximately 1 s, and here the CSI varied from 1, 3, or 5 s. Second, the  differing  durations of the CSI are suboptimally modeled by a dispersion derivative, which is fit across all trial types (i.e., 1, 3, and 5 s CSIs). This trial-by-trial variability is better modeled by a parametric modulation analysis ( Henson, 2007 ). 
 Response profiles of regions of interest (ROIs) identified in map-wise analyses were investigated using the deconvolution algorithm implemented in MarsBar (marsbar.sourceforge.net). This algorithm deconvolves the BOLD signal in the ROI using a finite impulse response function, which assumes no shape for the hemodynamic response. From these analyses, the cluster-wise integrated percent signal change was extracted for further characterization of the functional response (see Results for details). 
 
 
 Connectivity analyses 
 The second main goal of the present study was to determine whether the functional dynamics of the putative dorsal and ventral attention networks changed when an event memory was effectively formed relative to when one was not. An understanding of how these attention networks dynamically interact with other neural structures during the encoding of event information may inform how episodic memories are created. We therefore sought to determine whether neural components of the dorsal and ventral attention networks showed connectivity profiles that predicted later memory success or failure. 
 Multivariate connectivity analyses were conducted by submitting seed regions – ROIs identified in the univariate analyses as exhibiting top-down or bottom-up attention effects (see next paragraph) – to psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses to determine whether they showed memory-related functional connectivity with other regions in the brain ( Friston et al., 1997 ). In this manner, we investigated whether the connectivity between attention-related regions and other brain regions differed as a function of encoding success or failure. 
 Seed regions were components of PPC that exhibited relevant attention effects: a left dPPC (mIPS/SPL) region that displayed top-down attention effects, and bilateral vPPC (TPJ) regions that displayed bottom-up attention effects (for details, see Results section, ‘Neural correlates of top-down and bottom-up attention’). Using standard PPI analysis techniques, seed clusters were individually defined for each subject on the basis of the random effects group analyses. For each subject, the data for each seed region was the principal eigenvariate of all significant (p < .05) voxels within a 4-mm sphere, centered on the local peak maximum that fell within 2*FWHM of the smoothing kernel (i.e., 16 mm) and was within the anatomical region of interest, identified from each subject’s normalized structural scan. These subject-specific timeseries represented the ‘physiological’ component of the PPI. All but one of the 18 subjects met all criteria for every seed region; PPI analyses were performed on these 17 subjects. The timeseries were adjusted for variance associated with effects of no interest, and then a deconvolution with the hemodynamic responses was performed. The resultant vector was weighted by a contrast vector representing the relevant ‘psychological’ factor (in this case, a subsequent memory contrast: HCH vs. M), and then reconvolved with the hemodynamic responses. The outcome of this process formed the ‘psychophysiological interaction’, or PPI regressor. This regressor models the between-condition difference in regression slopes between each voxel in the brain and the seed region. This PPI regressor was entered into a GLM, along with regressors modeling main effects of the psychological and physiological factors (i.e., the condition contrast vector and the timeseries, respectively). In line with the univariate GLMs, we additionally modeled movement-related effects as well as session-specific constant terms. Because PPI analyses are inherently less powered than their univariate counterparts (as only the unshared variance between the three regressors is attributed to the interaction term, or the PPI regressor), we adopted a whole-brain uncorrected threshold of p < .005, four-voxel extent. Voxels that surpassed threshold in these PPI analyses can be interpreted as showing a significant difference in connectivity with the attention-related seed region as a function of later memory outcome. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral performance 
 
 Study task 
 Participants performed at ceiling on the object/greeble discrimination task for items that were cued validly and invalidly (.98, SE = .0002 and .99, SE = .0002, respectively). All but two of 20 participants showed evidence of attentional reorienting, as indexed by longer response times (RTs) to items appearing in the invalidly cued relative to the validly cued location; as noted above, data from the two subjects failing to show this behavioral reorienting effect were omitted from all analyses. Data from the 18 participants submitted to analysis revealed that the reorienting effect (all items: F (1,17)  = 21.00, p < .001;  Table 1 ) was significant for both common objects (t 17  = 5.97, p < .001) and greebles (t 17  = 2.91, p < .01). The CSI between the orienting cue and the onset of the object did not impact the reorienting effect, as evidenced by the absence of an interaction between CSI and validity (F < 1). 
 
 
 Memory task 
 
 Overall memory performance 
 Recognition memory was estimated by calculating the difference in the probabilities of an ‘old’ response to an old vs. a new item [Pr = (pOld | Old) − (pOld | New)]. Recognition memory performance was superior when participants were highly confident in their old/new decision (Pr hi conf  = .30, SE = .03) relative to when a low confidence response was given (Pr low conf  = .07, SE = .01) (Pr hi conf  vs. Pr low conf , t 17  = 5.75, p < .001). Analyses of  d ′, excluding three participants who had zero high confidence false alarms, resulted in the same pattern as the Pr analyses: high confidence  d ′= 1.25, SE = .11 vs. low confidence  d ′ = .29, SE = .08. 
 For studied items that were confidently endorsed as old, participants were well above chance (.5) when indicating the location in which the object was studied (‘source memory’ accuracy: mean = .71, SE = .03; t 17  = 6.54, p < .001). This was not the case, however, when low confidence judgments were given (mean = .52, SE = .02; t 17  < 1). Thus, because both recognition and source memory performance were poor for low confidence responses, the fMRI subsequent memory analyses focused on comparison of high confidence hits (HCH) vs. misses (M). 
 
 
 Valid vs. Invalid memory performance 
 The need to reorient attention to invalidly cued objects at study negatively impacted subsequent memory for those objects ( Table 2 ). Specifically, invalidly cued objects were later confidently recognized less often than were validly cued objects (t 17  = 5.18, p < .0005). However, when invalidly cued objects were subsequently recognized with high confidence, source memory performance was equivalent to that for validly cued objects (t 17  < 1). This finding suggests that the following neuroimaging comparisons of valid and invalid subsequent memory effects (HCH vs. M) were not biased in favor of conditions associated with superior source memory. Such a bias would be introduced, however, if subsequent memory analyses were expanded to include all recognized items (rather than restricted to HCHs), as source memory was better for all hits in the valid vs. invalid conditions (t 17  = 1.9, p<.04). This finding of biased source memory for all hits, but unbiased source memory for high confident hits, reinforces the restriction of subsequent memory analyses to high confident hits. Finally, study task RTs conditionalized as a function of later memory performance revealed that study RTs did not differ as a function of subsequent memory ( Table 1 ; valid HCH vs. M: t 17  < 1; invalid HCH vs. M: t 17  < 1). This finding rules out the possibility that the neural subsequent memory effects were simply a consequence of the amount of time spent initially processing study items (i.e., differential ‘duty cycles’). 
 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging findings 
 The present experiment was designed to directly assess the degree to which top-down and bottom-up attention mechanisms contribute to the formation of event memories. Our analysis strategy first considered the factors of attention and encoding separately, and then examined the relationship between them by (a) investigating regional overlap between attention and encoding effects, and (b) investigating connectivity effects. 
 
 Neural correlates of top-down and bottom-up attention 
 We first examined whether our attention paradigm gave rise to patterns of activity similar to those observed in prior Posner cueing studies (which primarily used detection tasks with repeated simple shapes, whereas our paradigm included a discrimination task and trial-unique meaningful objects). Based on prior studies, top-down attention effects were predicted to (a) be elicited by the arrow cues to shift attention, and (b) vary in duration according to the interval over which attention was maintained (the variable CSI) (see Experimental procedures). Supporting these predictions, a parametric modulation analysis revealed that cue-related activity (cue > fixation) varied positively according to CSI in the frontal eye fields (FEF), the left medial intraparietal sulcus (mIPS), extending into superior parietal lobule (SPL) ( Fig. 2 ;  Table 3 ). These findings are consistent with an extensive literature suggesting that these fronto-parietal regions form a ‘dorsal attention network’ (e.g.,  Corbetta et al., 1993 ;  Nobre et al., 1997 ;  Kastner et al., 1999 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Sylvester et al., 2007 ; reviewed in  Corbetta et al., 2008 ). 
 Confirming the outcome of the parametric modulation analysis, analysis of non-modulated cue effects (i.e., the canonical cue-related HRF) revealed the same set of regions (bilateral FEF and left mIPS/SPL). Notably, this contrast also identified an additional set of regions in visual cortex (bilateral visual cortex, centered on [12 −99 6] and [−18 −93 6], Z = 4.17), consistent with the idea that the non-modulated effects reflect a combination of low-level visual and high-level attention-related processes. Finally, to determine which non-modulated effects exhibited a sustained response, we inclusively masked the non-modulated effects (p < .001) with the dispersion derivative contrast (p < .05). The outcome of this procedure revealed 34 voxels in mIPS/SPL (centered on [−24 −57 54], Z = 3.66) that showed a more sustained response than the canonical cue-related HRF, further confirming the findings from the parametric modulation analysis. 
 To identify neural correlates of bottom-up attention, objects appearing in unexpected locations were contrasted with those appearing in expected locations (i.e., invalidly > validly cued objects). Multiple regions were more active when the object was invalidly cued, including bilateral temporoparietal junction (TPJ) ( Fig. 2 ;  Table 3 ). This pattern is consistent with the proposal that TPJ is a key component of a ‘ventral attention network’ that mediates stimulus-driven reorienting of attention ( Corbetta et al., 2008 ). Additional regions revealed in this contrast included FEF and IPS ( Fig. 2 ;  Table 3 ), a finding consistent with the hypothesis that stimulus-driven reorienting of attention triggers recruitment of the dorsal attention network ( Corbetta et al., 2002 ;  Giessing et al., 2006 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Shulman et al., 2009 ). That is, effects revealed by this contrast may reflect the consequences of a stimulus-driven salience calculation (mediated in part by TPJ), which in turn serves to drive shifts in the locus of visuospatial attention (partially mediated by an FEF-IPS/SPL network) (e.g.,  Burrows & Moore, 2009 ;  Shulman et al., 2009 ). 
 It is notable that these ‘validity effects’ appear to overlap with the CSI-varying cue-related effects in medial—but not lateral—IPS ( Fig. 2 , yellow). This apparent dissociation would extend recent evidence suggesting that lateral and medial IPS functionally differ ( Nelson et al., 2010 ), with mIPS differentially tracking demands on top-down attention (e.g.,  Hutchinson et al. 2009 ;  Sestieri et al., 2010 ;  Uncapher et al., 2010 ). Here, mIPS was engaged during the components of the Posner task that are thought to recruit top-down attention (most directly evidenced by the parametrically modulated cue-related contrast, and indirectly evidenced by the validity contrast, for reasons described in the previous paragraph). Interestingly, this mIPS/SPL region appears to anatomically overlap with that revealed in a recent meta-analysis of the top-down attention literature (compare the present mIPS/SPL top-down effects in  Fig. 2 , yellow+green, to the top-down attention ALE map in Fig. 1 of  Uncapher et al., 2010 ). 
 Importantly, the apparent selectivity of the present top-down effects to mIPS/SPL, not including lateral IPS, was confirmed by a disjunction analysis (i.e., identification of regions that exhibit significant effects in one contrast but not in the other). To identify regions that exhibited validity effects but not CSI-varying cue-related activity, we masked the validity contrast (p < .001) with the parametrically modulated cue-related contrast (thresholded at a lenient level, p < .10, to create a stringent mask). Importantly, left lateral IPS survived this disjunction analysis, indicating that it exhibited validity effects but no evidence of cue-related activity. We also performed the reverse disjunction analysis, masking the cue-related contrast (p < .001) with the validity contrast (thresholded at a lenient level, p < .10). This procedure did not reveal a disjunction in left mIPS/SPL (nor in FEF), suggesting that medial (and not lateral) parietal subregions are engaged during both the cue-related and validity contrasts (again, this finding is compatible with the view that top-down attention mechanisms can be triggered by stimulus-driven salience that drives the reorienting of attention). Together, these findings support the hypothesis that lateral and medial IPS functionally differ, with mIPS/SPL differentially tracking demands on top-down attention. 
 
 
 Neural correlates of episodic encoding 
 Prior studies identifying the neural correlates of encoding have contrasted study items that were subsequently remembered vs. forgotten (e.g.,  Brewer et al., 1998 ;  Wagner et al., 1998 ;  Henson et al., 1999 ; for reviews, see  Wagner et al., 1999 ;  Paller & Wagner, 2002 ;  Spaniol et al., 2009 ). Accordingly, we first analyzed stimulus-related activity on trials most analogous to prior subsequent memory experiments, namely trials on which the object appeared in an expected location (validly cued trials), and was later remembered with high confidence (HCH) vs. later forgotten (M). Consistent with the literature on MTL and PPC encoding effects (for respective reviews, see  Davachi, 2006 ;  Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ), this contrast revealed positive subsequent memory effects (HCH > M) in multiple regions, including bilateral hippocampus and right posterior IPS ( Fig. 3 ;  Table 4 ). Also evident were bilateral clusters that encompassed fusiform and lateral occipital (LO) cortex ( Fig. 3 ); these ventral temporal-occipital foci appear to include the lateral occipital complex (LOC), which is implicated in visual object representation (e.g.,  Malach et al., 1995 ;  Grill-Spector, Kourtzi, Kanwisher, 2001 ;  Grill-Spector and Malach, 2004 ). In support of this interpretation, an analysis of common objects vs. greebles identified a large swath of activity overlapping these fusiform and LO subsequent memory effects (available from the corresponding author upon request). Additionally, a positive subsequent memory effect was evident in left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), a region consistently associated with episodic encoding success for verbalizable and/or meaningful stimuli (e.g.,  Kirchhoff et al., 2000 ;  Baker et al., 2001 ;  Davachi et al., 2001 ;  Otten & Rugg, 2001a ;  Clark & Wagner, 2003 ). [Note that subsequent memory effects were computed by comparing all HCHs (i.e., collapsed across source memory accuracy) to misses; to identify effects of source memory, we compared HCHs with and without source memory in the subset of participants (n = 15) with five or more trials in each condition. No region demonstrated greater encoding activity for HCHs with source memory at standard statistical thresholds (p < .001), whereas activation in right TPJ was greater during HCHs without source memory. Because these source memory analyses were underpowered, however, interpretative caution is warranted.] 
 Positive subsequent memory effects are often accompanied by negative subsequent memory effects, or regions that show an enhanced response to items later forgotten relative to items later remembered. Consistent with prior reports (e.g.,  Otten and Rugg, 2001b ;  Wagner and Davachi, 2001 ;  Daselaar et al., 2004 ;  Gonsalves et al., 2004 ;  Reynolds et al., 2004 ;  Turk-Browne et al., 2006 ;  Chua et al., 2007 ;  Otten, 2007 ;  Park and Rugg, 2008 ), negative subsequent memory effects (M > HCH) were observed in right vPPC, including TPJ (~BA 40) and in medial aspects of parietal and prefrontal cortex ( Fig. 3 ;  Table 4 ). These negative subsequent memory effects, as well as the preceding positive subsequent memory effects, were associated with object-related activity (analogous analyses of cue-related activity did not reveal significant correlates of subsequent memory at standard statistical thresholds; c.f.,  Otten et al. 2006 ). 
 
 
 Overlap of attention and encoding effects 
 Stimulus-related signals that vary with subsequent memory may reflect a variety of processes. We therefore adopted a functional-localizer logic, using the top-down attention contrast to constrain the process space being investigated. To do so, we looked within the regions engaged during top-down attention (operationalized as parametrically modulated cue-related activity) to assess whether stimulus-period activity in these regions tracked subsequent memory. In other words, to determine whether the neural correlates of top-down attention overlapped with those of successful episodic encoding, we employed a conjunction analysis between the regions identified by the parametrically modulated cue-related contrast and those exhibiting positive object-related subsequent memory effects. Specifically, the cue-related contrast (thresholded at p < .001) was inclusively masked with the positive subsequent memory contrast for validly cued objects (thresholded at p < .05). This conjunction analysis (at a conjoint threshold of p < .0005) revealed that the bilateral FEF and left mIPS/SPL regions that exhibited a top-down cueing effect were again engaged when objects appeared (post-cue), and this engagement was predictive of subsequent memory ( Fig. 4 , green;  Table 3 , denoted in final column). [Note that additional analyses comparing HCHs with and without source memory failed to reveal a difference in encoding activation in left mIPS/SPL and FEF. Again, due to concerns about power, future studies are needed to determine whether left mIPS/SPL activation during encoding is specifically predictive of memory for item-location associations and/or is related to item memory.] 
 Negative subsequent memory effects in TPJ have been posited to reflect the disruptive consequences of the bottom-up capture of attention during encoding, perhaps marking the diversion of attention by irrelevant event information ( Otten & Rugg, 2001b ;  Wagner & Davachi, 2001 ;  Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). Here, we explicitly tested this account by examining the relationship between the parietal structures engaged during the bottom-up capture of attention (i.e., greater activation to invalidly cued relative to validly cued objects) and those demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects for validly cued objects. Importantly, inclusive masking of the contrast identifying bottom-up attention effects (thresholded at p < .001) with that revealing negative subsequent memory effects (thresholded at p < .05) revealed overlap in bilateral TPJ ( Fig. 4 , blue;  Table 3 , denoted in final column). This pattern suggests that, at least for validly cued objects, greater TPJ activation may reflect the capture of bottom-up attention by irrelevant event features. Qualitative inspection of the observed hemodynamic responses in bilateral TPJ ( Fig. 4 ) further indicated that TPJ responded maximally to items that appeared outside the current focus of attention (invalidly cued objects) and were later forgotten, and the least to items that appeared where expected (validly cued objects) and were later remembered. This observation of a negative subsequent memory effect in TPJ on invalidly cued trials – wherein bottom-up attention was presumably captured by the to-be-encoded object – was unexpected, as the capture of bottom-up attention by such objects was predicted  a priori  to foster their encoding. Accordingly, we next explored the subsequent memory effects on invalid trials in greater detail. 
 
 
 Encoding of objects outside the focus of attention 
 Prior subsequent memory studies have investigated encoding correlates for stimuli appearing in expected locations. In most cases, the spatial contingency was limited to one location (central fixation); in others, this contingency extended to multiple locations (e.g.,  Cansino et al., 2002 ;  Sommer et al., 2005a ,  2005b ;  Uncapher et al., 2006 ;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2009 ). To our knowledge, no study has examined whether encoding mechanisms are similar or different for stimuli presented outside vs. inside the current focus of top-down attention. The present design—in which spatial expectations were probabilistically confirmed (validly cued objects) or violated (invalidly cued objects)—provided leverage on this question, though we note that this analysis is inherently underpowered due to the relatively lower frequency of invalidly cued objects (with an average of 62 trials contributing to subsequent memory analyses of invalid objects vs. 214 for valid objects). [Note that the limited number of invalid trials precluded subsequent source memory analyses from being conducted.] 
 To complement the preceding subsequent memory analysis for validly cued objects, we first identified positive and negative subsequent memory effects for invalidly cued objects [i.e., (HCH > M) invalid  and (M > HCH) invalid ]. A positive subsequent memory effect for invalidly cued objects was observed in right fusiform ( Fig. 5A ;  Table 4 ); the absence of other positive correlates of encoding at the standard statistical threshold (p < .001) likely is due to low power. A follow-up statistically independent analysis of % signal change for this cluster further revealed a modest, but significant, positive subsequent memory effect for validly cued objects (t 17  = 2.34; p < .02). Strikingly, the negative subsequent memory analysis revealed unexpected effects in dPPC, including in right IPS and SPL ( Fig. 5B ;  Table 4 ; similar effects were observed in left IPS/SPL when the statistical threshold was relaxed to p < .005). This was surprising given the finding from a recent meta-analysis that all prior negative subsequent memory effects in parietal cortex have been reported in vPPC, with none in dPPC ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). Even in the few studies that have directly manipulated goal-directed attention in a subsequent memory paradigm ( Kensinger et al., 2003 ;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2005 ,  2008 ,  2009 ), in none of these was dPPC activity reported to be associated with subsequent forgetting. 
 We next sought to identify regions where subsequent memory effects differed according to whether objects appeared in expected relative to unexpected locations. Voxel-level interaction analyses [i.e., (HCH > M) invalid  > (HCH > M) valid , and vice versa] revealed that, while no regions showed positive encoding-related activity that was greater for invalid than valid trials (even when the threshold of the interaction was dropped to p < .01), several regions—including the right IPS and SPL regions identified above—exhibited the opposite pattern (valid > invalid subsequent memory effects;  Fig. 5B ;  Table 5 ). Qualitative inspection of the signal in both regions ( Fig 5C ) revealed a striking pattern of findings in SPL: a positive subsequent memory pattern for valid trials, reversing to a negative subsequent memory pattern for invalid trials. This reversal of positive to negative effects for items appearing inside vs. outside the focus of attention suggests that SPL may serve to bias the processing of information appearing in the cued location, at the expense of information appearing in the non-cued location. In so doing, SPL-mediated spatial attention processes may facilitate and hinder encoding, respectively. Thus this reversal of positive to negative subsequent memory effects perhaps explains why dPPC negative subsequent memory effects have not been reported in prior studies, as none have systematically manipulated whether objects appeared inside vs. outside the current focus of attention. 
 To evaluate the hypothesis that the reversal from positive to negative subsequent memory effects in SPL reflects the engagement of top-down attention, we inclusively masked the interaction contrast with the cue-related parametric analysis described above (p < .001 and p < .05, respectively). This procedure confirmed that a subset of the SPL cluster (6 of 26 voxels) showed both effects. Similarly, when we performed the reverse masking procedure (inclusively masking the cued-related parametric analysis with the validity × subsequent memory interaction analysis), a large proportion of the cluster (81 of the 125 voxels) exhibited both effects. Thus, the deployment of top-down attention appears to interact with stimulus location to either promote memory (if the stimulus appears in the cued location) or hinder memory (if it appears in the non-cued location). 
 One interpretation of the foregoing findings is that the more top-down attention is deployed to the expected location (as indexed by top-down attention effects in mIPS/SPL), the greater the reflexive reorienting response when the item appears in the unexpected location (as indexed by bottom-up attention effects in TPJ); under such circumstances, the redeployment of attention may be ineffective in promoting stimulus encoding (as indexed by negative subsequent memory effects in TPJ and SPL during invalid trials). Consistent with the former hypothesis, prior data indicate that expectations about where stimuli will appear modulate the magnitude of TPJ reorienting responses. For instance,  Vossel and colleagues (2006)  reported TPJ modulation according to two different levels of cue validity (cues were either 90% or 60% predictive of the location of the upcoming target), with a robust TPJ validity effect (invalid>valid activity) being observed in the high expectancy condition, but little to no effect being observed in the low expectancy condition. 
 To test the hypothesis that the more top-down attention is deployed to the expected location, the greater the activity in TPJ when a stimulus appears in the unexpected (vs. expected) location, we examined whether a relationship existed between mIPS/SPL top-down attention effects and TPJ validity effects. To do so, we regressed the extracted % signal change for each effect in each subject, and found a significantly positive correlation across subjects (right TPJ: r = .52, p < .02; left TPJ: r = .45, p < .03). In other words, those subjects that showed the greatest CSI-varying cue-related activity in mIPS/SPL also showed the greatest difference in TPJ activity when items appeared in the unexpected vs. expected location. To identify whether this correlation between regions also had a direct consequence for memory formation (as described above), we next performed a multi-linear regression analysis on the miss rate of items studied in the unexpected location. This analysis revealed a trend towards higher correlations between mIPS/SPL and TPJ effects and higher miss rates for items in the unexpected location (F = 3.262, p < .07), suggesting that those subjects exhibiting the greatest reorienting response in TPJ to items in the unexpected location (presumably due to allocating more top-down attention to the expected location, as indexed by mIPS/SPL activity) also had more difficulty effectively encoding items in unexpected locations into memory (as indexed by higher miss rates for these items). 
 
 
 Functional connectivity of attention-sensitive regions during encoding 
 The foregoing univariate analyses revealed that regions exhibiting top-down and bottom-up attention effects were also differentially associated with encoding success and failure. To understand the dynamic nature of this relationship between attention and memory formation, we next sought to characterize how attention-related parietal regions interact with the rest of the brain during the formation of event memories. To this end, we implemented psycho-physiological interaction (PPI) analyses to identify neural structures whose connectivity with attention-related parietal regions changed in a memory-related fashion. It should be noted that all PPI analyses use independent factors to identify and interrogate the data; in other words, we used the factor of attention to identify our seed ROIs, and then searched for regions whose connectivity with these seeds differed according to subsequent memory. 
 
 Top-down attention seeds 
 First, we identified which regions throughout the brain that the mIPS/SPL region exhibiting top-down attention effects in our univariate analyses interacted with during the preparatory (cue) period. Specifically, the analysis identified regions where connectivity with mIPS/SPL differed during trials on which the object was subsequently remembered vs. forgotten (‘subsequent memory connectivity effects’). Several regions exhibited such effects, i.e., stronger connectivity with mIPS/SPL during preparatory periods wherein the subsequently presented object was later remembered relative to forgotten ( Fig. 6A ;  Table 6 ), including the left LO/fusiform region that showed a positive subsequent memory effect when processing validly cued objects ( Fig. 3 ). Thus, stronger preparatory coupling between mIPS/SPL regions that mediate top-down attention and LO/fusiform regions that represent visual object form appears to facilitate encoding of subsequently encountered objects. Consistent with this interpretation, an across-subject regression revealed that subjects who showed stronger subsequent memory connectivity between mIPS/SPL and LO/fusiform (during the cue period) tended to demonstrate superior recognition memory at test (i.e., exhibited higher Pr for high-confidence judgments) relative to subjects who showed weaker connectivity effects (r (15)  = .414, p < .05;  Fig. 6A ). 
 In addition to connectivity increases during the preparatory period that tracked later memory outcome, mIPS/SPL also exhibited connectivity decreases with other regions (i.e., showed weaker connectivity during trials where the object was later remembered vs. forgotten). These regions included a large cluster in right angular gyrus (AnG;  Fig. 6A  and  Table 6 ). AnG is regarded as a key parietal component in the default mode network, which is thought to be involved in internally oriented or self-related cognition (for review, see  Buckner et al., 2008 ,  Bressler and Menon, 2010 ). Thus, one interpretation of this greater mIPS/SPL-AnG connectivity during trials where objects are later forgotten vs. remembered is that directing attention internally prior to the external presentation of a stimulus may be detrimental to the encoding of that information. 
 
 
 Bottom-up attention seeds 
 We next investigated whether the bilateral TPJ regions exhibiting bottom-up attention effects (during the stimulus-processing period) showed connectivity that differed according to later memory. We therefore looked for subsequent memory connectivity effects using the right and left TPJ regions as seeds. We found no regions that showed positive subsequent memory connectivity effects with the right TPJ seed and only a few that did so with the left TPJ seed ( Table 6 ). By contrast, the TPJ seeds showed robust negative subsequent memory connectivity effects with a broad set of regions ( Table 6 ). Strikingly, the LO/fusiform region that showed positive connectivity effects with the mIPS/SPL seed showed the opposite pattern of connectivity with TPJ ( Fig. 6B ). The TPJ seeds also showed negative subsequent memory connectivity effects with bilateral regions encompassing parahippocampal and fusiform cortices ( Fig. 6B ); parahippocampal cortex has been associated with the spatial encoding of objects (reviewed in  Eichenbaum & Lipton, 2008 ). Thus, successful object encoding appears to be associated with reduced coupling between TPJ regions (implicated in reflexive orienting) and LO/fusiform regions (implicated in visual object representation), as well as with parahippocampal regions (implicated in the encoding of objects in space). 
 
 
 
 Eye movements 
 Eye movements were not monitored in the scanner, raising the possibility that the observed subsequent memory effects could, in theory, reflect differential BOLD responses associated with eye movement patterns (e.g., objects fixated might be associated with more effective encoding and thus a higher likelihood of being subsequently remembered). While the absence of eye-tracking data precludes a definitive assessment of this possibility, we believe it unlikely for a number of reasons. First, it is unlikely that extensive eye movements occurred during scanning, because participants were able to maintain accurate fixation during the behavioral training session, and an extensive literature suggests that participants tend not to saccade when trained to covertly orient ( Posner & Cohen, 1980 ). Second, if eye movements did occur, to the extent that differences in fixating the to-be-remembered object account for differences in subsequent memory outcome, one might predict that RTs during the object discrimination task would be faster for objects in fixation relative to those peripherally viewed. However, RTs were comparable during the encoding of later remembered and later forgotten stimuli (see Behavioral performance and  Table 1 ). Third, subsequent memory effects have been consistently observed in IPS across studies in which all stimuli fall at the center of the visual field (for review, see  Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). Under such conditions, subjects learn that the center of the visual field is task/goal-relevant and it is to their advantage to fixate this region to effectively perceive and make decisions about presented stimuli. Fourth, even under conditions where stimuli are presented rapidly in the center of the visual field, making eye movements suboptimal and therefore unlikely, subsequent memory effects are observed in IPS. For instance,  Otten and Rugg (2001a)  identified subsequent memory effects in IPS/SPL for items presented for 300 ms, with no RT differences between items that were later remembered vs. forgotten. 
 Finally, we note that studies that have systematically mapped the effects of eye movements or overt shifts of attention have consistently identified bilateral parietal activity, corresponding to saccades to contralateral visual hemifields (reviewed in  Silver & Kastner, 2009 ). Our critical analysis (overlap of top-down attention effects and subsequent memory effects) identified  unilateral  activity in left IPS ( Fig. 4 ). This lateralization of effects was not due to thresholding, as the effects remained left-lateralized when the threshold of the attention effects was reduced from p < .001 to a liberal value of .01. Given that the items were presented with equal probability to the two sides of the screen, it seems unlikely that fluctuations in the magnitude of the unilateral IPS effects reflect eye movements to both sides of the screen. We would note that this pattern of left-lateralized IPS top-down attention effects has also been found in prior Posner studies, where eye movements were monitored during scanning and found to be negligible (e.g.,  Doricchi et al., 2010 ). 
 
 
 Summary of fMRI findings 
 The univariate data demonstrated a relationship between neural correlates of attention and episodic encoding of objects: top-down attention effects and encoding success effects overlapped in dPPC (mIPS/SPL), and bottom-up attention effects and encoding failure effects overlapped in vPPC (TPJ). The deployment of top-down attention interacted with stimulus location to either promote memory (if the stimulus appeared in the cued location) or hinder memory (if it appeared in the non-cued location). The multivariate connectivity findings suggest that episodic encoding of objects is influenced by parietal interactions with regions representing visual object information (LO/fusiform), with a positive influence from top-down attention-related regions (mIPS/SPL) and a negative influence from bottom-up attention-related regions (TPJ). 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Based on prior observations of encoding success effects localized predominantly to dPPC and encoding failure effects localized exclusively to vPPC, we previously speculated that top-down and bottom-up attention may have distinct influences on event encoding ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). The present study directly tested this ‘dual-attention encoding hypothesis’ by manipulating top-down and bottom-up attention during an incidental encoding paradigm. Three main findings advance understanding of how attention regulates memory formation. First, for objects appearing in expected locations, dPPC regions engaged during the controlled allocation of visuospatial attention were positively correlated with episodic memory formation, whereas vPPC regions engaged during stimulus-driven attentional capture were negatively correlated with memory formation. Second, we provide novel evidence that the deployment of top-down attention is not always beneficial for encoding, as the dorsal attention network was also associated with encoding failure when objects appeared outside the focus of attention. Finally, connectivity analyses revealed that, during the formation of memories for objects, top-down and bottom-up attention appear to have opposite influences on perceptual cortical areas that subserve visual object representation, suggesting that one manner in which attention modulates memory is by altering the perceptual processing of to-be-encoded stimuli. 
 
 Top-down attention and episodic encoding 
 We propose that the observed overlap between neural correlates of top-down attention and encoding success in dPPC is indicative of the extent to which the deployment of top-down attention supports memory encoding. In other words, the overlap of effects may reflect engagement of top-down attention mechanisms during the study task, which in turn increases the probability that attended information will progress through the cortical hierarchy to converge on MTL mechanisms for encoding into memory. 
 Top-down attention can enhance the firing rate of neurons representing goal-relevant elements of an experience (e.g.,  Desimone & Duncan, 1995 ;  McAdams & Maunsell, 1999 ;  Treue & Martinez-Trujillo, 1999 ; reviewed in  Treue, 2001 ;  Boynton, 2005 ), and attention is thought to influence between-region communication by altering oscillatory coupling ( Saalmann et al., 2007 ;  Gregoriou et al., 2009a ), preparing regions to receive input at the most excitable phase of their oscillatory activity ( Gregoriou et al., 2009b ). The hippocampus, by virtue of its apical position in the neural processing hierarchy ( Felleman & Van Essen, 1991 ), is proposed to be the recipient of cortically processed event features (reviewed in  Eichenbaum et al., 2007 ), and cortical–hippocampal coupling is associated with successful episodic encoding (e.g.,  Fell et al., 2001 ). By facilitating the cortical representations of goal-relevant stimuli, top-down attention—partially subserved by an FEF-mIPS/SPL network—could foster the propagation of higher fidelity representations to the hippocampus, resulting in a higher probability of stimulus encoding into memory (‘biased input hypothesis’;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2009 ). 
 The present data lend support for this perspective. First, activation in mIPS/SPL exhibited a top-down attention effect during the preparatory period, and predicted later memory success during the object processing period. Second, activity in this mIPS/SPL region predicted response profiles in object-sensitive regions of ventral temporo-occipital cortex, namely LO and fusiform. Importantly, this functional coupling was stronger during preparatory periods of trials for which the subsequently presented object was later remembered vs. later forgotten, and the strength of this mIPS/SPL–LO/fusiform coupling difference correlated with across-subject differences in later memory performance. Finally, activity in bilateral fusiform, LO, and hippocampus was greater during the viewing of objects that would be later remembered vs. forgotten. Collectively, these findings are consistent with a role of top-down attention in promoting encoding by (a) preparing object representation processes in LO/fusiform for incoming information, with a stronger drive promoting better encoding, and (b) fostering effective propagation of these putatively higher-fidelity visual representations to the hippocampus. Future studies using intracranial electrocorticography (e.g.,  Jacobs & Kahana, 2010 ), with independent electrodes in LO/fusiform and in hippocampus, will provide a means to test the role of attention-mediated oscillatory coupling in visual object encoding into episodic memory. 
 
 
 Bottom-up attention and episodic encoding 
 The dual-attention encoding hypothesis posits that memory failure can result when attention is captured by event information that is not the target of a subsequent retrieval attempt. That is, if attention is shifted away from information that will be the target of subsequent retrieval, encoding will be hindered for this information. Here, the overlap between bottom-up attention and negative subsequent memory effects for validly cued objects in bilateral TPJ lends support for the proposal that attention capture can hinder event encoding. Factors that engage the ventral attention network are debated, but at least include an unexpected or salience dimension (e.g.,  Posner & Cohen, 1984 ;  Jonides & Yantis, 1988 ). One possibility is that attention was captured by non-experimental variables (e.g., unexpected change in scanner noise, urge to move, or internally-oriented cognition) or stimulus-related variables (e.g., oddly shaped or shaded object), consistent with data indicating that TPJ is engaged by not only spatial but also nonspatial (feature-based) information (e.g.,  Linden et al., 1999 ;  Marois et al., 2000 ;  Braver et al., 2001 ;  Kiehl et al., 2001 ;  Serences et al., 2005 ). Thus, while future studies are needed to gain leverage on the nature of the attention-capturing information leading to subsequent forgetting of target objects, the present data provide evidence that a reorienting mechanism in TPJ is directly associated with later forgetting. 
 Intuitively, it is easy to understand that attentional capture of extra-stimulus information would draw processing resources from the target stimulus, leading to poorer memory for the stimulus. What is less clear is what happens when the attention-capturing information is stimulus-related. Recent studies reveal an equivocal pattern: while items that are distinctive in some way (and therefore attention-capturing) often enjoy a mnemonic advantage ( von Restorff, 1933 ), this is not always the case.  Strange and colleagues (2000)  reported an interaction of the ‘von Restorff effect’ and depth of processing. Perceptually distinctive items were better remembered only if studied under ‘shallow’ encoding conditions (where superficial aspects of the items were emphasized) (see also  Fabiani et al., 1990 ), whereas emotionally distinctive items were always remembered better. Importantly, semantically distinctive items were remembered worse when attention was paid to that dimension during study.  Summerfield and Mangels (2006)  additionally showed that items appearing at unpredictable times (distinctive in the temporal dimension) were more poorly remembered than predictable items. 
 Here we examined the consequences on memory when items appeared in an unexpected location. Like the semantic and temporal dimensions, items that appeared in an unexpected location suffered a mnemonic disadvantage. As in previous studies, this may be due to an interaction between our encoding task and the attention-capturing dimension. If attention to the unexpected spatial location occurred at the expense of some other memory-promoting dimension, such as semantic elaboration, memory for the objects would suffer. Another explanatory factor may be the degree to which attention-capturing information is used as a retrieval cue. To the degree that spatial information is a poor retrieval cue, attention being captured by the spatial dimension at study may hinder later memory performance. 
 The present findings also advance understanding of how memories are formed for objects appearing outside the current focus of attention (i.e., invalidly cued objects). Our data revealed that, rather than recruiting a new set of mechanisms, the mechanisms associated with encoding objects outside attentional focus—in fusiform cortex—are a subset of those engaged when objects are within attentional focus. Strikingly, presenting objects outside attentional focus also revealed a novel negative subsequent memory effect in the dorsal attention network (SPL). To date, activation in this top-down network has been exclusively associated with subsequent memory success, rather than failure ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ). This negative effect reversed to a positive effect when objects appeared in the expected location, suggesting that top-down biasing of attention interacts with expectation to either promote or hinder memory formation. Thus, previous findings that the top-down attention network exclusively promotes memory encoding may be due to a lack of expectation violations in prior studies. Collectively, the present findings highlight the role of perceptual cortices in visual object encoding, and the modulatory influence that attention has on activity in these regions. 
 
 
 
 Summary 
 The present data provide strong evidence that top-down and bottom-up attention mechanisms in parietal cortex influence episodic encoding, with mIPS/SPL-mediated top-down attention generally serving to promote memory formation, and TPJ-mediated bottom-up attention serving to hinder memory formation (at least within the present experimental context). Here we offer a mechanistic explanation for how to reconcile effects of attention that may appear inconsistent across the literature ( Uncapher & Wagner, 2009 ); namely, that the presence of positive or negative subsequent memory effects in dorsal or ventral PPC can be predicted based on whether one exerts experimental control over the focus of attention. These findings of direct overlap between attention and episodic encoding appear to stand in contrast to the pattern observed during episodic retrieval, where the overlap between parietal attention and memory effects is a topic of current debate ( Hutchinson et al., 2009 ;  Uncapher et al., 2010 ; c.f.,  Cabeza et al., 2008 ;  Ciaramelli et al., 2008 ). As such, the present data highlight the importance of attention during event processing for later remembering (e.g.  Craik et al., 1996 ). 
 
 
 
 Supported by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health (5R01–MH080309, F32–MH084475). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Nonlinear spatial normalization using basis functions 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 7 
 254 
 266 
 10408769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Unified segmentation 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 839 
 851 
 15955494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baker 
 JT 
 
 
 Sanders 
 AL 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 L 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2001 
 Neural correlates of verbal memory encoding during semantic and structural processing tasks 
 Neuroreport 
 12 
 1251 
 1256 
 11338201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 2008 
 Top-down and bottom-up mechanisms in biasing competition in the human brain 
 Vis Res 
 49 
 1154 
 1165 
 18694779 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blumenfeld 
 RS 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2006 
 Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex promotes long-term memory formation through its role in working memory organization 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 916 
 925 
 16421311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boynton 
 GM 
 
 
 2005 
 Attention and visual perception 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 15 
 465 
 469 
 16023853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Molfese 
 DL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 2001 
 Anterior cingulate cortex and response conflict: effects of frequency, inhibition and errors 
 Cereb Cortex 
 11 
 825 
 836 
 11532888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bressler 
 SL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Large-scale brain networks in cognition: emerging methods and principles 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 14 
 277 
 290 
 20493761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Z 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 1998 
 Making memories: brain activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered 
 Science 
 281 
 1185 
 1187 
 9712581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2008 
 The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burrows 
 BE 
 
 
 Moore 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 Influence and limitations of popout in the selection of salient visual stimuli by area V4 neurons 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 15169 
 15177 
 19955369 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 The parietal cortex and episodic memory: an attentional account 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 613 
 625 
 18641668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cansino 
 S 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain activity underlying encoding and retrieval of source memory 
 Cereb Cortex 
 12 
 1048 
 1056 
 12217968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 2007 
 Evidence for a specific role of the anterior hippocampal region in successful associative encoding 
 Hippocampus 
 17 
 1071 
 1080 
 17604351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Top-down and bottom-up attention to memory: A hypothesis (AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in memory retrieval 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 1828 
 1851 
 18471837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2003 
 Assembling and encoding word representations: fMRI subsequent memory effects implicate a role for phonological control 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 304 
 317 
 12457756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural systems for visual orienting and their relationships to spatial working memory 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 14 
 508 
 523 
 11970810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2000 
 Voluntary orienting is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 292 
 297 
 10700263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Dobmeyer 
 S 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 1990 
 Attentional modulation of neural processing of shape, color, and velocity in humans 
 Science 
 248 
 1556 
 1559 
 2360050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 1993 
 A PET study of visuospatial attention 
 J Neurosci 
 13 
 1202 
 1226 
 8441008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Govoni 
 R 
 
 
 Naveh-Benjamin 
 M 
 
 
 Anderson 
 ND 
 
 
 1996 
 The effects of divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 125 
 159 
 180 
 8683192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Lockhart 
 RS 
 
 
 1972 
 Levels of processing: A framework for memory research 
 J Verbal Learn and Verbal Behavior 
 11 
 671 
 684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 When less means more: deactivations during encoding that predict subsequent memory 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 921 
 927 
 15528092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 2006 
 Item, context and relational episodic encoding in humans 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 16 
 693 
 700 
 17097284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2001 
 When keeping in mind supports later bringing to mind: neural markers of phonological rehearsal predict subsequent remembering 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 13 
 1059 
 1070 
 11784444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Fockert 
 J 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 Lavie 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural correlates of attentional capture in visual search 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 16 
 751 
 759 
 15200703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 1995 
 Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 18 
 193 
 222 
 7605061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doricchi 
 F 
 
 
 Macci 
 E 
 
 
 Silvetti 
 M 
 
 
 Macaluso 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural correlates of the spatial and expectancy components of endogenous and stimulus-driven orienting of attention in the Posner task 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 1574 
 1585 
 19846472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downar 
 J 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 Mikulis 
 DJ 
 
 
 Davis 
 KD 
 
 
 2001 
 The effect of task relevance on the cortical response to changes in visual and auditory stimuli: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 1256 
 1267 
 11707082 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Lipton 
 PA 
 
 
 2008 
 Towards a functional organization of the medial temporal lobe memory system: role of the parahippocampal and medial entorhinal cortical areas 
 Hippocampus 
 18 
 1314 
 1324 
 19021265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 30 
 123 
 52 
 17417939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fabiani 
 M 
 
 
 Karis 
 D 
 
 
 Donchin 
 E 
 
 
 1990 
 Effects of mnemonic strategy manipulation in a Von Restorff paradigm 
 Electroenceph Clin Neurophys 
 75 
 22 
 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fell 
 J 
 
 
 Klaver 
 P 
 
 
 Lehnertz 
 K 
 
 
 Grunwald 
 T 
 
 
 Schaller 
 C 
 
 
 Elger 
 CE 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2001 
 Human memory formation is accompanied by rhinal-hippocampal coupling and decoupling 
 Nat Neurosci 
 4 
 1259 
 1264 
 11694886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Felleman 
 D 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 D 
 
 
 1991 
 Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1 
 1 
 47 
 1822724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fisher 
 R 
 
 
 1950 
 Statistical methods for research workers 
 London 
 Oliver and Boyd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Holmes 
 A 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 1998 
 Event-related fMRI: characterizing differential responses 
 Neuroimage 
 7 
 30 
 40 
 9500830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Glaser 
 DE 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 S 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Classical and Bayesian inference in neuroimaging: applications 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 484 
 512 
 12030833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gauthier 
 I 
 
 
 Tarr 
 MJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Becoming a “Greeble” expert: exploring mechanisms for face recognition 
 Vis Res 
 37 
 1673 
 1682 
 9231232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giessing 
 C 
 
 
 Thiel 
 CM 
 
 
 Rösler 
 F 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2006 
 The modulatory effects of nicotine on parietal cortex activity in a cued target detection task depend on cue reliability 
 Neuroscience 
 137 
 853 
 864 
 16309846 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gonsalves 
 B 
 
 
 Reber 
 PJ 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural evidence that vivid imagining can lead to false remembering 
 Psychol Sci 
 15 
 655 
 660 
 15447635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gregoriou 
 GG 
 
 
 Gotts 
 SJ 
 
 
 Zhou 
 H 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 2009a 
 High-frequency, long-range coupling between prefrontal and visual cortex during attention 
 Science 
 324 
 1207 
 1210 
 19478185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gregoriou 
 GG 
 
 
 Gotts 
 SJ 
 
 
 Zhou 
 H 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 2009b 
 Long-range neural coupling through synchronization with attention 
 Prog Brain Res 
 176 
 35 
 45 
 19733748 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 The human visual cortex 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 27 
 649 
 677 
 15217346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Kourtzi 
 Z 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2001 
 The lateral occipital complex and its role in object recognition 
 Vis Res 
 41 
 1409 
 1422 
 11322983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 S 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Penny 
 W 
 
 
 2007 
 Efficient experimental design for fMRI 
 Statistical parametric mapping: The analysis of brain images 
 193 
 210 
 Elsevier 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Recollection and familiarity in recognition memory: an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 J Neurosci 
 19 
 3962 
 3972 
 10234026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 2000 
 The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 284 
 291 
 10700262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutchinson 
 JB 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2009 
 Posterior parietal cortex and episodic retrieval: convergent and divergent effects of attention and memory 
 Learn Mem 
 16 
 343 
 356 
 19470649 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ikkai 
 A 
 
 
 Curtis 
 CE 
 
 
 2008 
 Cortical activity time locked to the shift and maintenance of spatial attention 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1384 
 1394 
 17921456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indovina 
 I 
 
 
 Macaluso 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociation of stimulus relevance and saliency factors during shifts of visuospatial attention 
 Cereb Cortex 
 17 
 1701 
 1711 
 17003078 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 J 
 
 
 Kahana 
 MJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Direct brain recordings fuel advances in cognitive electrophysiology 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 14 
 162 
 171 
 20189441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 1988 
 Uniqueness of abrupt visual onset in capturing attention 
 Percep & Psychophysics 
 43 
 346 
 354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2000 
 Mechanisms of visual attention in the human cortex 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 23 
 315 
 341 
 10845067 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Pinsk 
 MA 
 
 
 De Weerd 
 P 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 1999 
 Increased activity in human visual cortex during directed attention in the absence of visual stimulation 
 Neuron 
 22 
 751 
 761 
 10230795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Clarke 
 RJ 
 
 
 Corkin 
 S 
 
 
 2003 
 What neural correlates underlie successful encoding and retrieval? A functional magnetic resonance imaging study using a divided attention paradigm 
 J Neurosci 
 23 
 2407 
 2415 
 12657700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 KA 
 
 
 Laurens 
 KR 
 
 
 Duty 
 TL 
 
 
 Forster 
 BB 
 
 
 Liddle 
 PF 
 
 
 2001 
 Neural sources involved in auditory target detection and novelty processing: an event-related fMRI study 
 Psychophysiology 
 38 
 133 
 142 
 11321614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Abrams 
 RA 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 An event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study of voluntary and stimulus-driven orienting of attention 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 4593 
 4604 
 15872107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirchhoff 
 BA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Stern 
 CE 
 
 
 2000 
 Prefrontal-temporal circuitry for episodic encoding and subsequent memory 
 J Neurosci 
 20 
 6173 
 6180 
 10934267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Sweeney 
 JA 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 2002 
 Combining brains: a survey of methods for statistical pooling of information 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 538 
 550 
 12030836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linden 
 DE 
 
 
 Prvulovic 
 D 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 Völlinger 
 M 
 
 
 Zanella 
 FE 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 1999 
 The functional neuroanatomy of target detection: an fMRI study of visual and auditory oddball tasks 
 Cereb Cortex 
 9 
 815 
 823 
 10601000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Reppas 
 JB 
 
 
 Benson 
 RR 
 
 
 Kwong 
 KK 
 
 
 Jiang 
 H 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 WA 
 
 
 Ledden 
 PJ 
 
 
 Brady 
 TJ 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Tootell 
 RB 
 
 
 1995 
 Object-related activity revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging in human occipital cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 92 
 8135 
 8139 
 7667258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Leung 
 HC 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 2000 
 A stimulus-driven approach to object identity and location processing in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 25 
 717 
 728 
 10774738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McAdams 
 CJ 
 
 
 Maunsell 
 JH 
 
 
 1999 
 Effects of attention on orientation-tuning functions of single neurons in macaque cortical area V4 
 J Neurosci 
 19 
 431 
 441 
 9870971 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Umilta 
 C 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 1990 
 Modularity and neuropsychology: Modules and central processes in attention and memory 
 Modular deficits in Alzheimer’s disease 
 1 
 59 
 Cambridge 
 MIT Press/Bradford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Phillips 
 JS 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2010 
 A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 67 
 156 
 170 
 20624599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 Sebestyen 
 GN 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 1997 
 Functional localization of the system for visuospatial attention using positron emission tomography 
 Brain 
 120 
 515 
 533 
 9126062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noudoost 
 B 
 
 
 Chang 
 MH 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 NA 
 
 
 Moore 
 T 
 
 
 2010 
 Top-down control of visual attention 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 20 
 183 
 190 
 20303256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Fragments of a larger whole: retrieval cues constrain observed neural correlates of memory encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 17 
 2030 
 2038 
 17088375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Quale 
 AH 
 
 
 Akram 
 S 
 
 
 Ditewig 
 TA 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain activity before an event predicts later recollection 
 Nature Neurosci 
 9 
 489 
 491 
 16501566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2001a 
 Task-dependency of the neural correlates of episodic encoding as measured by fMRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 11 
 1150 
 1160 
 11709486 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2001b 
 When more means less: neural activity related to unsuccessful memory encoding 
 Curr Biol 
 11 
 1528 
 1530 
 11591321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2002 
 Observing the transformation of experience into memory 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 6 
 93 
 102 
 15866193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2008 
 The relationship between study processing and the effects of cue congruency at retrieval: fMRI support for transfer appropriate processing 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 868 
 875 
 17652467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Cohen 
 Y 
 
 
 
 
 Stelmach 
 GE 
 
 
 Requin 
 J 
 
 
 1980 
 Attention and the control of movements 
 Tutorials in motor behavior 
 243 
 258 
 New York 
 North-Holland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Cohen 
 Y 
 
 
 
 
 Bouma 
 H 
 
 
 Bowhuis 
 D 
 
 
 1984 
 Components of visual orienting 
 Attention and performance X 
 531 
 556 
 Hillsdale 
 Erlbaum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 2004 
 Item- and task-level processes in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: positive and negative correlates of encoding 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 1472 
 1483 
 15050572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Henson 
 RA 
 
 
 2002 
 The neural basis of episodic memory: evidence from functional neuroimaging 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 357 
 1097 
 1110 
 12217177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saalmann 
 YB 
 
 
 Pigarev 
 IN 
 
 
 Vidyasagar 
 TR 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural mechanisms of visual attention: how top-down feedback highlights relevant locations 
 Science 
 316 
 1612 
 1615 
 17569863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Shomstein 
 S 
 
 
 Leber 
 AB 
 
 
 Golay 
 X 
 
 
 Egeth 
 HE 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2005 
 Coordination of voluntary and stimulus-driven attentional control in human cortex 
 Psychol Sci 
 16 
 114 
 122 
 15686577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sestieri 
 C 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Attention to memory and the environment: functional specialization and dynamic competition in human posterior parietal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 8445 
 8456 
 20573892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Franke 
 D 
 
 
 Pope 
 DL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Interaction of stimulus-driven reorienting and expectation in ventral and dorsal frontoparietal and Basal Ganglia-cortical networks 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 4392 
 4407 
 19357267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silver 
 MA 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Topographic maps in human frontal and parietal cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 13 
 488 
 495 
 19758835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sommer 
 T 
 
 
 Rose 
 M 
 
 
 Gläscher 
 J 
 
 
 Wolbers 
 T 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 2005a 
 Dissociable contributions within the medial temporal lobe to encoding of object-location associations 
 Learn Mem 
 12 
 343 
 351 
 15897257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sommer 
 T 
 
 
 Rose 
 M 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 2005b 
 Contributions of occipital parietal and parahippocampal cortex to encoding of object-location associations 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 732 
 743 
 15721186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Davidson 
 PS 
 
 
 Kim 
 AS 
 
 
 Han 
 H 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2009 
 Event-related fMRI studies of episodic encoding and retrieval: meta-analyses using activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 1765 
 1779 
 19428409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strange 
 BA 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2000 
 Brain mechanisms for detecting perceptual semantic and emotional deviance 
 Neuroimage 
 12 
 425 
 433 
 10988036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 C 
 
 
 Mangels 
 JA 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociable neural mechanisms for encoding predictable and unpredictable events 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 18 
 1120 
 1132 
 16839286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Jack 
 AJ 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Asymmetry of anticipatory activity in visual cortex predicts the locus of attention and perception 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 14424 
 14433 
 18160650 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szekely 
 A 
 
 
 Jacobsen 
 T 
 
 
 D’Amico 
 S 
 
 
 Devescovi 
 A 
 
 
 Andonova 
 E 
 
 
 Herron 
 D 
 
 
 Lu 
 CC 
 
 
 Pechmann 
 T 
 
 
 Pleh 
 C 
 
 
 Wicha 
 N 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 K 
 
 
 Gerdjikova 
 I 
 
 
 Gutierrez 
 G 
 
 
 Hung 
 D 
 
 
 Hsu 
 J 
 
 
 Iyer 
 G 
 
 
 Kohnert 
 K 
 
 
 Mehotcheva 
 T 
 
 
 Orozco-Figueroa 
 A 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 A 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 O 
 
 
 Arevalo 
 A 
 
 
 Vargha 
 A 
 
 
 Butler 
 AC 
 
 
 Buffington 
 R 
 
 
 Bates 
 E 
 
 
 2004 
 A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic studies 
 J Mem Lang 
 51 
 247 
 250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treue 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Neural correlates of attention in primate visual cortex 
 Trends Neurosci 
 24 
 295 
 300 
 11311383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treue 
 S 
 
 
 Martínez Trujillo 
 JC 
 
 
 1999 
 Feature-based attention influences motion processing gain in macaque visual cortex 
 Nature 
 399 
 575 
 579 
 10376597 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turk-Browne 
 NB 
 
 
 Yi 
 D-J 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 2006 
 Linking implicit and explicit memory: common encoding factors and shared representations 
 Neuron 
 49 
 917 
 927 
 16543138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2005 
 Effects of divided attention on fMRI correlates of memory encoding 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 17 
 1923 
 1935 
 16356329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2008 
 Fractionation of the component processes underlying successful episodic encoding: a combined fMRI and divided-attention study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 20 
 240 
 254 
 18275332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2009 
 Selecting for memory? The influence of selective attention on the mnemonic binding of contextual information 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 8270 
 8279 
 19553466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2009 
 Posterior parietal cortex and episodic encoding: insights from fMRI subsequent memory effects and dual-attention theory 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 91 
 139 
 154 
 19028591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Hutchinson 
 JB 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2010 
 A roadmap to brain mapping: Toward a functional map of human parietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 67 
 5 
 8 
 20624586 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2006 
 Episodic encoding is more than the sum of its parts: an fMRI investigation of multifeatural contextual encoding 
 Neuron 
 52 
 547 
 556 
 17088219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Restorff 
 H 
 
 
 1933 
 Über die wirkung von bereichsbildungen im spurenfeld 
 Psychol Res 
 18 
 299 
 342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vossel 
 S 
 
 
 Thiel 
 CM 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2006 
 Cue validity modulates the neural correlates of covert endogenous orienting of attention in parietal and frontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 32 
 1257 
 1264 
 16846742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 2001 
 Cognitive neuroscience: forgetting of things past 
 Curr Biol 
 11 
 R964 
 967 
 11728323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 1999 
 When encoding yields remembering: insights from event-related neuroimaging 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 354 
 1307 
 1324 
 10466153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 1998 
 Building memories: Remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity 
 Science 
 281 
 1188 
 1191 
 9712582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Marrett 
 S 
 
 
 Neelin 
 P 
 
 
 Vandal 
 AC 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 1996 
 A unified statistical approach for determining significant signals in images of cerebral activation 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 4 
 58 
 73 
 20408186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental design.  Left ,  During the study phase, subjects were scanned while incidentally encoding a series of visually presented objects and greebles in a variant of the Posner cueing paradigm. Items were preceded by an arrow cue, pointing to a box on the left or right side of the screen. Subjects were to covertly shift attention to the cued box, in anticipation of an upcoming item. Items appeared after a variable duration (see Experimental Procedures), in either the cued location (‘validly cued trial’) or the uncued location (‘invalidly cued trial’). Subjects made a button press to indicate they had identified a real object or a greeble, regardless of whether the item appeared in the validly or invalidly cued location.  Right , Following the study phase, subjects were administered a surprise memory test for the real objects. Subjects made one of four memory responses indicating whether they recognized the item from the previous study phase (‘old’) or whether the object was unstudied (‘new), as well as their level of confidence in their decision (‘sure’ or ‘unsure’). If an ‘old’ response was given, subjects were cued to make a source judgment for the location in which the item was studied (‘left’ or ‘right’). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Top-down and bottom-up attention effects.  Top , Regions that exhibit cue-related activity that was modulated according to the duration over which attention was to be maintained (green; ‘top-down attention effects’). Regions that exhibit greater activity in response to objects that appeared in an unexpected vs. expected location (red; ‘bottom-up attention effects’). Regional overlap of the two effects appears in yellow. Effects are thresholded at p < .001 on a standardized brain (PALS-B12 atlas using Caret5:  http://brainvis.wustl.edu/wiki/index.php/Caret:About ).  Bottom , The observed hemodynamic responses are plotted for relevant clusters (data pooled across activated voxels falling within a 6-mm radius sphere centered on the peak voxel in the cluster; note that top-down attention effects were elicited by cues and bottom-up attention effects by objects). L IPS/SPL, left intraparietal sulcus/superior parietal lobule; L TPJ, left temporoparietal junction; R TPJ, right temporoparietal junction. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Subsequent memory effects.  Left , Greater activity in response to validly cued objects that were later confidently remembered relative to forgotten (‘Positive’ subsequent memory effects; warm colors) was observed in bilateral hippocampus, left VLPFC, right pIPS, and bilateral LO/Fusiform. By contrast, right TPJ exhibited greater activity in response to validly cued objects that were later forgotten relative to confidently remembered (‘Negative’ subsequent memory effects; cool colors). Hippocampal effects are displayed on mean across-subject anatomical images; all other effects are surface-rendered on a standardized brain. Display thresholds are p < .001.  Right , Observed hemodynamic responses to objects are plotted for relevant clusters (data pooled across all voxels in the cluster). L Hip, left hippocampus; R Hip, right hippocampus; R pIPS, right posterior intraparietal sulcus; R TPJ, right temporoparietal junction; R LO/Fus, right lateral occipital and fusiform cortex; L VLPFC, left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; L LO/Fus, left lateral occipital and fusiform cortex; HCH, high confidence hits; M, misses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Overlap of attention and encoding effects.  Top , Regions exhibiting both top-down attention and positive subsequent memory effects (SME) for validly cued objects are displayed in green, and those showing both bottom-up attention and negative subsequent memory effects are displayed in blue. Data displayed at conjoint thresholds of p < .0005.  Bottom , Observed hemodynamic responses are plotted for PPC clusters, according to subsequent memory, and validity condition at study (data pooled across all voxels in each cluster). L mIPS/SPL, left medial intraparietal sulcus/superior parietal lobule; L TPJ, left temporoparietal junction; R TPJ, right temporoparietal junction; SME, subsequent memory effect; HCH valid, validly cued high confidence hits; M valid, validly cued misses; HCH invalid, invalidly cued high confidence hits; M invalid, invalidly cued misses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Subsequent memory effects for items outside the current focus of attention (invalid trials).  A , A positive subsequent memory effect for invalidly cued items was observed in right fusiform.  B , Negative subsequent memory effects for invalidly cued items (blue) were observed in ventral parietal regions, but also—strikingly—in dorsal parietal regions (see text). Regions that demonstrated a greater subsequent memory effect for objects appearing inside vs. outside the focus of attention (valid vs. invalid) are displayed in red. A subset of regions demonstrating this interaction also showed a negative subsequent memory effect for invalid items: right IPS and SPL (purple).  C , To illustrate the nature of the interaction in R IPS and SPL, subsequent memory effects for valid and invalid conditions are plotted for each region (cluster-wise mean parameter estimates and standard errors shown for clusters identified from the interaction contrast). All display thresholds are p < .001. R Fus, right fusiform cortex, R IPS, right intraparietal sulcus, R SPL, right superior parietal lobule, L SPL, left superior parietal lobule, SME, subsequent memory effect. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Parietal attention seeds show connectivity that differs according to encoding success or failure.  A , Regions whose connectivity with L mIPS/SPL (green sphere, peak mIPS/SPL coordinates of the top-down attention contrast illustrated in  Fig 2 ) was stronger during preparatory periods of trials resulting in objects being remembered vs. forgotten (‘positive subsequent connectivity effects’; warm colors). Regions showing the opposite effect, or stronger connectivity with L mIPS/SPL during preparatory periods leading to forgotten vs. remembered objects (‘negative subsequent connectivity effects’) are displayed in cool colors [Note the small cluster in dorsal AnG (coordinates 39, -57, 33) is in fact spatially contiguous with the large ventral AnG cluster that has been surface-rendered dorsally (see  Table 6  for details)]. Scatter plot illustrates that individual differences in the strength of the positive subsequent connectivity effect in LO/Fus during encoding correlates with across-subject differences in later memory performance, such that the stronger the mIPS/SPL—LO/Fus connectivity, the superior the later memory performance.  B , Regions whose connectivity with L or R TPJ (red spheres, peak TPJ coordinates from the bottom-up attention contrast illustrated in  Fig 2 ) was stronger during the presentation of objects that were later remembered vs. forgotten, and vice versa (positive and negative subsequent connectivity effects). Coloring scheme same as used in  A . 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Mean median response times (and standard errors; SE) in ms to critical study items (objects that were later tested for memory) as a function of study cue-to-stimulus interval (CSI) and subsequent memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 According to study CSI 
 
 
 According to later memory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1s CSI 
 3s CSI 
 5s CSI 
 Across CSI 
 HCH 
 LCH 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Validly cued items 
 734 (43) 
 714 (41) 
 708 (42) 
 719 (42) 
 715 (40) 
 713 (44) 
 721 (42) 
 
 
 Invalidly cued items 
 881 (49) 
 851 (47) 
 842 (40) 
 859 (46) 
 873 (55) 
 830 (52) 
 864 (45) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean recognition and source memory performance (±SE). Source memory conditionalized on recognition memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Recognition Memory (proportion of old or new items) 
 
 
 Source Memory (proportion correct) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 High confidence 
 Low confidence 
 High confidence 
 Low confidence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hits 
 False Alarms 
 Hits 
 False Alarms 
 
 
 
 
 Validly cued items 
 .37 (.04) 
 .04 (.01) 
 .19 (.02) 
 .13 (.02) 
 .72 (.04) 
 .52 (.03) 
 
 
 Invalidly cued items 
 .26 (.04) 
 .21 (.02) 
 .69 (.04) 
 .50 (.03) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Parietal and frontal regions exhibiting top-down and bottom-up attention effects (given the large spatial extent of the clusters, peaks and subpeaks listed; coordinates with associated cluster size denote cluster peak, and subpeaks are contiguous local maxima >8mm apart). Clusters that also exhibit subsequent memory effects (i.e., survived the conjunction analysis between attention and memory contrasts) are denoted in last column (peak coordinates identified from the conjunction analysis listed). 
 
 
 
 
 
 ~BA 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Peak Z  (# voxels) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Top-down attention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ∩ Positive SME 
 
 
 R FEF 
 6/4 
 39 
 −3 
 63 
 4.04 (172) 
 39 
 −3 
 63 
 
 
  R FEF 
 4/6 
 27 
 −9 
 57 
 3.35 
 
 
 
 
 
  R FEF 
 4 
 30 
 −3 
 66 
 3.45 
 30 
 −3 
 66 
 
 
  R Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 39 
 −6 
 51 
 4.03 
 45 
 0 
 57 
 
 
  R Supplementary/Cingulate Eye Fields (SEF/CEF) 
 6 
 48 
 0 
 48 
 4.02 
 48 
 0 
 48 
 
 
 L Frontal Eye Field (FEF) 
 6/4 
 −33 
 −6 
 60 
 5.17 (480) 
 −30 
 −3 
 45 
 
 
  L FEF 
 4 
 −15 
 −9 
 63 
 3.37 
 
 
 
 
 
  L Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 −45 
 −6 
 45 
 4.87 
 −45 
 −6 
 45 
 
 
  L Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 −36 
 −18 
 51 
 3.71 
 
 
 
 
 
  L SEF/CEF 
 6 
 −6 
 6 
 54 
 4.28 
 −3 
 3 
 57 
 
 
 L medial Intra-Parietal Sulcus (mIPS)/Superior Parietal Lobule (SPL) 
 7 
 −30 
 −48 
 57 
 3.89 (125) 
 
 
 
 
 
  L mIPS/SPL 
 7 
 −27 
 −60 
 57 
 3.75 
 −27 
 −57 
 51 
 
 
  L mIPS 
 7 
 −30 
 −42 
 48 
 3.74 
 
 
 
 
 
  L mIPS 
 7 
 −36 
 −30 
 39 
 3.20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bottom-up attention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ∩ Negative SME 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Sulcus (IFS) 
 46 
 −30 
 30 
 24 
 3.57 (37) 
 
 
 
 
 
  L IFS 
 46 
 −36 
 24 
 36 
 3.47 
 
 
 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG) 
 46 
 −42 
 30 
 30 
 3.48 
 
 
 
 
 
 R IFG 
 44 
 54 
 21 
 27 
 3.28 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 R Anterior Insula 
 16 
 48 
 21 
 −3 
 3.97 (82) 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Anterior Insula 
 16 
 42 
 27 
 −6 
 3.92 
 
 
 
 
 
 L Anterior Insula 
 16 
 −36 
 18 
 −3 
 3.57 (13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 L SEF 
 6/8 
 −9 
 9 
 54 
 3.29 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 R FEF 
 6 
 45 
 3 
 48 
 4.79 (306) 
 
 
 
 
 
  R FEF 
 6 
 30 
 3 
 54 
 4.23 
 
 
 
 
 
  R SEF 
 6 
 12 
 9 
 60 
 4.37 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Medial Frontal Gyrus (MFG) 
 44/6 
 36 
 9 
 33 
 3.55 
 
 
 
 
 
 L FEF 
 6 
 −24 
 0 
 54 
 4.70 (96) 
 
 
 
 
 
 R TPJ 
 40 
 63 
 −36 
 36 
 4.93 (597) 
 57 
 −39 
 36 
 
 
  R TPJ 
 40 
 54 
 −39 
 30 
 4.72 
 51 
 −39 
 33 
 
 
  R TPJ 
 40 
 63 
 −42 
 24 
 4.72 
 60 
 −45 
 30 
 
 
  R TPJ 
 40 
 60 
 −51 
 15 
 4.45 
 60 
 −54 
 24 
 
 
  R lateral IPS 
 7 
 45 
 −45 
 51 
 3.68 
 48 
 −42 
 51 
 
 
  R mIPS 
 7 
 36 
 −51 
 42 
 4.25 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate 
 7/31 
 18 
 −54 
 42 
 3.55 
 
 
 
 
 
 L lateral IPS 
 7 
 −30 
 −45 
 39 
 4.98 (590) 
 
 
 
 
 
  L lateral IPS 
 7 
 −27 
 −69 
 36 
 4.49 
 
 
 
 
 
  L TPJ 
 40 
 −48 
 −51 
 39 
 4.23 
 −48 
 −51 
 39 
 
 
  L TPJ 
 40 
 −57 
 −57 
 24 
 3.63 
 −57 
 −57 
 24 
 
 
  L Precuneus 
 7 
 −12 
 −57 
 51 
 4.36 
 −9 
 −60 
 45 
 
 
 R Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate 
 7/31 
 15 
 −66 
 54 
 3.84 (82) 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate 
 7/31 
 9 
 −63 
 42 
 3.62 
 9 
 −63 
 42 
 
 
  R Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate 
 7/31 
 12 
 −54 
 54 
 3.37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Z values refer to the peak or subpeak of the listed cluster. L, Left; R, Right, SME, subsequent memory effect. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Brain regions associated with encoding success (positive subsequent memory effects) or failure (negative subsequent memory effects), for items presented in expected locations (valid trials) or unexpected locations (invalid trials). 
 
 
 
 
 
 ~BA 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Peak Z  (# voxels) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Valid trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  L IFG 
 45 
 −39 
 24 
 15 
 3.29 (4) 
 
 
  L IFG/Inferior Frontal Junction 
 44/6 
 −42 
 0 
 27 
 4.14 (93) 
 
 
  R Posterior/medial Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6/4 
 6 
 −18 
 57 
 3.43 (4) 
 
 
  L Putamen 
 - 
 −33 
 0 
 −9 
 3.69 (8) 
 
 
  R Putamen 
 - 
 27 
 −6 
 −12 
 3.57 (28) 
 
 
  L Posterior Hippocampus 
 - 
 −24 
 −33 
 −6 
 3.60 (19) 
 
 
  R Posterior Hippocampus 
 - 
 33 
 −39 
 −6 
 3.71 (14) 
 
 
  R Fusiform 
 37 
 48 
 −54 
 −6 
 4.08 (55) 
 
 
  L Fusiform 
 37 
 −48 
 −57 
 −6 
 3.90 (97) 
 
 
  R Posterior IPS 
 7/19 
 33 
 −72 
 33 
 4.08 (18) 
 
 
 
 
 Negative subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  R Medial Superior Rostral Gyrus 
 10 
 15 
 60 
 15 
 4.23 (40) 
 
 
  R Anterior/medial Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG) 
 9 
 15 
 42 
 42 
 3.38 (15) 
 
 
  R TPJ 
 40/39 
 51 
 −48 
 39 
 3.99 (98) 
 
 
  BL Posterior Cingulate 
 31 
 −6 
 −69 
 36 
 3.69 (36) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Invalid trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  R Fusiform 
 37 
 39 
 −45 
 −15 
 3.40 (6) 
 
 
 
 
 Negative subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  R Dorsolateral Prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) 
 9 
 45 
 12 
 45 
 3.60 (6) 
 
 
  R IPS/TPJ 
 7/40 
 36 
 −39 
 42 
 3.56 (52) 
 
 
  R SPL 
 5 
 24 
 −48 
 63 
 3.31 (4) 
 
 
  R Precuneus 
 7 
 12 
 −63 
 51 
 4.01 (7) 
 
 
  R Parietal-Occipital Sulcus 
 18/17 
 6 
 −78 
 39 
 3.26 (6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Z values refer to the peak of the cluster (subpeaks available from the corresponding author upon request). L, Left; R, Right; BL, Bilateral. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Brain regions where subsequent memory effects differ according to whether items appear in expected vs. unexpected locations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ~BA 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Peak Z  (# voxels) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Valid > Invalid subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  L Anterior SFG 
 9 
 −18 
 45 
 27 
 3.24 (5) 
 
 
  R Putamen 
 - 
 27 
 −6 
 −6 
 3.65 (17) 
 
 
  R Central Sulcus 
 3/4 
 51 
 −12 
 39 
 3.40 (12) 
 
 
  L Central Sulcus 
 3/4 
 −48 
 −12 
 42 
 3.46 (26) 
 
 
  R SPL 
 7 
 30 
 −39 
 63 
 4.25 (26) 
 
 
  R IPS 
 7 
 42 
 −45 
 45 
 3.41 (8) 
 
 
  R Precuneus 
 7 
 12 
 −60 
 51 
 4.03 (16) 
 
 
  L Precuneus 
 7 
 −12 
 −66 
 51 
 3.23 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 Invalid > Valid subsequent memory effects 
 
 
 
 
  - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Regions where connectivity with attention-related seed regions differs according to later memory success or failure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ~BA 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Peak Z  (# voxels) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Top-down attention seed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Left mIPS/SPL 
 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding success 
 
 
 
  R Medial Thalamus 
 - 
 6 
 0 
 −6 
 2.84 (7) 
 
 
  R Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 22 
 57 
 −39 
 6 
 3.57 (17) 
 
 
  L Fusiform 
 37 
 −36 
 −51 
 −9 
 2.89 (5) 
 
 
  L Lateral Occipital cortex 
 37 
 −51 
 −63 
 −6 
 3.06 (6) 
 
 
  L Lateral Occipital cortex 
 37 
 −45 
 −78 
 −3 
 3.20 (33) 
 
 
  BL Medial Occipital cortex 
 17 
 0 
 −96 
 9 
 2.87 (4) 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding failure 
 
 
 
  R Midbrain 
 - 
 3 
 −36 
 −27 
 2.65 (4) 
 
 
  R Angular Gyrus 
 39 
 42 
 −57 
 27 
 3.51 (84) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bottom-up attention seeds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right TPJ 
 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding success 
 
 
 
  - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding failure 
 
 
 
  BL Medial SFG 
 9 
 0 
 51 
 39 
 3.12 (17) 
 
 
  L IFG 
 45/44 
 −51 
 24 
 15 
 2.83 (5) 
 
 
  BL Anterior Cingulate 
 24 
 6 
 9 
 27 
 2.98 (13) 
 
 
  BL Medial Thalamus 
 - 
 0 
 3 
 −9 
 3.00 (7) 
 
 
  R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 36 
 24 
 −33 
 −21 
 2.99 (8) 
 
 
  L ParahippocampalGyrus/Fusiform 
 36/37 
 −24 
 −36 
 −21 
 3.16 (21) 
 
 
  R Retrosplenial 
 29 
 21 
 −51 
 9 
 3.07 (26) 
 
 
  L Retrosplenial 
 29 
 −15 
 −51 
 12 
 3.33 (47) 
 
 
  BL Retrosplenial 
 29 
 0 
 −63 
 12 
 2.81 (6) 
 
 
  R Lateral Occipital cortex 
 19 
 45 
 −63 
 −9 
 3.11 (15) 
 
 
 
 Left TPJ 
 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding success 
 
 
 
  L Putamen 
 - 
 −24 
 9 
 12 
 3.01 (4) 
 
 
  R Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 60 
 −3 
 42 
 2.94 (30) 
 
 
  L Retrosplenial 
 29 
 −9 
 −39 
 21 
 2.78 (4) 
 
 
  R Posterior Cingulate 
 31 
 6 
 −63 
 36 
 2.90 (9) 
 
 
 
 Greater connectivity during encoding failure 
 
 
 
  L DLPFC 
 46 
 −39 
 33 
 9 
 2.84 (6) 
 
 
  BL Medial Thalamus 
 - 
 −3 
 −3 
 −9 
 2.79 (5) 
 
 
  R Fusiform 
 37 
 27 
 −39 
 −24 
 3.21 (22) 
 
 
  L Fusiform 
 37 
 −30 
 −42 
 −21 
 3.06 (19) 
 
 
  L Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 36 
 −27 
 −48 
 −6 
 2.90 (8) 
 
 
  R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 36 
 36 
 −51 
 −9 
 3.41 (15) 
 
 
  L Lateral Occipital cortex 
 19 
 −39 
 −60 
 −6 
 2.73 (5) 
 
 
  L Lateral Occipital cortex 
 19 
 −39 
 −75 
 −3 
 2.92 (6) 
 
 
  L Parietal-Occipital Sulcus 
 18/17 
 −12 
 −81 
 24 
 3.06 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
