
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 7911385 
 6764 
 Psychiatry Res 
 
 Psychiatry research 
 
 0165-1781 
 1872-7123 
 
 
 21937201 
 3196255 
 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2011.02.003 
 NIHMS273753 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of inhibitory control in adult ADHD: Evidence from the Milwaukee longitudinal sample 
 
 
 
 
 Mulligan 
 Richard C. 
 
 a 
 b 
 □ 
 c 
 * 
 g 
 
 
 
 Knopik 
 Valerie S. 
 
 a 
 d 
 
 
 
 Sweet 
 Lawrence H. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Fischer 
 Mariellen 
 
 b 
 □ 
 e 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 Michael 
 
 c 
 
 
 
 Rao 
 Stephen M. 
 
 b 
 □ 
 f 
 
 
 a Department of Psychiatry & Human Behavior, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA 
 b Functional Imaging Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA 
 c Department of Psychology, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA 
 d Department of Psychiatry, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA 
 e Associated Mental Health Consultants, Wauwatosa, WI, USA 
 f Schey Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA 
 g Present institution: Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Psychiatry 
 
 Corresponding Author: Richard C. Mulligan, Ph.D., Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies, G-S121-4, Department of Psychiatry & Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, Tel: 401-316-6069, Fax: 401-863-6647,  Richard_Mulligan@brown.edu 
 
 □ 
 Affiliated during data collection 
 
 
 
 25 
 2 
 2011 
 
 
 21 
 9 
 2011 
 
 
 30 
 11 
 2011 
 
 
 30 
 11 
 2012 
 
 194 
 2 
 119 
 129 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Only a few studies have investigated the neural substrate of response inhibition in adult ADHD using Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go tasks. Inconsistencies and methodological limitations in the existing literature have resulted in limited conclusions regarding underlying pathophysiology. We examined the neural basis of response inhibition in a group of adults diagnosed with ADHD in childhood and who continue to meet criteria for ADHD while addressing limitations present in earlier studies. Adults with ADHD ( n =12) and controls ( n =12) were recruited from an ongoing longitudinal study and were matched for age, IQ, and education. Individuals with comorbid conditions were excluded. Functional MRI was used to identify and compare the brain activation patterns during correct trials of a response inhibition task (Go/No-Go). Our results showed that the control group recruited a more extensive network of brain regions than the ADHD group during correct inhibition trials. Adults with ADHD showed reduced brain activation in the right frontal eye field, pre-supplementary motor area, left precentral gyrus, and the inferior parietal lobe bilaterally. During successful inhibition of an inappropriate response, adults with ADHD display reduced activation in fronto-parietal networks previously implicated in working memory, goal-oriented attention, and response selection. This profile of brain activation may be specifically associated with ADHD in adulthood. 
 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
 attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 response inhibition 
 adult psychiatry 
 attention 
 impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a neurobehavioral disorder characterized by developmentally inappropriate levels of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity ( American Psychiatric Association, 1994 ). ADHD is often considered a childhood disorder, as it occurs in 1-5% of children ( Faraone and Biederman, 2005 ). However, ADHD also occurs in 1-7% of adults ( Simon et al., 2009 ), and prospective longitudinal follow-up studies show that rather than normalizing with increasing age, ADHD persists into adulthood in 4-66% of individuals diagnosed in childhood ( Weiss et al., 1985 ;  Mannuzza et al., 1998 ;  Rasmussen and Gillberg, 2000 ;  Barkley et al., 2002 ). 
 Psychological theories have proposed that ADHD symptoms follow from a primary deficit in inhibitory control ( Barkley, 1997 ;  Quay, 1997 ). Functional neuroimaging studies suggest that a network of fronto-parietal brain regions is implicated in motor response inhibition as assessed by Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go tasks. Brain regions implicated include inferior prefrontal, medial prefrontal (including the pre-supplementary motor area), and inferior parietal areas (for review see  Chambers et al., 2009 ). Lesion and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies suggest that two subregions of prefrontal cortex, the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), are critically involved in inhibitory control, as patients with lesions to these regions and healthy participants undergoing TMS to these regions perform “Stop” and “No-Go” trials of the Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go tasks more slowly and less accurately than healthy controls ( Aron et al., 2003 ;  Chambers et al., 2006 ;  Floden and Stuss, 2006 ;  Picton et al., 2007 ;  Chen et al., 2009 ). Taken together, these studies provide compelling evidence that the frontal lobes play a critical role in response inhibition, and that the pre-SMA and the right IFG represent subregions of the frontal lobes that are critically related to inhibitory control. 
 The theory that individuals with ADHD have deficits in response inhibition that follow from dysfunction of the frontal lobes is consistent with several different lines of research. Individuals with ADHD demonstrate behavioral impairments relative to healthy control participants on “Stop” and “No-Go” trials of the Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go paradigms. Differences in performance have been observed in samples of ADHD children ( Trommer et al., 1988 ;  Tamm et al., 2004 ;  Lijffijt et al., 2005 ) and in samples of ADHD adults ( Bekker et al., 2005 ;  O'Connell et al., 2009 ;  Burden et al., 2010 ). Functional neuroimaging studies have shown that when children with ADHD perform “Stop” and “No-Go” trials on the Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go paradigms they display reduced activation in the frontal lobes compared to matched healthy control participants ( Dickstein et al., 2006 ;  Rubia et al., 2008 ;  Suskauer et al., 2008 ;  Passarotti et al., 2010 ). Clinical reports and longitudinal data have also shown that adults with ADHD exhibit a pervasive pattern of disinhibition in several major life activities including money management, excessive substance abuse, and gambling ( Barkley, 2008 ). Taken together, this data suggests that the neural correlates of inhibitory control are dysfunctional in adults with ADHD. 
 Functional neuroimaging studies have only very recently begun to investigate the neural correlates of response inhibition in adults with ADHD using Stop-signal and Go/No-Go tasks. Five fMRI studies that compared groups of adults diagnosed with ADHD to matched controls while each group performed the same Stop-Signal or Go/No-Go task have yielded inconsistent findings ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Dibbets et al., 2009 ;  Cubillo et al., 2010 ;  Dillo et al., 2010 ;  Kooistra et al., 2010 ). Three of the studies reported that adults with ADHD demonstrate increased prefrontal activation while inhibiting a motor response ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Dibbets et al., 2009 ;  Kooistra et al., 2010 ). This is consistent with a recently proposed hypothesis suggesting that adults with ADHD may rely on the frontal lobes to compensate for primary dysfunction in other brain regions ( Halperin and Schulz, 2006 ). However, two studies have reported that adults with ADHD demonstrate reduced activation of frontal brain regions while inhibiting a motor response ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Cubillo et al., 2010 ). This supports the alternative claim that dysfunction of frontal lobes is directly related to deficits in response inhibition in individuals with ADHD ( Rubia et al., 1999 ;  Booth et al., 2005 ). 
 There may be several reasons for the inconsistent findings. First, prospective longitudinal follow-up studies suggest that retrospective self-report of ADHD symptoms may be inaccurate ( Barkley et al., 2002 ;  Mannuzza et al., 2002 ), calling into question whether the participants in three studies that used retrospective diagnosis of ADHD ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Dibbets et al., 2009 ;  Dillo et al., 2010 ) were assigned to the appropriate experimental group. 
 Secondly, the potential influence of comorbid psychiatric disorders on the outcome of functional neuroimaging studies should also be considered. Although four of the studies reported that they excluded comorbid conditions, two studies excluded participants based on report of psychiatric disorder rather than on the results of structured psychiatric interviews ( Dibbets et al., 2009 ;  Kooistra et al., 2010 ). Furthermore, two studies did not exclude comorbidities that are commonly present in adults with ADHD including learning disabilities and current use of substances ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Cubillo et al., 2010 ). These approaches raise questions as to whether the functional neuroimaging patterns described in these studies were specifically related to ADHD ( Adler et al., 2005 ;  Leibenluft et al., 2007 ;  Paloyelis et al., 2007 ;  Cubillo and Rubia, 2010 ). 
 Thirdly, methodological issues may have contributed to the inconsistent findings. Four of the studies used an event-related design, while one study utilized a block design. Interestingly, the four that used event-related examined activation associated with correct trials only and found that ADHD and control participants activated the prefrontal cortex to a different degree during inhibition of a prepotent motor response ( Epstein et al., 2007 ;  Dibbets et al., 2009 ;  Cubillo et al., 2010 ;  Kooistra et al., 2010 ), while the study that used a block design did not find activation differences in the frontal lobes ( Dillo et al., 2010 ). Several authors have noted that block designs may be more susceptible to a variety of functional neuroimaging confounds, including effects of task difficulty, response preparation, habituation, different stimuli, maintenance of stimulus-response associations, changes in set, stimulus analysis, processing of conflict and error, novelty processing, mixed event types, and frequency of motor events ( Garavan et al., 2002 ;  Tamm et al., 2004 ;  Paloyelis et al., 2007 ;  Simmonds et al., 2008 ). Additionally, it is not possible to examine brain activation associated with correct trials within the context of a block design. 
 Finally, a recent meta-analysis that examined the neural correlates of response inhibition in healthy samples noted that another possible factor that could contribute to variable functional neuroimaging findings when using the Go/No-Go task is contrast of “Go” and “No-Go” trials ( Simmonds et al., 2008 ). The meta-analysis examined the results of 11 event-related fMRI studies that administered the Go/No-Go task to healthy individuals, and suggested that although the contrast of “No-Go” and “Go” trials would reveal areas of the brain that were uniquely involved in response inhibition and selection, this type of contrast would also fail to associate any brain region that contributed to both cognitive processes, such as the pre-SMA. Interestingly, none of the five studies that examined the neural correlates of response inhibition in adults with ADHD contrasted brain activation patterns associated with “No-Go” trials against implicit task baseline, and, likely, this is why none of these studies found activation differences between ADHD and control participants that were located in the pre-SMA despite this region's critical role in response inhibition. 
 The five previous studies in adults with ADHD provided inconsistent results and may have been confounded by issues that were related to sample assessment, functional neuroimaging design and analysis. For this reason, the aim of the current study was to examine the neural correlates of response inhibition in adults with ADHD while addressing these previous limitations. To ensure that adults in our sample had symptoms of ADHD in childhood as well as in adulthood and were therefore assigned to the correct experimental group, we examine an adult ADHD sample that was recruited from an ongoing longitudinal study ( Barkley, 2008 ). To confirm that resulting brain activation patterns were specifically associated with ADHD, we exclude individuals with current psychiatric or neurological comorbidities. To avoid potential confounds associated with fMRI block designs and to be able to compare our neuroimaging findings with those of other studies that have used the same task, we administer an event-related version of the Go/No-Go task that has been studied within samples of healthy participants ( Garavan et al., 1999 ;  Garavan et al., 2002 ;  Garavan et al., 2003 ;  Hester et al., 2004a ;  Kelly et al., 2004 ). To reveal activation in a network of brain regions associated with the act of inhibiting a prepotent response without eliminating brain regions that may play an important role in both response selection and inhibition we contrast activation associated with “No-Go” trials against an implicit task baseline. We perform this contrast prior to testing whether ADHD and control participants demonstrate differences in mean hemodynamic response during the correct performance of “No-Go” trials within the boundaries of functionally-defined brain regions of interest defined by the contrast of “No-Go” trials with implicit task baseline. 
 In keeping with the theory that dysfunction of the frontal lobes is associated with deficits in response inhibition in individuals with ADHD, we hypothesized that our sample of adults with ADHD would demonstrate less accurate performance and less prefrontal activation than controls during “No-Go” trials. More specifically, we predicted that our group of adults with ADHD would demonstrate reduced activation in subregions of prefrontal cortex thought to play a critical role in response inhibition, such as the right IFG and the pre-SMA. 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Participants were recruited from a long-term, prospective, longitudinal study of “hyperactive” and IQ-matched control children ( n  = 158) (Barkley et al., 1985;  Barkley et al., 2002 ;  Barkley, 2008 ). ADHD participants were originally recruited from consecutive clinic referrals, and continue to meet criteria for combined type ADHD. Individuals in the longitudinal control group ( n  = 81) were originally recruited using a “snowball” technique in which parents of the hyperactive children provided names of friends who had children within the same age range of the hyperactive participants. 
 We recruited 12 adult males from the original longitudinal “hyperactive” group and 12 adult males from the original control group. All ADHD participants met diagnostic criteria for ADHD in adulthood based on their parents' report of current DSM-IV ADHD symptoms (number of current ADHD symptoms > 1.5 SD of control group mean) ( Barkley et al., 2002 ). Exclusion criteria for both groups included: 1) DSM-IV Axis I diagnosis, as defined by the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV, non-patient version (SCID-NP); 2) history or current evidence of learning disability, operationally defined by any Wide Range Achievement Test–3 rd  edition (WRAT-3) score below the 7 th  percentile; 3) Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–3 rd  edition (WAIS-III) Vocabulary and Block Design scaled scores < 6; 4) history of neurological disorders/conditions; 5) dependence on or daily use of alcohol or marijuana, as determined by the SCID-NP; 6) current use of cocaine, illicit stimulants, hallucinogens or inhalants; or 7) evidence of recent alcohol or psychoactive drug use as determined by breath and urine testing. Each of the formerly “hyperactive” subjects had, at minimum, a three-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled stimulant trial ( Barkley, 2008 ). Many of the participants were on a stimulant for longer periods of time during their childhood and adolescence. Only one of the ADHD subjects was taking a stimulant at the time of the study, and he was required to go off his medication 48 hours before he participated in the fMRI session. All participants were right-handed. The two groups did not differ significantly in age, years of education, or overall estimated IQ, but the control group scored higher on WAIS-III Vocabulary ( Table 1 ). All participants provided written informed consent approved by the institutional review board at Medical College of Wisconsin, and $50.00 was offered as compensation for participation in the study. 
 
 
 2.2 Response inhibition task, Go/No-Go 
 Our version of the Go/No-Go task followed a format described previously ( Garavan et al., 1999 ). Participants saw a series of lower case letters replacing one another (500 ms/letter). During an initial practice session to establish a prepotent response to target letters, participants were instructed to make a button press response quickly and accurately whenever certain target letters (“x” or “y”) were presented within a series of distracter letters (2 runs, 250 letters, 75 targets). Following practice, a switch in the rules was made which stipulated that responses to “x” or “y” should only be made if the two target letters alternated in the presented series ( Figure 1 ). Response to targets constituted the “Go” condition of this task whereas the presentation of “lure” letters, to which a prepotent response has been practiced but becomes inappropriate, constituted the “No-Go” condition. Participants completed 6 runs of the alternation task in the scanner with 250 letters per run (1500 total letters). “No-Go” letters were presented every ∼ 20 s and targets every 3.5 s. The six scanning runs and the last practice run consisted of an average of 36 “Go” letters and 7 “No-Go” letters per run. Response prepotency was maintained by including five times more valid “Go” letters than “No-Go” letters and through prior instructions that stressed fast responding. Participants were encouraged to respond while the stimulus was still on screen, but responses were considered valid if they responded within 1000 ms of stimulus onset. 
 
 
 2.3 Magnetic resonance imaging and processing 
 Whole-brain imaging was performed on a Signa GE 1.5 Tesla scanner equipped with a prototype 30.5 com i.d. three-axis local gradient head coil and an elliptical endcapped quadrature radio frequency coil. Prior to functional imaging, high resolution, 3D spoiled gradient-recalled at steady state anatomic images were collected [TE = 5 ms; TR = 24 ms, 40 flip angle, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, FOV = 24 2  cm, matrix size = 256 × 192] for precise anatomical reference. 
 Multi-scan series of images were acquired using a single-shot, gradient-echo echo-planar pulse sequence with initial pi/2 pulse [TE = 40 ms; TR = 2500 ms; 90 flip angle; slice thickness = 6 mm; FOV = 24 cm; matrix size = 64 2 ]. To provide coverage of the entire brain 22 contiguous sagittal slices were selected. Data were acquired from six runs of 66 sequential echo-planar images collected within 165 s per run with an interscan interval of ∼30 s. 
 Image processing and analyses were performed using Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) software (Cox, 1996). After discarding the first three images from each run, linear de-trending algorithms available within the AFNI program were applied to the functional data. Images were then concatenated by run and spatially registered in three-dimensional space using an iterative linear least squares algorithm. 
 
 
 2.4 fMRI analysis 
 
 2.4.1 Individual models of functional activity 
 To derive the magnitude of hemodynamic response to each task condition, variations in the linearly-detrended, motion-corrected, concatenated time-series data were then modeled using onset times associated with each trial type, a γ-variate function, and a nonlinear regression optimization procedure ( Garavan et al., 1999 ). The maximum hemodynamic lag associated with the γ-variate function was constrained to a range similar to previously published estimates ( Cohen et al., 1997 ), and the magnitude parameter of the model was free to vary. The regression yielded a separate estimate of the peak hemodynamic response to correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials within every voxel in the brain, making no assumptions about relative magnitude. Estimates of motion from each dimension of space were included in the individual model as covariates of no interest. Baseline hemodynamic activity during distracter letters was also allowed to vary freely in the model. 
 
 
 2.4.2 Group activation maps associated with the contrast of correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials 
 Data for all participants were transformed into stereotaxic space ( Talaraich and Tourneaux, 1988 ) to allow direct voxel-by-voxel statistical comparisons to be performed across participants. The stereotactically resampled statistical parametric maps were spatially averaged over a 6 mm radius. In an attempt to identify a network of brain regions specifically associated with response inhibition, peak hemodynamic changes associated with correct “Go” trials and “No-Go” trials were contrasted directly against each other using voxelwise two-sample, two-tailed t-test comparisons (uncorrected α = p < 0.0005). Separate voxelwise maps were constructed for the ADHD and the control groups so that brain regions exhibiting greater magnitude during “No-Go” trials could be identified in either group (see section 2.4.4 “fMRI-fROI analysis”). Voxels not spatially contiguous to a cluster with a minimum volume of 350 μl were removed in order to control for Type I error. This approach accords to theory suggesting that as the number of contiguous voxels that make up a cluster of voxels considered to be activated increases the likelihood that this cluster was falsely identified by chance decreases ( Forman et al., 1995 ). Additionally, p values estimating the probability that a particular cluster may have been falsely identified using our uncorrected α and minimum cluster size thresholds (Type I error) were generated on a cluster by cluster basis using a Monte Carlo permutation procedure implemented in AFNI (AlphaSim). The program estimated the probability that each cluster identified within the map at a particular uncorrected α level was the result of Type I error based on its size, the level of smoothness associated with the data, and 1,000 random image permutations. To protect against the possibility that our thresholding procedures were too stringent in relation to this contrast and that the resultant activation maps may have suffered from Type II error, we also considered activation patterns present at a more lenient threshold (uncorrected α = p < 0.005, 200 μl minimum cluster volume). 
 
 
 2.4.3 Group activation maps associated with correct “No-Go” trials 
 To reveal a network of brain regions associated with “No-Go” trials including those brain regions that may make significant contributions to “Go” and “No-Go” trials, peak change associated with correct “No-Go” trials was contrasted against an implicit task baseline (i.e., 0) through use of voxelwise one-sample, two-tailed t-test comparisons at uncorrected α = p < .0005 and minimum cluster volume of 350 μl. We again attempted to estimate the probability of Type I error associated with each cluster observed in the resultant maps using the same Monte Carlo procedures described above, and again constructed separate voxelwise maps for the ADHD and the control groups so that brain regions recruited by either group could be identified (see below). 
 
 
 2.4.4 fMRI-fROI analysis 
 As a follow-up to the voxel-wise analyses, a functional region of interest (fROI) analysis using a conjunctive “OR” mask was conducted ( Poldrack, 2007 ). Use of a conjunctive “OR” mask is a common method for creating functionally defined ROIs based on identifying a set of task-associated brain regions recruited by either group ( Celone et al., 2006 ;  Mitsis et al., 2008 ;  Roberts et al., 2009 ;  Seidenberg et al., 2009 ). This method permits hypothesis testing within the spatial extent of meaningfully defined regions of interest while minimizing bias towards either group, and it has improved statistical power over voxel-wise approaches. To create the “OR” mask, a single fROI map was generated by conjoining activated regions identified in the voxelwise analysis across the groups. Any voxel considered to be “activated” in the “No-Go” versus implicit task baseline comparison contributed to the final conjunctive fROI map. To perform follow-up comparisons that examined group differences in hemodynamic response within each fROI, an averaged peak hemodynamic response was calculated for all voxels within an fROI for each participant. Two-sample, two-tailed unequal variance t-tests were used for all comparisons given the small sample size. 
 
 
 2.4.5 Common Areas of Recruitment: Go and No-Go trials 
 To identify brain regions that may have made contributions to both “Go” and “No-Go” trials, a conjunction analysis (i.e., “AND” mask) was also performed following the Minimum Statistic compared to the Conjunction Null method (MS/CN) described by  Nichols et al. (2005) . This was achieved in a series of steps. First, peak changes associated with correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials were each contrasted separately against an implicit task baseline (i.e., 0) through use of voxelwise one-sample, two-tailed t-test comparisons at uncorrected α = p < .0005 and a minimum cluster volume of 350 μl. Separate voxelwise maps for the ADHD and the control groups were constructed so that brain regions recruited by either group during the performance of each trial type could be identified. Second, separate “OR” maps were constructed in relation to “Go” and “No-Go” trials that described activation demonstrated by either group during the performance of each trial type. Third, maps associated with each trial type were then converted to binary code (1 = activated, 0 = not activated) and added to one another in order to identify brain regions common to both trial types (as demonstrated by either group). To perform follow-up comparisons that examined group differences in hemodynamic response within each fROI identified within this “AND” mask, an averaged peak hemodynamic response was calculated for all voxels within an fROI for each participant in relation to each trial type. 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 Mean accuracy (±SD) on “Go” trials was 94% (±3%) for the control group and 94% (±3%) for the ADHD group. Mean accuracy (±SD) on “No-Go” trials was 89% (±8%) for the control group and 79% (±25%) for the ADHD group. There was no significant difference between the ADHD and Control groups' performance on “Go” [  t  (1, 21) = 0.08,  P  = 0.94,  d  = 0.03 ] or “No-Go” trials [  t  (1, 13) = 1.31,  P  = 0.21,  d  = -0.53 ]. 
 Direct contrast of peak activation associated with “Go” and “No-Go” trials failed to reveal any significantly activated brain regions in either group at our selected voxelwise and minimum cluster volume thresholds. When we relaxed our thresholds (uncorrected α = p < 0.005, 200 μl minimum cluster volume), one region, the right angular gyrus, was identified as exhibiting greater activation during “No-Go” trials than during “Go” trials in at least one of our experimental groups ( Table 2 ). However, posthoc estimation of the probability of Type I error associated with this cluster using Monte Carlo permutation suggested that we could not reject the possibility that this cluster may have been identified as activated by chance ( Table 2 ; p < 0.99). Follow-up analyses of mean magnitude of response within this brain region did suggest, however, that the control group demonstrated significantly greater activation than the ADHD group within this brain region during the performance of correct “No-Go” trials. 
 During correct “No-Go” trials, the pattern of brain regions activated by each group was similar for ADHD and control participants ( Figure 2 ). Conjunctive “OR mask” fROI analyses were performed to identify regions activated by either group ( Table 3 ,  Figure 2 ,  Figure 3 ). Follow-up analyses revealed areas of significant difference in magnitude of brain response between groups ( Table 3 ,  Figure 3 ). 
 The control group demonstrated significantly greater mean magnitude of activation than the ADHD group in six regions during the correct performance of “No-Go” trials: right frontal eye field (FEF), right pre-SMA, right inferior parietal lobe, left inferior parietal lobe, left precentral gyrus, and left precuneus ( Table 3 ,  Figure 3 ). However, Monte Carlo permutation suggested that we could not reject the possibility that the cluster located in left precuneus may have been identified as activated by chance ( Table 2 ; p < 0.19). There were no brain regions in which the ADHD group demonstrated significantly greater magnitude of activation than the control group. 
 Zero-order correlations calculated between “No-Go” related brain activity and accuracy of performance and between “No-Go” related brain activity and current ADHD symptoms were not significant. 
 The results of the conjunction analysis using the MS/CN method showed that there were five regions in which the ADHD group or the control group demonstrated common activation during the correct performance of “Go” and “No-Go” trials ( Table 2 ): right FEF, right pre-SMA, right IFG, and bilateral inferior parietal lobe. Follow-up analyses of mean magnitude of response within these brain regions suggested that the control group did not demonstrate significantly greater mean activation than the ADHD group within any of these commonly recruited brain regions during the correct performance of “Go” trials ( Table 2 ). However, during correct performance of “No-Go” trials, the control group demonstrated greater mean activation magnitude than the ADHD group in some of the regions that were commonly recruited during “Go” and “No-Go” trials ( Table 2 ) including regions of the right FEF and the right pre-SMA. 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 The current study examined a well-characterized sample of adults with ADHD from an ongoing longitudinal study that did not include individuals with comorbid conditions. As such, the observed differences in brain activation between individuals with ADHD and controls are unlikely to be due to factors that may be related to inaccurate retrospective assessment of ADHD symptoms or due to disorders that are often comorbid with ADHD. Consistent with the hypothesis that dysfunction of the frontal lobes is present in individuals with ADHD and consistent with functional neuroimaging studies that have investigated the neural correlates of response inhibition in ADHD children ( Dickstein et al., 2006 ;  Rubia et al., 2008 ;  Suskauer et al., 2008 ;  Passarotti et al., 2010 ), our study suggests that ADHD adults display less activation than controls during inhibition of a prepotent motor response. 
 Participants in our two experimental group were observed to activate a predominantly right-lateralized frontoparietal network of brain regions during the correct performance of “No-Go” trials. Regions identified through contrast of “No-Go” trials with implicit task baseline included areas that have been previously associated with inhibitory control such as the right IFG and medial prefrontal cortex (pre-SMA) as well as other areas that have frequently been observed to be co-activated during the correct performance of “No-Go” trials including premotor cortex (FEF), right anterior insula, and the bilateral inferior parietal lobes ( Garavan et al., 2006 ;  Simmonds et al., 2008 ). Although inferior occipital and left precuneus regions were also identified as being activated at our originally selected thresholds, post hoc Monte Carlo permutation procedures suggested that we could not reject the possibility that these clusters could have been identified as being active by chance ( Table 3 ). 
 In a meta-analysis of event-related functional neuroimaging studies that compared the neural correlates of “simple” and “complex” versions of the Go/No-Go task,  Simmonds and colleagues (2008)  proposed that contrast of “No-Go” trials against implicit task baseline and use of a “complex” version of the Go/No-Go task identical to the one used in the present study likely elicits brain activation associated with response inhibition amongst other cognitive abilities including selective attention, stimulus recognition, working memory ( i.e. , updating of stimulus-response associations), and response selection, including selecting not to respond. Consistent with their hypothesis, their results showed that in addition to brain regions thought to be critically involved in response inhibition, such as the pre-SMA, “complex” versions of the Go/No-Go task that involved additional cognitive task demands such as selective attention and updating of working memory were observed to elicit additional activation in a predominantly right-lateralized network including regions in the right middle/inferior frontal gyrus and bilateral inferior parietal regions. The authors interpreted this evidence to suggest that the neural basis of response inhibition may vary depending on task demands. This interpretation is consistent with the results of a prior study suggesting that the pre-SMA is recruited during the performance of “No-Go” trials regardless of whether a “simple” or “complex” versions of the Go/No-Go task are administered, but an additional frontoparietal network is recruited as working memory demands associated with the Go/No-Go task are added ( Mostofsky et al., 2003 ). This evidence suggests that the neural basis of response inhibition may be made up of a network of brain regions some of which play a critical role in supporting response inhibition and others that may be recruited to play a more auxiliary role depending on task demands. However, it is also possible that use of a “complex” version of the Go/No-Go task and contrast of “No-Go” related activity against implicit task baseline may reveal activation patterns that are associated with cognitive operations co-occuring with the performance of response inhibition tasks rather than with the cognitive operation of canceling a response itself. 
 Contrast of “Go” trials and “No-Go” trials may be one way to address this issue as it is conceivable that “Go”-related activation may be subtracted from “No-Go”-related activation in order to identify activation uniquely and therefore specifically associated with response inhibition. However, as was discussed in the introduction, contrast of “Go” trials and “No-Go” trials may also fail to identify areas that make critical contributions to the performance of both trial types. The results of our own analysis suggested that direct contrast of activation associated with “Go” and “No-Go” trials produced null findings ( Table 2 ), suggesting that several areas that contributed to “No-Go” trials also contributed to “Go” trials, a hypothesis that our follow-up MS/CN conjunction analyses supported ( Table 2 ). Furthermore, areas of the pre-SMA and the right IFG were also identified among the set of regions that were commonly recruited during “Go” and “No-Go” trials, consistent with the idea that areas that may be critically involved in response inhibition may be recruited during the performance of both trial types. Although the results of our conjunction analysis could also be interpreted to suggest that areas recruited during both trial types are not uniquely related response inhibition and are therefore not specifically related to response inhibition, we find this interpretation to be less likely for two reasons: 1) as mentioned above, recent work has identified a critical role for the pre-SMA and the right IFG in response inhibition; and 2) the results of our follow-up fROI analyses suggested that areas of the pre-SMA that were commonly recruited during both trial types were differentially activated by our ADHD and control groups depending on whether they were performing “Go” or “No-Go” trials. More specifically, our control group demonstrated greater mean activation of this region than our ADHD group only while correctly performing “No-Go” trials ( Table 2 ) suggesting that this region is specifically involved in response inhibition despite its recruitment during “Go” and “No-Go” trials. 
 Although we cannot rule out the possibility that activation described by the contrast of “No-Go” related activation and implicit task baseline may be associated with co-occuring cognitive processes including but not limited to selective attention, updating of working memory, task switching, response selection (including selecting not to respond), and performance monitoring, several studies have suggested that brain regions associated with these cognitive operations may make significant contributions to the performance of response inhibition tasks (for reviews see  Garavan et al., 2006 ;  Chambers et al., 2009 ). If this were confirmed, brain regions identified by the contrast of “No-Go” related activation with implicit task baseline may in fact describe a network of brain regions associated with response inhibition. Within the context of this literature, our results are most consistent with the view that contrast of “No-Go” related activation with implicit task baseline using a “complex” version of the “No-Go” task reveals a network of brain regions some of which are critically involved in response inhibition and others which may play a more auxiliary role depending on additional task demands. 
 There were no areas within the network of brain regions defined by this contrast in which our group of adults with ADHD exhibited greater activation than controls or demonstrated activation outside of this network. As we predicted, areas in which a significant reduction in activation was observed included the pre-SMA, a functionally-defined sub-region of medial prefrontal cortex that is considered to be a critical node within the network of brain regions associated with inhibitory control ( Floden and Stuss, 2006 ;  Picton et al., 2007 ;  Chen et al., 2009 ). Additional reductions in activation were also observed in a premotor area (right FEF), the left precentral gyrus (motor cortex), and in the inferior parietal lobes bilaterally. 
 Our findings are supported by the results of the study by  Cubillo and colleagues (2010)  another study that examined the neural correlates of response inhibition in a prospectively defined sample of adults with verifiable symptoms of ADHD in childhood and adulthood. Examining a sample of 11 ADHD adults and 14 age-matched controls, the authors reported that their group of adults with ADHD exhibited less activation than controls during the performance of “Stop” trials of a Stop Signal task. Significant reductions in activation were observed in the right caudate, thalamus, and putamen as well as bilateral premotor, bilateral inferior frontal/anterior insula, and medial prefrontal brain regions including the anterior cingulate and the SMA. Our study also found evidence that adults with ADHD exhibited less activation than controls in premotor and medial prefrontal cortex during inhibition of a prepotent motor response. Furthermore, similar findings were observed between the two studies despite differences in sample exclusion criteria as the previous study did not exclude participants with conditions that were commonly comorbid with ADHD. Nevertheless, there were some inconsistencies between the two studies as our study did not confirm that adults with ADHD exhibit less activation than controls in the inferior frontal gyrus and subcortical brain regions, and the previous study did not report that adults with ADHD display less activation than controls in the pre-SMA, the left precentral gyrus, the left precuneus, and the inferior parietal lobe bilaterally. 
 There are several possible explanations that may account for the inconsistent findings. For one, Cubillo and colleagues contrasted successful “Stop” trials against successful “Go” trials rather than contrasting “Stop” trials against implicit task baseline. As was reviewed earlier, contrast of “Stop” and “Go” trials may succeed in revealing brain regions that are uniquely related to inhibitory control, but may also fail to reveal any brain region that makes equivalent contributions to the performance of both trial types including regions that may make critical contributions to inhibitory control such as the pre-SMA. For example, because the pre-SMA has been implicated in processes related to both response selection and response inhibition (for review see  Mostofsky and Simmonds, 2008 ), it is possible that these investigators did not find activation differences that were located in the pre-SMA due to the similar recruitment of this brain region during both trial types. 
 Another possibility that may account for the inconsistent findings between the present study and that of  Cubillo and colleagues (2010)  may be related to the possibility that the Stop Signal and the Go/No-Go tasks may measure different aspects of response inhibition. Some authors have proposed that this explanation can potentially account for differences in the neural correlates of these two tasks ( Rubia et al., 2001 ;  Aron and Poldrack, 2006 ;  Zheng et al., 2008 ). The Go/No-Go task has been described as a measure of response inhibition ( Chambers et al., 2009 ), but unlike the Stop Signal task, the cognitive abilities involved in successful performance of this task may not be limited to cancellation of an already initiated motor response ( Aron and Poldrack, 2006 ). Whereas the Stop Signal task may measure processes related to the “cancellation” of an already initiated motor response, the Go/No-Go task may place a greater demand on “restraint” during stimulus presentation ( Schachar et al., 2007 ). Thus, ADHD-associated dysfunction of brain regions during inhibition of a motor response may vary depending on the point in time when the motor plan is countermanded. Thus, the results of our study may describe ADHD-associated dysfunction in a fronto-parietal network of brain regions that may be present during inhibition of a prepotent cognitive bias while Cubillo and colleagues' study may describe ADHD-related dysfunction in a fronto-striatal network of brain regions evident during cancellation of an already initiated motor response. Future studies may consider evaluating differences in the time course of neural processes related to response inhibition in samples of adults with ADHD more explicitly. 
 Cubillo and colleagues (2010)  also found evidence of differences in activation between adult ADHD and control participants that were located in the right IFG. We also expected to find activation differences located in this brain region. Although our group of healthy control participants exhibited activation in  pars opercularis  of the right IFG, a region of the brain thought to be critically related to inhibitory control ( Aron et al., 2003 ), we observed no statistical difference between ADHD and controls in this brain region. Another previous study also administered a Go/No-Go task to a group of adults with ADHD (ADHD,  n  = 9; Controls,  n  = 9) also found evidence of reduced activation in the IFG during the performance of “No-Go” trials ( Epstein et al., 2007 ). However, that study also did not exclude individuals with common comorbidities, calling into question whether their findings were specifically associated with ADHD. It is possible that reduced activation of the right IFG may not account for deficits in inhibition in adults with ADHD. This possibility would also be consistent with recent fMRI studies that have challenged the notion that the right IFG directly controls response inhibition and favor attributing this role to the pre-SMA ( Duann et al., 2009 ;  Sharp et al., 2010 ). 
 Consistent with our hypotheses and with the results of fMRI studies of ADHD children ( Tamm et al., 2004 ;  Rubia et al., 2008 ;  Suskauer et al., 2008 ), our group of adults with ADHD was observed to display reduced activation during the correct performance of “No-Go” trials in a medial prefrontal region located rostral to the SMA known as the pre-SMA ( Picard and Strick, 2001 ). Several authors have suggested that the pre-SMA may play a critical role during successful response inhibition by maintaining stimulus-response associations used to select a response (or the inhibition of a response) ( Floden and Stuss, 2006 ;  Picton et al., 2007 ;  Mostofsky and Simmonds, 2008 ;  Simmonds et al., 2008 ;  Chambers et al., 2009 ;  Chen et al., 2009 ). This interpretation would be consistent with the results of a study that used a variation of the Go/No-Go task used in the present study to investigate whether activation patterns associated with response conflict could be dissociated from activation patterns associated with error processing ( Garavan et al., 2003 ). The study attempted to vary the level of response conflict present during inhibition of a prepotent response through administration of different stimulus presentation rates that elicited “fast” and “slow” responding while activation patterns associated with both of these conditions were examined separately in association with correct and incorrect trials. The results of that study suggested that an area of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) showed significant responses to errors of commission, but was not sensitive to the task's changing conflict demands whereas an area of the pre-SMA was sensitive to response conflict but not to errors of commission. Taken together, this evidence suggests that the pre-SMA is sensitive to manipulations that may disrupt the maintenance of stimulus-response associations within the context of performing a task requiring response selection or inhibition. By contrast, the ACC may be more important for monitoring of performance. It is unlikely that our observed results within the pre-SMA may be ascribed to differences in the neural correlates of error monitoring as we examined activation associated with correct trials only. This may explain why contrast of activation associated with correct “No-Go” trials with implicit task baseline did not reveal activation in the ACC. As we were unable to examine error-related activation within the context of this study due to an insufficient number of trials, it remains possible that adult ADHD and control participants demonstrate differential activation in the ACC during error processing, a hypothesis that should be explored in future studies. 
 A recent paired-pulse transcutaneous stimulation study demonstrated that the pre-SMA modulates activity in motor cortex in the presence of cognitive conflict but this is not observed when the same actions are performed in the absence of conflict ( Mars et al., 2009 ). This raises the possibility that our group of adults with ADHD displayed less activation than controls in left precentral gyrus (motor cortex) during inhibition trials due to underactivation of the pre-SMA. Future studies might test this hypothesis using effective connectivity methods. 
 Our ADHD group also displayed reduced activation in the parietal lobes and the right FEF bilaterally consistent with structural neuroimaging evidence indicating that the inferior parietal lobe may be underdeveloped in adults with ADHD ( Makris et al., 2007 ) and with functional neuroimaging evidence suggesting that adults with ADHD demonstrate reduced activation in premotor cortex during the performance of inhibitory control tasks ( Cubillo et al., 2010 ). Activation of the parietal lobes has been reliably observed during the performance of response inhibition tasks, but magnetic stimulation of this region does not result in worse performance on the Stop-Signal task ( Chambers et al., 2006 ). This suggests that the right inferior parietal lobe may not be critically related to successful response inhibition or that this brain region may not be related to the act of inhibiting an already initiated motor response. It is possible that recruitment of right inferior parietal lobe during inhibition trials may reflect a phasic increase in a more general attentional process ( Garavan et al., 1999 ) that may co-occur with inhibition of a prepotent cognitive bias such as during sustained attention ( Fassbender et al., 2004 ) or triggering shifts of attention ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ). Alternatively, the bilateral inferior parietal lobes may be necessary for maintenance of items in working memory during the performance of response inhibition tasks ( Hester et al., 2004a ). The FEF is important for volitional eye saccade movements ( Pierrot-Deseilligny et al., 2004 ). As such, this brain region may play an important role in support of stimulus recognition during the performance of a manual version of the Go/No-Go task not involving inhibition of eye movements. By contrast, left parietal cortex has been implicated in response selection ( Bunge et al., 2002 ), an important component process that may contribute to more deliberative aspects of response inhibition ( Garavan et al., 2002 ). Within the context of this literature our results suggest that adults with ADHD may demonstrate reduced activation in brain regions that support higher order attentional, working memory, and response selection processes that contribute to inhibition of a prepotent cognitive bias. 
 Our behavioral finding that adults with ADHD did not perform significantly worse than controls on “No-Go” trials (10% worse) was unexpected. Post-hoc analyses suggested that the association between ADHD and response inhibition was moderate ( d  = -0.53), consistent with results of a meta-analysis including 17 studies and nearly 1200 children ( d  = 0.58) ( Lijffijt et al., 2005 ). This power analysis suggested that in order to detect a group difference in behavioral performance for response inhibition with 0.80 power (α=0.05), 57 participants per group would be necessary. Since significant differences in brain activation were nonetheless observed in six brain regions, these results are consistent with the view that functional neuroimaging methods may be more sensitive than behavioral measures in the detection of brain disorders. However, an undetected difference in accuracy of “Go” trial performance was not likely since ADHD and control participants performed very similarly on these trials (94% ±3% vs. 94% ±3%). This suggests that potential differences between the ADHD and control groups with regard to performance of “No-Go” trials were not likely to be due to primary ADHD deficits in working memory or attention. 
 Limitations to our study deserve consideration. As was mentioned earlier, it is possible that our choice to contrast activation associated with “No-Go” trials against an implicit task baseline may have revealed areas of activation that were not specifically related to response inhibition. As such, these brain regions may have been associated with cognitive operations co-occuring with the performance of response inhibition tasks rather than with response inhibition itself (Type I error). Although we acknowledge this possibility, we chose to perform this contrast in order to avoid exclusion of brain regions that may make significant contributions to both “Go” and “No-Go” trials (Type II error). Furthermore, the results of our conjunction and follow-up fROI analyses suggested that some of the brain regions that were recruited during both trial types may be specifically and critically implicated in inhibitory control. Finally, we cannot reject the possibility that brain regions that are associated with cognitive processes co-occuring with response inhibition are not part of the network associated with inhibitory control although they may not be critical nodes within this network. 
 Our exclusion criteria to eliminate common comorbidities likely limited our sample. As such, our low sample size may have limited our power to detect behavioral differences under the “No-Go” condition. However, if this were the case, then it is likely that the five previous fMRI studies that attempted to examine the neural correlates of response inhibition in adults with ADHD may have been similarly underpowered as the sample sizes in these studies ranged between 9 and 17 participants per group. In fact, not one of the five studies reported that they observed a significant difference between ADHD and control participants with regard to accuracy of performance during inhibition trials while studies with higher sample sizes reportedly found significant differences ( Bekker et al., 2005 ;  O'Connell et al., 2009 ). In the event that our study was underpowered to detect behavioral differences in performance of this task, the differences in activation that were observed between ADHD and control participants could be attributable to differential task difficulty rather than to dysfunction of brain regions ( Price and Friston, 1999 ). We attempted to address this problem by modeling activation of correct trials only. Future studies should attempt to replicate our findings using higher sample sizes. 
 All of our ADHD participants were clinically referred during childhood and had a previous history of stimulant medication. A recent study suggested that chronic exposure to stimulant medication may have an effect on brain function in individuals with ADHD ( Konrad et al., 2007 ). Our study could not rule out the possibility that history of stimulant medication impacted upon on our findings, but it should be noted that history of treatment with stimulant medication may also be correlated with greater severity of ADHD symptoms ( Barkley et al., 2003 ). Future studies should attempt to repeat our procedures with a medication naive group. 
 In sum, our results suggest that adults with ADHD demonstrate less activation than matched controls within a fronto-parietal network of brain regions that has been previously associated with inhibition of a prepotent cognitive bias. Areas in which reduced activation was observed include premotor, medial prefrontal, and inferior parietal brain regions. As each of these brain regions may play a different role within the execution of response inhibition, it is possible that adults with ADHD have more difficulty with the component abilities that contribute to successful response inhibition, namely working memory, goal-oriented attention, and selection of a motor response. Considering that individuals with common comorbid conditions were excluded, the profile of reduced activation demonstrated may be specifically associated with persistent symptoms of adult ADHD. Future studies should determine whether this pattern of reduced activation varies with task demands or if it can be used for the purpose of diagnosis. 
 
 
 
 We acknowledge Blythe Janowiak, Jill Dorflinger, Rebecca Thompson, and Sally Durgerian for personal and technical assistance. This project was supported by NIH-NIMH (R01 87365 to SMR, R01 87365S1 for RCM). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adler 
 CM 
 
 
 Delbello 
 MP 
 
 
 Mills 
 NP 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 V 
 
 
 Holland 
 S 
 
 
 Strakowski 
 SM 
 
 
 2005 
 Comorbid ADHD is associated with altered patterns of neuronal activation in adolescents with bipolar disorder performing a simple attention task 
 Bipolar Disorder 
 7 
 577 
 588 
 
 
 
 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 1994 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 Washington, DC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 BJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 2003 
 Stop-signal inhibition disrupted by damage to right inferior frontal gyrus in humans 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 115 
 116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2006 
 Cortical and subcortical contributions to stop signal response inhibition: role of the subthalamic nucleus 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 2424 
 2433 
 16510720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barkley 
 RA 
 
 
 1997 
 ADHD and the nature of self-control 
 New York, New York 
 Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barkley 
 RA 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 Smallish 
 L 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 The persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into young adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition of disorder 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 111 
 279 
 289 
 12003449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barkley 
 RA 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 Smallish 
 L 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 K 
 
 
 2003 
 Does the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with stimulants contribute to drug use/abuse? A 13-year prospective study 
 Pediatrics 
 111 
 97 
 109 
 12509561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barkley 
 RA 
 
 
 Murphy 
 KR 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 ADHD in adults: what the science says 
 New York 
 The Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bekker 
 EM 
 
 
 Overtoom 
 CC 
 
 
 Kenemans 
 JL 
 
 
 Kooij 
 JJ 
 
 
 De Noord 
 I 
 
 
 Buitelaar 
 JK 
 
 
 Verbaten 
 MN 
 
 
 2005 
 Stopping and changing in adults with ADHD 
 Psychological Medicine 
 35 
 807 
 816 
 15997601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Meyer 
 JR 
 
 
 Lei 
 Z 
 
 
 Trommer 
 BL 
 
 
 Davenport 
 ND 
 
 
 Li 
 W 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2005 
 Larger deficits in brain networks for response inhibition than for visual selective attention in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 46 
 94 
 111 
 15660647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Hazeltine 
 E 
 
 
 Scanlon 
 MD 
 
 
 Rosen 
 AC 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociable contributions of prefrontal and parietal cortices to response selection 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 1562 
 1571 
 12414294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burden 
 MJ 
 
 
 Jacobson 
 JL 
 
 
 Westerlund 
 A 
 
 
 Lundahl 
 LH 
 
 
 Morrison 
 A 
 
 
 Dodge 
 NC 
 
 
 Klorman 
 R 
 
 
 Nelson 
 CA 
 
 
 Avison 
 MJ 
 
 
 Jacobson 
 SW 
 
 
 2010 
 An event-related potential study of response inhibition in ADHD with and without prenatal alcohol exposure 
 Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 
 34 
 617 
 627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celone 
 KA 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Atri 
 A 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 DePeau 
 K 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Selkoe 
 DJ 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 2006 
 Alterations in memory networks in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: an independent component analysis 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 10222 
 10231 
 17021177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Stokes 
 MG 
 
 
 Henderson 
 TR 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 Morris 
 AP 
 
 
 Mattingley 
 JB 
 
 
 2006 
 Executive “brake failure” following deactivation of human frontal lobe 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 18 
 444 
 455 
 16513008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 2009 
 Insights into the neural basis of response inhibition from cognitive and clinical neuroscience 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 33 
 631 
 646 
 18835296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 CY 
 
 
 Muggleton 
 NG 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 OJ 
 
 
 Hung 
 DL 
 
 
 Juan 
 CH 
 
 
 2009 
 Control of prepotent responses by the superior medial frontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 44 
 537 
 545 
 18852054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 1997 
 Parametric analysis of fMRI data using linear systems methods 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 93 
 103 
 9299383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cubillo 
 A 
 
 
 Halari 
 R 
 
 
 Ecker 
 C 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 2010 
 Reduced activation and inter-regional functional connectivity of fronto-striatal networks in adults with childhood Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and persisting symptoms during tasks of motor inhibition and cognitive switching 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 44 
 629 
 39 
 20060129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cubillo 
 A 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 2010 
 Structural and functional brain imaging in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics 
 10 
 603 
 620 
 20367211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dibbets 
 P 
 
 
 Evers 
 L 
 
 
 Hurks 
 P 
 
 
 Marchetta 
 N 
 
 
 Jolles 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Differences in feedback- and inhibition-related neural activity in adult ADHD 
 Brain and Cognition 
 70 
 73 
 83 
 19201515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickstein 
 SG 
 
 
 Bannon 
 K 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2006 
 The neural correlates of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: an ALE meta-analysis 
 The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 47 
 1051 
 1062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dillo 
 W 
 
 
 Goke 
 A 
 
 
 Prox-Vagedes 
 V 
 
 
 Szycik 
 GR 
 
 
 Roy 
 M 
 
 
 Donnerstag 
 F 
 
 
 Emrich 
 HM 
 
 
 Ohlmeier 
 MD 
 
 
 2010 
 Neuronal correlates of ADHD in adults with evidence for compensation strategies--a functional MRI study with a Go/No-Go paradigm 
 German Medical Science 
 8 
 Doc09 
 20421953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duann 
 JR 
 
 
 Ide 
 JS 
 
 
 Luo 
 X 
 
 
 Li 
 CS 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional connectivity delineates distinct roles of the inferior frontal cortex and presupplementary motor area in stop signal inhibition 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 10171 
 10179 
 19675251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 JN 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Tonev 
 ST 
 
 
 Davidson 
 MC 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Garrett 
 A 
 
 
 Hinshaw 
 SP 
 
 
 Greenhill 
 LL 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Shafritz 
 KM 
 
 
 Vitolo 
 A 
 
 
 Kotler 
 LA 
 
 
 Jarrett 
 MA 
 
 
 Spicer 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 ADHD- and medication-related brain activation effects in concordantly affected parent-child dyads with ADHD 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 48 
 899 
 913 
 17714375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Biederman 
 J 
 
 
 2005 
 What is the prevalence of adult ADHD? Results of a population screen of 966 adults 
 Journal of Attention Disorders 
 9 
 384 
 391 
 16371661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fassbender 
 C 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Wylie 
 GR 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2004 
 A topography of executive functions and their interactions revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 20 
 132 
 143 
 15183386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Floden 
 D 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 2006 
 Inhibitory control is slowed in patients with right superior medial frontal damage 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 18 
 1843 
 1849 
 17069475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 33 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Fassbender 
 C 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 2006 
 Individual differences in the functional neuroanatomy of inhibitory control 
 Brain Research 
 1105 
 130 
 142 
 16650836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 J 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 2003 
 A midline dissociation between error-processing and response-conflict monitoring 
 Neuroimage 
 20 
 1132 
 1139 
 14568482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Roche 
 RA 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociable executive functions in the dynamic control of behavior: inhibition, error detection, and correction 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 1820 
 1829 
 12498755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 1999 
 Right hemispheric dominance of inhibitory control: an event-related functional MRI study 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 
 96 
 8301 
 8306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Halperin 
 JM 
 
 
 Schulz 
 KP 
 
 
 2006 
 Revisiting the role of the prefrontal cortex in the pathophysiology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 132 
 560 
 581 
 16822167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 RL 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Foxe 
 DM 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2004a 
 Predicting success: patterns of cortical activation and deactivation prior to response inhibition 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 776 
 785 
 15200705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2004b 
 Beyond common resources: the cortical basis for resolving task interference 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 202 
 212 
 15325367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2004 
 Prefrontal-subcortical dissociations underlying inhibitory control revealed by event-related fMRI 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 19 
 3105 
 3112 
 15182319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Konrad 
 K 
 
 
 Neufang 
 S 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Herpertz-Dahlmann 
 B 
 
 
 2007 
 Long-term effects of methylphenidate on neural networks associated with executive attention in children with ADHD: results from a longitudinal functional MRI study 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 46 
 1633 
 1641 
 18030085 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kooistra 
 L 
 
 
 van der Meere 
 JJ 
 
 
 Edwards 
 JD 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 BJ 
 
 
 Crawford 
 S 
 
 
 Goodyear 
 BG 
 
 
 2010 
 Preliminary fMRI findings on the effects of event rate in adults with ADHD 
 Journal of Neural Transmission 
 117 
 655 
 662 
 20157743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Rich 
 BA 
 
 
 Vinton 
 DT 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Fromm 
 SJ 
 
 
 Berghorst 
 LH 
 
 
 Joshi 
 P 
 
 
 Robb 
 A 
 
 
 Schachar 
 RJ 
 
 
 Dickstein 
 DP 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural circuitry engaged during unsuccessful motor inhibition in pediatric bipolar disorder 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 164 
 52 
 60 
 17202544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lijffijt 
 M 
 
 
 Kenemans 
 JL 
 
 
 Verbaten 
 MN 
 
 
 van Engeland 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 A meta-analytic review of stopping performance in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: deficient inhibitory motor control? 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 114 
 216 
 222 
 15869352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Biederman 
 J 
 
 
 Valera 
 EM 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 J 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DN 
 
 
 Caviness 
 VS 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Seidman 
 LJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Cortical thinning of the attention and executive function networks in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 17 
 1364 
 1375 
 16920883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mannuzza 
 S 
 
 
 Klein 
 RG 
 
 
 Bessler 
 A 
 
 
 Malloy 
 P 
 
 
 LaPadula 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Adult psychiatric status of hyperactive boys grown up 
 The American Journal of Psychiatry 
 155 
 493 
 498 
 9545994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mannuzza 
 S 
 
 
 Klein 
 RG 
 
 
 Klein 
 DF 
 
 
 Bessler 
 A 
 
 
 Shrout 
 P 
 
 
 2002 
 Accuracy of adult recall of childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 The American Journal of Psychiatry 
 159 
 1882 
 1888 
 12411223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mars 
 RB 
 
 
 Klein 
 MC 
 
 
 Neubert 
 FX 
 
 
 Olivier 
 E 
 
 
 Buch 
 ER 
 
 
 Boorman 
 ED 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 2009 
 Short-latency influence of medial frontal cortex on primary motor cortex during action selection under conflict 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 6926 
 6931 
 19474319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitsis 
 GD 
 
 
 Iannetti 
 GD 
 
 
 Smart 
 TS 
 
 
 Tracey 
 I 
 
 
 Wise 
 RG 
 
 
 2008 
 Regions of interest analysis in pharmacological fMRI: how do the definition criteria influence the inferred result? 
 Neuroimage 
 40 
 121 
 132 
 18226552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 Schafer 
 JG 
 
 
 Abrams 
 MT 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 MC 
 
 
 Flower 
 AA 
 
 
 Boyce 
 A 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Kraut 
 MA 
 
 
 Denckla 
 MB 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 2003 
 fMRI evidence that the neural basis of response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Brain Research Cognitive Brain Research 
 17 
 419 
 430 
 12880912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Response inhibition and response selection: two sides of the same coin 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 751 
 761 
 18201122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 2005 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Connell 
 RG 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Dockree 
 PM 
 
 
 Lau 
 A 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural correlates of deficient error awareness in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 1149 
 1159 
 19350709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paloyelis 
 Y 
 
 
 Mehta 
 MA 
 
 
 Kuntsi 
 J 
 
 
 Asherson 
 P 
 
 
 2007 
 Functional MRI in ADHD: a systematic literature review 
 Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics 
 7 
 1337 
 1356 
 17939771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passarotti 
 AM 
 
 
 Sweeney 
 JA 
 
 
 Pavuluri 
 MN 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural correlates of response inhibition in pediatric bipolar disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 Psychiatry Research 
 181 
 36 
 43 
 19926457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2001 
 Imaging the premotor areas 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 11 
 663 
 672 
 11741015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picton 
 TW 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Alexander 
 MP 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Binns 
 MA 
 
 
 Gillingham 
 S 
 
 
 2007 
 Effects of focal frontal lesions on response inhibition 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 17 
 826 
 838 
 16699079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pierrot-Deseilligny 
 C 
 
 
 Milea 
 D 
 
 
 Muri 
 RM 
 
 
 2004 
 Eye movement control by the cerebral cortex 
 Current Opinion in Neurology 
 17 
 17 
 25 
 15090873 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2007 
 Region of interest analysis for fMRI 
 Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience 
 2 
 67 
 70 
 18985121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Scanning patients with tasks they can perform 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 8 
 102 
 108 
 10524600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quay 
 HC 
 
 
 1997 
 Inhibition and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 
 25 
 7 
 13 
 9093895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rasmussen 
 P 
 
 
 Gillberg 
 C 
 
 
 2000 
 Natural outcome of ADHD with developmental coordination disorder at age 22 years: a controlled, longitudinal, community-based study 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 
 39 
 1424 
 1431 
 11068898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 GM 
 
 
 Nestor 
 L 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2009 
 Learning and memory deficits in ecstasy users and their neural correlates during a face-learning task 
 Brain Research 
 1292 
 71 
 81 
 19631624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Halari 
 R 
 
 
 Smith 
 AB 
 
 
 Mohammed 
 M 
 
 
 Scott 
 S 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Dissociated functional brain abnormalities of inhibition in boys with pure conduct disorder and in boys with pure attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 165 
 889 
 897 
 18413706 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Overmeyer 
 S 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 1999 
 Hypofrontality in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder during higher-order motor control: a study with functional MRI 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 156 
 891 
 896 
 10360128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Russell 
 T 
 
 
 Overmeyer 
 S 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Sharma 
 T 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Andrew 
 CM 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 2001 
 Mapping motor inhibition: conjunctive brain activations across different versions of go/no-go and stop tasks 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 250 
 261 
 11162266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schachar 
 R 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 Robaey 
 P 
 
 
 Chen 
 S 
 
 
 Ickowicz 
 A 
 
 
 Barr 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Restraint and cancellation: multiple inhibition deficits in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 
 35 
 229 
 238 
 17351752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 M 
 
 
 Guidotti 
 L 
 
 
 Nielson 
 KA 
 
 
 Woodard 
 JL 
 
 
 Durgerian 
 S 
 
 
 Antuono 
 P 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Q 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 2009 
 Semantic memory activation in individuals at risk for developing Alzheimer disease 
 Neurology 
 73 
 612 
 620 
 19704080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Bonnelle 
 V 
 
 
 De Boissezon 
 X 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 James 
 SG 
 
 
 Patel 
 MC 
 
 
 Mehta 
 MA 
 
 
 2010 
 Distinct frontal systems for response inhibition, attentional capture, and error processing 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 107 
 6106 
 6111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 2008 
 Meta-analysis of Go/No-go tasks demonstrating that fMRI activation associated with response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 224 
 232 
 17850833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 V 
 
 
 Czobor 
 P 
 
 
 Balint 
 S 
 
 
 Meszaros 
 A 
 
 
 Bitter 
 I 
 
 
 2009 
 Prevalence and correlates of adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis 
 The British Journal of Psychiatry 
 194 
 204 
 211 
 19252145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suskauer 
 SJ 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fotedar 
 S 
 
 
 Blankner 
 JG 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Denckla 
 MB 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for abnormalities in response selection in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: differences in activation associated with response inhibition but not habitual motor response 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 478 
 493 
 18004945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talaraich 
 J 
 
 
 Tourneaux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 New York 
 Thieme Medical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamm 
 L 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Ringel 
 J 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 2004 
 Event-related FMRI evidence of frontotemporal involvement in aberrant response inhibition and task switching in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 43 
 1430 
 1440 
 15502603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trommer 
 BL 
 
 
 Hoeppner 
 JA 
 
 
 Lorber 
 R 
 
 
 Armstrong 
 KJ 
 
 
 1988 
 The go-no-go paradigm in attention deficit disorder 
 Annals of Neurology 
 24 
 610 
 614 
 3202613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weiss 
 G 
 
 
 Hechtman 
 L 
 
 
 Milroy 
 T 
 
 
 Perlman 
 T 
 
 
 1985 
 Psychiatric status of hyperactives as adults: a controlled prospective 15-year follow-up of 63 hyperactive children 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry 
 24 
 211 
 220 
 3989165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zheng 
 D 
 
 
 Oka 
 T 
 
 
 Bokura 
 H 
 
 
 Yamaguchi 
 S 
 
 
 2008 
 The key locus of common response inhibition network for no-go and stop signals 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 1434 
 1442 
 18303978 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Go/No-Go task 
 Participants were instructed to respond to target letters “x” and “y”, and withhold response on nonalternating presentations of target letters. Response to targets (“x” or “y” alternating) constituted the “Go” condition of this task whereas the presentation of “lure” letters, to which a prepotent response has been practiced but becomes inappropriate (“x” followed by “x” or “y followed by “y”), constituted the “No-Go” condition. There were 5 more times as many “targets” as “lures” to emphasize a prepotent response. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Brain Regions Activated During Correct “No-Go” Trials 
 In ADHD and Control columns, red indicates regions demonstrating significantly greater peak activation during “No-Go” trials than at implicit task baseline (i.e., 0) at uncorrected p < .0005, minimum cluster volume = 350 μl; blue indicates de-activation regions (No-Go < 0) identified at the same thresholds. In the final column, regions activated by either group are displayed in the same stereotactic space; different colors indicate distinct fROIs used in between-group contrasts. Numbers correspond to regions described in  Tables 2  and  3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Comparison of BOLD Signal in ROIs Active During Correct Response Inhibition Trials 
 Mean magnitude of BOLD response (± SEM) for control participants (white;  n  = 12) and ADHD participants (black;  n  = 12) in each ROI during correct “No-Go” trials. Numbers on the x axis correspond to regions described in  Tables 2  and  3 . Numbers on the y-axis correspond to average parameter estimates of peak change in event-related hemodynamic signal during correct “No-Go” trials. * p  <  0.05 . 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic, intelligence, and parental ADHD ratings for the adult ADHD and Controls Groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ADHD 
 Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adult Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 31.6 (2.5) 
 29.9 (1.4) 
 
 
 Years of Education 
 13.3 (2.5) 
 15.0 (1.9) 
 
 
 Prorated IQ 
 105.6 (15.2) 
 116.1 (8.6) 
 
 
  Vocabulary * 
 10.8 (3.5) 
 13.7 (2.4) 
 
 
  Block Design 
 11.5 (3.3) 
 13.1 (2.0) 
 
 
 Parent ADHD rating * 
 9.4 (3.8) 
 1.4 (2.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Means (SD) are provided. Adult IQ prorated from Block Design and Vocabulary subtests of the WAIS-III. Adult parental ratings of ADHD symptoms derived from DSM-IV criteria. 
 
 
 * 
 p < 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain Regions Revealed In the Comparison of Activation During Correct “Go” and “No-Go” Trials of the Go/No-Go Task 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Vol (μl) 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 p 1 
 
 ADHD 
 (SD) 
 CTRL 
 (SD) 
 
 df 
 
 
 t 
 
 
 p 2 
 
 
 d 
 
 
 
 
 
 No-Go > Go **   (No-Go trials) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Angular Gyrus (BA 39) 
 346 
 37 
 -58 
 35 
 0.99 
 0.21 
 (0.36) 
 0.76 
 (0.34) 
 21 
 3.85 
 <0.01 * 
 1.57 
 
 
 No-Go & Go ***   (Go trials) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (1) R FEF (BA 6) 
 456 
 32 
 -2 
 51 
 N/A 
 0.39 
 (0.19) 
 0.54 
 (0.47) 
 14 
 1.03 
 0.32 
 0.42 
 
 
  (2) R Pre-SMA (BA 6) 
 1,429 
 4 
 9 
 46 
 N/A 
 0.70 
 (0.19) 
 0.78 
 (0.47) 
 14 
 0.55 
 0.59 
 0.22 
 
 
  (4) R IFG †  (BA 44) 
 722 
 45 
 3 
 28 
 N/A 
 0.49 
 (0.24) 
 0.47 
 (0.41) 
 17 
 -0.15 
 0.89 
 -0.06 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (7) R Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 961 
 36 
 -51 
 38 
 N/A 
 0.38 
 (0.16) 
 0.39 
 (0.29) 
 17 
 0.10 
 0.92 
 0.04 
 
 
  (8) L Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 438 
 -31 
 -48 
 38 
 N/A 
 0.44 
 (0.24) 
 0.48 
 (0.30) 
 20 
 0.36 
 0.72 
 0.15 
 
 
 No-Go & Go ***   (No-Go trials) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (1) R FEF (BA 6) 
 456 
 32 
 -2 
 51 
 N/A 
 0.25 
 (0.32) 
 0.76 
 (0.30) 
 21 
 4.03 
 <0.01 * 
 1.64 
 
 
  (2) R Pre-SMA (BA 6) 
 1,429 
 4 
 9 
 46 
 N/A 
 0.50 
 (0.55) 
 0.88 
 (0.36) 
 18 
 2.00 
 0.05 * 
 0.82 
 
 
  (4) R IFG †  (BA 44) 
 722 
 45 
 3 
 28 
 N/A 
 0.68 
 (0.40) 
 0.83 
 (0.30) 
 20 
 1.04 
 0.31 
 0.43 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (7) R Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 961 
 36 
 -51 
 38 
 N/A 
 0.47 
 (0.37) 
 0.72 
 (0.27) 
 20 
 1.89 
 0.07 
 0.77 
 
 
  (8) L Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 438 
 -31 
 -48 
 38 
 N/A 
 0.41 
 (0.44) 
 0.60 
 (0.22) 
 16 
 1.34 
 0.20 
 0.55 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Brain regions are defined by direct contrast of trial types (No-Go > Go) and by conjunction analyses (No-Go & Go). Regions of interest are numbered, and are based on activation demonstrated by either group (“OR” map). Regions are labeled and numbered as in  Fig. 2  and  Fig. 3  and follow the convention of the Talaraich atlas ( Talaraich and Tourneaux, 1988 ).  p 1  = α per cluster as estimated by AlphaSim (i.e., corrected α). Coordinates represent distance in mm from anterior commissure:  x  right (+)/left(-); y anterior (+)/posterior (-); z superior (+)/inferior (-). Abbreviations used in tables are as follows: R = right; L = Left, BA = Brodmann areas; FEF = Frontal Eye Fields; SMA = Supplementary Motor Area; IFG = Inferior Frontal Gyrus; ACC = Anterior Cingulate Cortex; CTRL = control group. Average parameter estimates of magnitude of hemodynamic response (±SD) during both trial types are listed by each experimental group in each functional region of interest (fROI). Summary statistics (i.e.,  t ,  p , and Cohen's  d ) describe the result of direct comparisons of the magnitude of hemodynamic response between groups (i.e., ADHD vs. CTRL) within each fROI while each group performed each trial type. Positive  t  and  d  values represent ADHD < CTRL.  p 2  = α related to comparison of average magnitude of response within an fROI (ADHD vs CTRL); 
 
 
 * 
 p <.05; 
 
 
 ** 
 p < .005 (uncorrected), 200 μl cluster size threshold; 
 
 
 *** 
 p < .0005 (uncorrected), 350 μl cluster size threshold; 
 
 
 † 
 pars opercularis 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain Regions Exhibiting Change in Activation During Correct “No-Go” Trials of the Go/No-Go Task 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Vol (μl) 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 p 1 
 
 ADHD 
 (SD) 
 CTRL 
 (SD) 
 
 df 
 
 
 t 
 
 
 p 2 
 
 
 d 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No-Go > 0 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (1) R FEF (BA 6) 
 1,888 
 34 
 0 
 48 
 0.001 * 
 0.23 
 (0.22) 
 0.71 
 (0.19) 
 21 
 5.72 
 <0.01 * 
 2.34 
 
 
  (2) R Pre-SMA (BA 6) 
 1,692 
 6 
 9 
 47 
 0.001 * 
 0.46 
 (0.50) 
 0.83 
 (0.32) 
 18 
 2.16 
 0.04 * 
 0.88 
 
 
  (3) L Precentral Gyrus (BA 4) 
 858 
 -41 
 -2 
 31 
 0.02 * 
 0.42 
 (0.41) 
 0.84 
 (0.39) 
 21 
 2.57 
 0.02 * 
 1.05 
 
 
  (4) R IFG †  (BA 44) 
 1,340 
 46 
 5 
 28 
 0.001 * 
 0.64 
 (0.28) 
 0.80 
 (0.33) 
 21 
 1.28 
 0.21 
 0.52 
 
 
  (5) R Anterior Insula (BA 13) 
 1,130 
 34 
 14 
 2 
 0.003 * 
 0.51 
 (0.24) 
 0.75 
 (0.36) 
 19 
 1.92 
 0.07 
 0.78 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (7) R Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 2,419 
 36 
 -53 
 38 
 0.001 * 
 0.44 
 (0.32) 
 0.69 
 (0.25) 
 20 
 2.13 
 0.04 * 
 0.87 
 
 
  (8) L Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40) 
 1,003 
 -32 
 -48 
 37 
 0.01 * 
 0.37 
 (0.32) 
 0.59 
 (0.18) 
 17 
 2.08 
 0.05 * 
 0.85 
 
 
  (9) L Precuneus (BA 39) 
 509 
 -27 
 -69 
 34 
 0.19 
 0.34 
 (0.28) 
 0.70 
 (0.26) 
 21 
 3.26 
 <0.01 * 
 1.33 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (11) R Inferior Occipital Gyrus (BA 18) 
 470 
 30 
 -89 
 -5 
 0.23 
 0.58 
 (0.50) 
 0.56 
 (0.26) 
 16 
 -0.12 
 0.90 
 -0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No-Go < 0 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (6) L Anterior Cingulate (BA 32) 
 753 
 -2 
 39 
 -6 
 0.05 * 
 -0.89 
 (0.62) 
 -0.83 
 (0.60) 
 21 
 0.24 
 0.81 
 0.10 
 
 
  (12) L Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 9) 
 602 
 -10 
 52 
 22 
 0.12 
 -0.81 
 (0.37) 
 -0.80 
 (0.79) 
 15 
 0.04 
 0.97 
 0.02 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (10) Precuneus (BA 31) 
 4,706 
 0 
 -68 
 18 
 0.001 * 
 -0.66 
 (0.20) 
 -0.48 
 (0.46) 
 15 
 1.24 
 0.23 
 0.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Regions are labeled and numbered as in  Table 2 ,  Figure 2 , and  Figure 3 . Coordinates and abbreviations follow the same convention as in  Table 2 .  p 1  = α per cluster as estimated by AlphaSim (i.e., corrected α). Average parameter estimates of magnitude of hemodynamic response (±SD) during correct No-Go trials are listed for each experimental group in each fROI. Summary statistics (i.e.,  t ,  p , and Cohen's  d ) describe the result of direct comparisons of magnitude of hemodynamic response between groups (i.e., ADHD vs. Control) within each fROI while each group performed correct No-Go trials. Positive  t  and  d  values represent ADHD < CTRL.  p 2  = α related to comparison of average magnitude of response within an fROI (ADHD vs Control); 
 
 
 * 
 p <.05; 
 
 
 ** 
 p < .005 (uncorrected), 200 μl cluster size threshold; 
 
 
 *** 
 p < .0005 (uncorrected), 350 μl cluster size threshold; 
 
 
 † 
 pars opercularis 
 
 
 
 
