
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101083946 
 30089 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 
 Cognitive, affective & behavioral neuroscience 
 
 1530-7026 
 1531-135X 
 
 
 21964552 
 3306241 
 10.3758/s13415-011-0062-x 
 NIHMS356890 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Beyond arousal and valence: The importance of the biological versus social relevance of emotional stimuli 
 
 
 
 
 Sakaki 
 Michiko 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Niki 
 Kazuhisa 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 Mara 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 University of Southern California 
 2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 
 
 Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michiko Sakaki, 3715 McClintock Ave., University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089.  msakaki@usc.edu 
 
 
 27 
 2 
 2012 
 
 
 3 
 2012 
 
 
 01 
 3 
 2013 
 
 12 
 1 
 115 
 139 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The present study addressed the hypothesis that emotional stimuli relevant to survival or reproduction (biologically emotional stimuli) automatically affect cognitive processing (e.g., attention; memory), while those relevant to social life (socially emotional stimuli) require elaborative processing to modulate attention and memory. Results of our behavioral studies showed that: a) biologically emotional images hold attention more strongly than socially emotional images, b) memory for biologically emotional images was enhanced even with limited cognitive resources, but c) memory for socially emotional images was enhanced only when people had sufficient cognitive resources at encoding. Neither images’ subjective arousal nor their valence modulated these patterns. A subsequent functional magnetic resonance imaging study revealed that biologically emotional images induced stronger activity in visual cortex and greater functional connectivity between amygdala and visual cortex than did socially emotional images. These results suggest that the interconnection between the amygdala and visual cortex supports enhanced attention allocation to biological stimuli. In contrast, socially emotional images evoked greater activity in medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and yielded stronger functional connectivity between amygdala and MPFC than biological images. Thus, it appears that emotional processing of social stimuli involves elaborative processing requiring frontal lobe activity. 
 
 
 social emotion 
 biological emotion 
 attention 
 memory encoding 
 amygdala 
 medial prefrontal cortex 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Aging : NIA 
 R01 AG025340-06A1 || AG 
 
 
 National Institute on Aging : NIA 
 K02 AG032309-03 || AG 
 
 
 
 
 Emotion has a major impact on cognitive processing (see  Dolan, 2002  for a review). To understand these effects, researchers have focused on two orthogonal dimensions of emotion ( Anderson, Christoff, Stappen, et al., 2003 ;  Russell & Carroll, 1999 ): arousal (how exciting or calming) and valence (how positive and negative). Studies based on this two-dimensional approach demonstrate the importance of both arousal and valence. 
 In terms of valence, positive and negative emotions differ in how they affect various kinds of cognitive processing: memory encoding ( Kensinger, 2009 ;  Mather & Carstensen, 2005 ;  Mickley & Kensinger, 2008 ;  Ochsner, 2000 ;  Talmi, Schimmack, Paterson, & Moscovitch, 2007 ), the scope of attention ( Fenske & Eastwood, 2003 ;  Fredrickson & Branigan, 2005 ;  Rowe, Hirsh, & Anderson, 2007 ), cognitive flexibility ( Isen & Daubman, 1984 ;  Isen, Johnson, Mertz, & Robinson, 1985 ), creative problem solving ( Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 1987 ;  Subramaniam, Kounios, Parrish, & Jung-Beeman, 2009 ), cognitive control ( Dreisbach, 2006 ), knowledge retrieval ( Bäum & Kuhbandner, 2007 ), and perceptual processing ( Kuhbandner, et al., 2009 ). 
 Arousal also has effects on memory and other aspects of cognitive processing. People have enhanced memory for emotionally arousing materials ( Bradley, Greenwald, Petry, & Lang, 1992 ;  Dolcos & Denkova, 2008 ;  Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2004 ;  Hamann, Ely, Grafton, & Kilts, 1999 ;  Kensinger & Corkin, 2004 ) and their intrinsic features ( D’Argembeau & Van der Linden, 2004 ;  Doerksen & Shimamura, 2001 ;  Kensinger & Corkin, 2003a ;  Mather, 2007 ;  Mather & Nesmith, 2008 ;  Nashiro & Mather, in press ), but arousal either does not enhance or impair memory information peripheral to the emotional aspect of an event ( Kensinger, 2009 ;  Kensinger, Garoff-Eaton, & Schacter, 2007 ;  Mather, Gorlick, & Nesmith, 2009 ;  Payne, Stickgold, Swanberg, & Kensinger, 2008 ). Highly arousing stimuli also recruit attention ( Anderson, 2005 ;  Schimmack, 2005 ), which interrupts cognitive processing of competing less-salient stimuli ( Arnell, Killman, & Fijavz, 2007 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ;  Ihssen, Heim, & Keil, 2007 ;  Ihssen & Keil, 2009 ;  Keil & Ihssen, 2004 ;  Mather, et al., 2006 ;  K. J. Mitchell, Mather, Johnson, Raye, & Greene, 2006 ;  Most, Chun, Widders, & Zald, 2005 ). In general, emotional arousal modulates cognitive processing, enhancing processing of salient stimuli while reducing processing of non-salient stimuli ( Mather & Sutherland, 2011 ;  Sutherland & Mather, under review ). 
 Although this two-dimensional approach can account for many effects, arousal and valence may not be sufficient to explain all of the effects of emotion on cognition. One possibly important factor which past studies have not addressed well is the motivational relevance (see  Larson & Steuer, 2009  for related arguments). Emotional reactions are often induced by stimuli related to primary motives, such as survival (e.g., foods;  Lang, et al., 1998 ;  Morris & Dolan, 2001 ) and reproduction (e.g., sexual images;  Hamann, Herman, Nolan, & Wallen, 2004 ). However, people can also feel emotions when they encounter social stimuli that are not directly related to survival or reproduction (e.g.,  Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003 ;  Singer, et al., 2004 ). These two kinds of emotional stimuli might influence cognitive processing in different ways. 
 For example, many studies on the effects of emotion on cognition have used picture stimuli obtained from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS:  Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1997 ). The IAPS involves arousing pictures depicting sexual behaviors, severe injuries, dead bodies, or aimed guns. These stimuli are highly related to survival or reproduction, representing situations that imply direct physical outcomes (either positive or negative), such as death, injuries, and sexual experiences. In contrast, other pictures in the IAPS are less relevant to survival or reproduction and are more relevant to social life (e.g., smiling children, crying people). These stimuli represent social situations with other individuals, each of whom could have a different intention, goal, or emotional feeling, depending on the contexts and other individuals. Because of the complex nature of social situations, the meanings, outcomes and causes of emotion are embedded in each stimulus context. 
 These considerations suggest the following hypothesis: Emotional materials related to survival/reproduction (biologically emotional materials) imply clear meanings and direct physical outcomes, and therefore, their emotional nature can be detected even with just automatic processing (see  Figure 1A ). In contrast, emotional materials less related to survival or reproduction and more strongly related to social life (socially emotional materials) have ambiguous meanings and outcomes shaped by their context. Therefore, they need to be interpreted by each individual in each context in order to elicit an emotion. Thus, socially emotional materials should require effortful cognitive processing to elicit emotions and any subsequent effects of emotion on cognition (see  Figure 1B ). The present study aims to address this hypothesis. 
 
 Effects of Survival or Reproduction Relevance 
 Consistent with the hypothesis, past studies reported preferential processing of survival-relevant stimuli. People tend to detect threats to survival (such as a gun or snake) more automatically than other neutral stimuli (e.g.,  Blanchette, 2006 ;  Brosch & Sharma, 2005 ;  Carlson, Fee, & Reinke, 2009 ;  Fox, Griggs, & Mouchlianitis, 2007 ;  Öhman, Flykt, & Esteves, 2001 ). Similar tendencies were reported in preschool children ( LoBue & DeLoache, 2008 ) and infants from 5 to 18 month olds ( DeLoache & LoBue, 2009 ;  LoBue & DeLoache, 2008 ,  2010 ;  Rakison & Derringer, 2008 ), suggesting the possibility that humans have an innate predisposition to process survival-related stimuli preferentially. 
 Although past research has mostly focused on the effects of threatening stimuli, recent research demonstrated that the effects of survival relevance are not limited to negative stimuli. Positive stimuli related to reproduction, such as sexual materials ( Lykins, Meana, & Kambe, 2006 ) and babies’ faces ( Brosch, Sander, Pourtois, & Scherer, 2008 ;  Brosch, Sander, & Scherer, 2007 ), captured people’s attention automatically. Likewise, infants’ faces more quickly induced strong activity in reward-related regions in the brain than did adults’ faces ( Kringelbach, et al., 2008 ;  Nitschke, et al., 2004 ). There is also evidence that basic motives, such as hunger or thirst, produce preferential processing of positive reinforcers that satisfy those needs ( Drobes, et al., 2001 ;  Mogg, Bradley, Hyare, & Lee, 1998 ;  Morris & Dolan, 2001 ). Furthermore, studies have demonstrated preferential attention and memory encoding for taboo words compared to other emotional words ( Anderson, 2005 ;  Jay, Caldwell-Harris, & King, 2008 ;  Kensinger & Corkin, 2003b ;  MacKay, et al., 2004 ;  Mathewson, Arnell, & Mansfield, 2008 ). Although taboo words are defined by social norms, many of them refer to sexual acts or body products ( Foote & Woodward, 1973 ;  Jay, 2009 ). Thus, it appears that people can process survival/reproduction-related stimuli preferentially even after they are converted to an abstract/verbal format. 
 In summary, past studies suggest that materials related to survival or reproduction receive preferential processing. Most of these studies, however, did not compare survival relevance with social life relevance. Thus, it is unclear whether survival relevance impacts cognitive processing more automatically than social relevance. 
 
 
 Social Cognitive Neuroscience Studies on Biological vs. Social Emotions 
 Recent studies in social cognitive neuroscience have started to examine how biological and social emotions are processed in the brain ( Eisenberger & Lieberman, 2004 ;  Eisenberger, et al., 2003 ;  Immordino-Yang, McColl, Damasio, & Damasio, 2009 ;  Jackson, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2005 ;  Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, Bramati, & Grafman, 2002 ;  Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, Eslinger, et al., 2002 ;  Moll, Eslinger, & Oliveira-Souza, 2001 ;  Singer, et al., 2004 ). Although each study dealt with a different aspect of social emotion, such as social pain, moral judgments, empathy, or compassion, they each suggested differences in underlying processing between biologically and socially emotional stimuli. 
 For example, observing others’ physical pain induced earlier activity in emotion-related regions in the brain than did observing others’ social pain ( Immordino-Yang, et al., 2009 ). Studies also revealed that biologically emotional images (e.g., sexual images or mutilation) modulate activity in visual cortex ( Bradley, et al., 2003 ), skin conductance response, and startle reflex ( Bradley, Codispoti, Cuthbert, & Lang, 2001 ) more strongly than do socially emotional images (e.g., happy families). In addition, processing of biologically emotional films (i.e., a pizza commercial; wounded bodies) produced greater activity in brain regions involved in visceral responses ( Britton, et al., 2006 ), while processing of socially emotional stimuli (e.g., comedy show; poignant bereavement scene; pictures involving people or faces) has been associated with cortical regions that implement higher order cognitive processing ( Britton, et al., 2006 ;  Norris, Chen, Zhu, Small, & Cacioppo, 2004 ). These results seem consistent with our hypothesis, suggesting that people process the emotional implications of biologically emotional stimuli automatically, but engage in more elaborative processing when presented with socially emotional stimuli. 
 Since these studies targeted physical or neural responses induced by biological and social emotional stimuli, however, it is not clear whether relevance to survival or reproduction versus relevance to social life affect cognitive processing (e.g., attention or memory encoding) differently. In addition, there has been no clear agreement about how to define biologically and socially emotional stimuli, leading different studies to use different ways to categorize biologically and socially emotional stimuli. Furthermore, most of the past studies did not match arousal and valence between social vs. biological emotional materials. Thus, it is unclear whether the results were due to the social/biological nature of stimuli or arousal/valence. 
 
 
 Overview of the Present Study 
 We tested our hypothesis that, compared with socially emotional stimuli, biologically emotional materials impact cognitive processing more automatically using several different paradigms. In Study 1, we compared the effects of biological versus social emotional materials on attention and memory encoding. In Study 2, we further examined memory encoding of biological and social emotional materials, manipulating cognitive resources available at encoding to see if cognitive resources affect memory encoding of biologically and socially emotional materials differently. Finally, in Study 3 we investigated the brain regions associated with processing biological and social emotional stimuli by using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
 Given the absence of clear definitions about biological and social emotional materials in the literature, across all studies, we adopted a bottom-up approach to define biologically and socially emotional stimuli to reduce any arbitrary biases introduced by the researchers. That is, we selected stimuli based on people’s ratings on relevance to survival/reproduction and relevance to social life. Although there might be emotional stimuli rated high in relation to survival/reproduction and to social adaptation, the primary purpose of the current study is to identify the effects of biological and social relevance separately. Therefore, as biologically emotional stimuli, we used stimuli rated high in relation to survival/reproduction and low in relation to social life. Socially emotional stimuli were also defined as those rated high in relation to social life but low in relation to survival/reproduction. We also carefully matched arousal and valence across the biologically and the socially emotional stimuli to avoid confounding the stimulus type (i.e., biological or social stimuli) and arousal or valence. 
 
 
 Study 1 
 In Study 1, we examined the effects of biologically/socially emotional stimuli on attention. Previous studies revealed that emotional stimuli have more impact on attention disengagement than on attention capture ( Fox, Russo, Bowles, & Dutton, 2001 ;  Fox, Russo, & Dutton, 2002 ) especially when they compete with other stimuli for attention ( Anderson, 2005 ;  Buodo, Sarlo, & Palomba, 2002 ;  Pratto & John, 1991 ;  Schimmack, 2005 ). Based on these findings, we investigated the effects of biologically and socially emotional stimuli on attention disengagement, by using a dot-probe task combined with other competing stimuli. To enhance participants’ engagement, a problem solving task was employed as a competing task (see  Schimmack, 2005  for a similar procedure). 
 On each trial ( Figure 2A ), participants were shown a riddle, which was followed by either a biological, social, neutral picture, or asterisks at the center of a display. After 150 ms of the picture or the asterisks, participants saw a dot-probe at one of eight possible locations ( Figure 2B ), all of which were different from the picture’s location. The participants’ task was to indicate the location of the dot-probe as quickly and as accurately as possible. If participants have more difficulty disengaging their attention from biologically emotional pictures than from socially emotional ones, their reaction times to detect the dot-probe should be slower after biological pictures than social ones. Study 1 also included a surprise memory test of pictures to examine the effects of biologically/socially emotional stimuli on memory as well as attention. 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty-two Japanese undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Tokyo took part in the experiment (14 males;  M age  = 21.09, SD = 2.36). 
 
 
 Materials: Pictures 
 Based on pilot ratings (see  Supplementary Materials ), we selected 10 biological (5 positive, 5 negative), 10 social (5 positive, 5 negative), and 10 neutral pictures. Biological and social pictures were matched in arousal and valence (see  S-Table 1 ). Examples for each category were sexual images or appetizing food for biological positive pictures; a snake, skull, or a man who commits suicide for biological negative ones; smiling people, celebrating athletes, or money for social positive ones; KKK or neo-Nazi for social negative ones. The recognition test included an additional 5 biological positive, 5 biological negative, 5 social positive, 5 social negative, and 10 neutral pictures as foils. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 We employed a modified version of the dot-probe task to examine the effects of biological and social emotional stimuli on attention ( Figure 2 ; see  Supplementary Methods  for details). After participants finished the attention task, they worked on a mathematical calculation task for 5 min, which was followed by a surprise recognition test for the pictures. In the memory test, participants were shown pictures used in the attention task and new pictures and asked to indicate whether they saw each picture or not. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Effects of pictures on reaction time to detect the dot-probe 
 In this and the following studies in the current article, outlier response times were identified using  Tukey (1977) ’s criterion of three times the interquartile range (the hinge-spread) higher than the third quartile in each condition. The remaining reaction times were submitted to a one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA). 1  This ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type,  F (3, 63) = 7.74,  R 2  = .01,  p  < .01. Post-hoc comparisons (Tukey’s HSD) revealed that reaction times were significantly longer after biological pictures than after social pictures, neutral pictures, or asterisks ( Figure 3A ), respective  t s(63) = 2.78, 3.30, 4.44,  SE s = 10,  p s < .05. In contrast, the reaction time did not differ across social, neutral, and control conditions ( p s > .30). In addition, the difference between biological and social pictures was not modulated by valence and arousal ( Figure 3B ; see  Supplementary Results  for details). These results suggest that people have more difficulty disengaging their attention from biologically emotional pictures than from socially emotional pictures, regardless of valence and subjective arousal. 
 
 
 Memory of pictures 
 Next, we examined participants’ memory for biologically versus socially emotional pictures. A one-way repeated measures ANOVA on the hit rates of pictures revealed a significant effect of picture type,  F (2, 42) = 8.77,  R 2  = .19,  p  < .01. Post-hoc Tukey’s HSD tests revealed that participants remembered biological ( M  = .33) and social pictures ( M  = .39) significantly better than neutral ones ( M  = .19), respective  ts (42) = 3.13, 4.15,  SE s = .05,  p s < .05. There was no significant difference for biological and social pictures ( p  > .40). Further analyses revealed no significant effects of valence and arousal (see  Supplementary Results ). 2 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Study 1 revealed that biologically emotional stimuli hold attention more than do socially emotional stimuli, regardless of valence and arousal. Like the biologically emotional pictures, socially emotional pictures had higher arousal than neutral pictures—yet the social pictures did not slow reaction times more than neutral pictures did. Thus, the relevance to survival or reproduction had a larger impact on attention than arousal or valence. In contrast, participants remembered both biologically and socially emotional stimuli significantly better than neutral stimuli. In fact, they remembered socially emotional stimuli as well as biologically emotional stimuli. These results suggest that memory for socially emotional stimuli and memory for biologically emotional stimuli are facilitated through different mechanisms. Study 2 addresses this possibility. 
 One possible concern about Study 1 is that each person might have different evaluations about what is related to social adaptation and what is related to survival/reproduction, depending on his/her experiences. In addition, Study 1 might not have enough statistical power to detect the effects of arousal and valence, because of the relatively small number of trials in each condition. The statistical power issue was exacerbated by the fact that dichotomization of continuous variables (i.e., arousal and valence in this case) results in the loss of the statistical power (Irwin & McClelland, 2003). However, in a supplemental study ( S-Study 1 ; see  Supplementary Studies  for details), we replicated the results from Study 1 while determining each picture’s biological/social relevance, arousal, and valence by each participant’s evaluation. In this  supplemental study , we treated arousal and valence as continuous variables to increase the statistical power; as in Study 1 we found a significant effect of biological relevance but not of valence and arousal ( S-Figure 1 ). Thus, this  supplemental study  provides additional support for the importance of biological relevance in attention. 
 
 
 
 Study 2 
 Past research suggests two different mechanisms by which emotion enhances memory ( Anderson, Christoff, Panitz, De Rosa, & Gabrieli, 2003 ;  Kensinger & Corkin, 2004 ;  Talmi, et al., 2007 ); a) emotional materials tend to attract and hold attention more automatically than do neutral materials, and b) emotional materials recruit more effortful semantic elaboration than neutral materials. In Study 1, we found that biologically emotional stimuli held attention more strongly than socially emotional ones when the pictures were not relevant to the primary task. This automatic capture of attention by biologically emotional stimuli but not socially emotional stimuli suggests that memory for biologically emotional stimuli would depend on the automatic attention mechanism more than would socially emotional stimuli. In contrast, if each socially emotional stimulus has to be interpreted by each individual in each context to elicit an emotion (as we posited above), the semantic elaborative process should be more crucial in memory for socially emotional stimuli than for biological stimuli. Study 2 addressed these predictions. 
 Half of the participants in Study 2 viewed emotional or neutral pictures while working on a secondary task (divided-attention condition), whereas the other half viewed pictures without any additional task (full-attention condition). This encoding session was followed by a surprise recognition test of picture memory. To examine how vividly participants remembered each picture, we included remember-know judgments ( Gardiner, Ramponi, & Richardson-Klavehn, 1998 ) as well as old-new judgments. If memory encoding of socially emotional materials depends on effortful elaborative processing, participants should show worse memory for social stimuli in the divided-attention condition than in the full-attention condition. In contrast, if memory for biologically emotional materials is enhanced through automatic attention mechanisms, participants’ memory for biologically emotional pictures should be less influenced by the attention manipulations than their memory for socially emotional stimuli. 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Forty-eight Japanese undergraduates and graduate students at University of Tokyo participated (21 males;  M age  = 22.19,  SD  = 2.03). They were randomly assigned to either full- ( N  = 25) or divided-attention condition ( N  = 23). Data from two participants were not used; one did not understand the differences between remember/know and old/new judgments in the recognition test, and the other did not press keys during the encoding session. 
 
 
 Materials 
 Based on the pilot picture rating study, we chose 32 biological (16 positive, 16 negative), 32 social (16 positive, 16 negative), and 32 neutral pictures. Biologically and socially emotional pictures were selected to have matched valence and arousal levels (see  S-Table 1 ). In the recognition task, 78 non-studied foils (13 biological positive, 13 biological negative, 13 social positive, 13 social negative, and 26 neutral) were used. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Participants saw each of 96 pictures for 2500 ms in a randomized order with a 4-sec inter-trial interval. The encoding session consisted of four blocks. Both in the full- and divided-attention conditions, participants were asked to make a judgment about whether they liked or disliked each picture as quickly and as accurately as possible, using their right hand to press keys. 
 In addition to this picture judgment task, participants in the divided attention condition listened to a sound sequence, and worked on a sound-pitch judgment task ( Gilbert & Silvera, 1996 ) throughout the session. The sound sequence consisted of a low-pitched, a medium-pitched, and a high-pitched tone in randomized order with variable intervals (approx 1 – 3 secs). Participants’ task was to keep track of the sound sequence and to press a button with their left hand immediately after they detected a specific sequence of three tones: low, medium, and high pitched tones in that order regardless of interval duration. 
 The encoding session was followed by a mathematical calculation task for three minutes. Finally, participants were given a surprise recognition test for the pictures. They indicated whether they remembered seeing the picture (i.e., old) or not (i.e., new). For any item that received an “old” decision, participants were asked to indicate whether they vividly remembered seeing the picture in the first session (i.e., remember) or sensed that the picture was familiar but did not remember any details about its prior presentation (i.e., know). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Effects of attention and stimulus type on memory 
 A 2 (attention: full vs. divided) × 3 (stimulus type: biological, social vs. neutral) ANOVA on the hit rate 3  revealed significant effects of attention,  F (1, 44) = 9.66,  p  < .01,  R 2  = .18, stimulus type,  F (2, 88) = 5.53,  p  < .01,  R 2  = .33, and an interaction between attention and stimulus type,  F (2, 88) = 3.36,  p  < .05,  R 2  = .17. The attention manipulation had a significant effect for social,  F (1, 88) = 16.08,  p  < .01, and neutral stimuli,  F (1, 88) = 4.31,  p  < .05, but not for biological stimuli ( p  > .10;  Figure 4A ). Participants in the full-attention condition remembered biological and social stimuli significantly better than neutral stimuli,  t s(44) = 3.16, 3.94,  SE s = .02,  p s < .01, with no significant difference between biological and social stimuli ( p  > .60; Tukey’s HSD). In contrast, participants in the divided-attention condition remembered biological stimuli better than social,  t (44) = 2.39,  SE  = .04,  p  < .05, and neutral stimuli,  t (44) = 2.21,  SE  = .04,  p  < .05, and there was no significant difference between social and neutral stimuli ( p  > .95). 4  These results suggest that cognitive resources contribute more to encoding socially emotional materials than to encoding biologically emotional materials. 
 
 
 Effects of attention and stimulus type on Remember rates 
 A similar analysis on the proportion of “Remember” responses also revealed significant effects of attention,  F (1, 44) = 5.75,  p  < .05,  R 2  = .10, of stimulus type,  F (2, 88) = 8.28,  p  < .01,  R 2  = .22, and an interaction between them,  F (2, 88) = 5.27,  p  < .01,  R 2  = .10. The attention manipulation had a significant effect on memory for social and neutral stimuli,  Fs (1, 88) =11.35, 4.33,  ps  < .05, but not for biological stimuli ( p  > .30;  Figure 5A ). Participants in the full-attention condition were more likely to vividly remember social stimuli than biological or neutral stimuli,  ts (44) = 3.35, 4.53,  SEs  = .02, .03,  ps  < .01, while there was no significant difference between biological and neutral stimuli ( p  > .20; Tukey’s HSD). When participants’ attention was focused elsewhere in the divided-attention condition, however, they did not show enhanced remember rates for social stimuli compared with neutral or biological stimuli ( ps  > .20). Instead, they produced a greater proportion of remember responses to biological stimuli than to neutral stimuli,  t (44) = 3.16,  SE  = .03,  p  < .05. Thus, it appears that vivid memory for socially emotional stimuli depends more on cognitive resources than does vivid memory for biologically emotional stimuli. 5 
 
 
 Like/Dislike Judgments in the Encoding Session 
 To examine whether the attention manipulation influenced like/dislike judgments during the encoding session, the reaction times of like/dislike judgment were submitted to a 3 (stimulus type) × 2 (attention) ANOVA. This ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type,  F (2, 88) = 26.24,  p  < .01,  R 2  = .02, with no other significant effects ( p s > .30). Participants took longer to make judgments about neutral pictures ( M  = 1178 ms) than social ( M  = 1092 ms) and biological pictures ( M  = 1048 ms; Tukey’s HSD),  t s(88) = 4.12, 7.12,  SE s = 18,  p s < .01. This result is not surprising because we did not allow participants to judge pictures as neutral in their like/dislike judgments. More interestingly, participants took longer to make a decision about social pictures than biological pictures ( M social  = 1092 ms vs.  M bio  = 1048 ms),  t (88) = 2.40,  SE  = 18,  p  < .05, suggesting that socially emotional stimuli require deeper cognitive processing to make like/dislike judgments than do biologically emotional stimuli. 
 We also calculated the proportion of pictures for which the participant’s judgments were consistent with the valence categories (i.e., liked positive pictures and disliked negative pictures), to examine the accuracy of participants’ judgments. This consistency measure was submitted to a 2 (attention) × 2 (stimulus type: social vs. biological) ANOVA. Because it is hard to define correct judgments for neutral pictures, we did not involve neutral pictures in this analysis. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of stimulus type,  F (1, 44) = 4.20,  p  < .05,  R 2  = .06, indicating that participants were more accurate when they made judgments about biological pictures than social ones ( M bio  = .76 vs.  M social  = .72). None of the other effects were significant ( p s > .20). 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 When participants had enough attention (i.e., full attention condition), socially emotional stimuli were remembered as well as biologically emotional stimuli. In addition, when we looked at remember rates, socially emotional stimuli produced even higher remember rates than biological stimuli. However, dividing attention impaired memory for socially emotional stimuli more than for biologically emotional stimuli. As a result, in the divided attention condition, biologically emotional stimuli were more likely to be recognized than socially emotional stimuli. Further analyses confirmed similar patterns irrespective of valence and arousal ( Figure 4B – 4C ;  Figure 5B – 5C ; see  Supplementary Results  for details). These results suggest that memory for socially emotional stimuli is enhanced through effortful elaboration, while memory for biologically emotional stimuli is enhanced through automatic attention allocation, regardless of subjective arousal and valence. 
 We also found that during the encoding session, participants took longer to make like/dislike judgments for socially emotional stimuli than for biological stimuli. This result is also consistent with our hypothesis that the affective nature of biologically emotional stimuli can be detected more automatically than the affective nature of socially emotional stimuli. 
 
 
 
 Study 3 
 Study 3 examined the neural mechanisms underlying processing of biologically and socially emotional stimuli. Given previous evidence showing that the amygdala responds to both social and non-social emotional stimuli (e.g.,  Adolphs, 2003 ;  Britton, et al., 2006 ;  Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, Eslinger, et al., 2002 ;  Norris, et al., 2004 ), we expected that both biologically and socially emotional stimuli would induce similar activity in the amygdala. According to the results from Studies 1–2 and our hypothesis as outlined in  Figure 1 , however, we also expected different brain regions activated and different functional connectivity with the amygdala depending on stimulus type (i.e., biologically and socially emotional stimuli). 
 Past studies revealed that the amygdala is reciprocally interconnected with the visual cortex ( Amaral, Behniea, & Kelly, 2003 ;  Emery & Amaral, 2000 ), and that these two brain regions influence each other, which results in enhanced perceptual processing of emotional stimuli ( Bradley, et al., 2003 ;  Schupp, Junghöfer, Weike, & Hamm, 2003 ). If biologically emotional images hold visual attention more strongly than socially emotional images as revealed in Study 1, biologically emotional pictures should produce greater activity in visual cortex and stronger connectivity between the amygdala and visual cortex than do socially emotional pictures. 
 In contrast, previous research has suggested that medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) implements meta-cognitive or elaborative operations about emotional aspects of stimuli ( Amodio & Frith, 2006 ;  Cunningham, Johnson, Gatenby, Gore, & Banaji, 2003 ;  Ochsner, Knierim, et al., 2004 ). If socially emotional stimuli trigger more elaborative processing than biologically emotional stimuli, MPFC should show stronger activation in response to socially emotional stimuli than to biologically emotional stimuli. In addition, if MPFC plays a critical role in processing the affective nature of social stimuli, the amygdala should have stronger functional connectivity with MPFC for socially emotional stimuli than for biological stimuli. 
 Study 3 also employed both pictorial stimuli and verbal stimuli to examine whether biologically and socially emotional stimuli recruit similar brain regions regardless of the stimuli format (i.e., word or picture). Two different predictions can be made concerning the brain regions underlying processing of words. First, if the conceptual meaning of the stimuli is critical, biologically emotional stimuli would activate similar brain regions, regardless of the format of the materials. Similarly, socially emotional words and pictures would activate overlapping regions of the brain. An alternative possibility is that once biologically emotional stimuli become abstract (i.e., verbal stimuli in this case), physical outcomes would be less evident than in pictorial stimuli, and therefore, they might need similar elaborative processing as socially emotional stimuli to evoke emotional reactions. In contrast, socially emotional stimuli would not imply direct physical outcomes, regardless of the stimulus formats, and both socially emotional words and pictures would need similar elaborative processing. Thus, an alternative prediction is that biologically emotional  words  recruit different brain regions from biologically emotional  pictures  but induce similar activation patterns to socially emotional stimuli, while socially emotional stimuli activate similar brain regions, regardless of the stimulus format. By including biologically and socially emotional words, we addressed these predictions. 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Sixteen Japanese University of Tsukuba undergraduates and graduate students took part in the experiment (12 males;  M age  = 21.2, SD = 1.78). They gave informed consent in accordance with the MRI ethics committee of AIST. Prospective participants were excluded if they had any medical, neurological, or psychiatric illness. One participant judged more than 70% of social positive pictures and more than 60% of social negative pictures to be neutral during the task. Data from this participant were not included. 
 
 
 Materials: Emotional pictures 
 Twenty-eight biologically emotional pictures (14 positive, 14 negative), 28 socially emotional pictures (14 positive, 14 negative), and 28 neutral pictures were selected based on the pilot picture rating study. Social and biological pictures were matched not only in arousal and valence (see  S-Table 1 ), but also in luminance (measured by Adobe Photoshop). Neutral pictures were also matched in luminance to the emotional pictures. We also included 14 scrambled images as nonsense stimuli. They were created based on three pictures from biological positive, biological negative, social positive, and social negative picture, and two neutral pictures used in the experiment. 
 
 
 Materials: Emotional words 
 Based on a pilot rating study of words (see  Supplementary Materials ), 28 biological (14 positive, 14 negative), 28 social (14 positive, 14 negative), and 28 neutral words were chosen (see  S-Table 3 ). There were no differences in arousal or valence scores between the biological and social stimuli. In addition, 14 nonsense words were used in the experiment. Biological, social and neutral words were matched on familiarity obtained from published norms ( Amano & Kondo, 2000 ). 
 
 
 Behavioral procedure 
 In each trial, participants saw either a word or a picture for 1800 ms. Words and pictures from the different emotion categories were randomly intermixed, with inter-stimulus intervals ranging from 6 to 8 secs. After each stimulus disappeared, participants were asked to indicate whether they liked, disliked, or were neutral about each stimulus by pressing buttons (see  Supplementary Results  for behavioral results). 
 
 
 Functional MRI data acquisition and preprocessing 
 All scanning was performed on a 3.0-T MRI Scanner (GE 3T Signa) equipped with EPI capability using the standard head coil for radiofrequency transmission and signal reception. Twenty-seven axial slices (4 mm thick and 0.2 mm gap, interleaved) were prescribed to cover the whole brain. A T2* weighted gradient echo EPI was employed. The imaging parameters were TR=2s, TE=30ms, FA=75, and FOV=20 cm×20 cm (64×64 mesh). Each participant’s data were individually pre-processed by SPM8 (Wellcome Trust Center for Neuroimaging). In the preprocessing analysis, images were corrected for slice-timing and motion, then spatially normalized into the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template and spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel of 8mm FWHM. 
 
 
 Whole-brain analysis 
 For each participant, stimulus-dependent changes in BOLD signal were modeled with regressors for each event type: neutral, biological positive, biological negative, social positive, social negative, and nonsense for each stimulus format (i.e., word and picture). The regressors were convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function provided by SPM. A high-pass filter (cutoff period = 128 s) was applied to remove low-frequency artifacts from the data. Effects of each event type were estimated using a fixed-effects model and then entered into a random effects analysis. Because preliminary fMRI analyses found similar patterns between positive and negative stimuli (see  S-Tables 4–6 ), we report our main results from analyses with positive and negative valence categories collapsed. 
 In the whole-brain analysis, we performed two analyses. First, we assessed activity differences between biologically and socially emotional stimuli. The threshold was set at  p  < .05 -FDR at the cluster level with a height threshold of  t  = 3.79. Second, to reveal brain regions commonly activated by the two kinds of emotional stimuli, conjunction analyses were performed using the masking function in SPM. For this purpose, initial contrast analyses examined brain regions involved in processing each type of emotional stimuli compared with neutral and nonsense stimuli. These individual contrast analyses were then entered into conjunction analyses. The threshold for each contrast entered into a conjunction analysis was set at a voxel level  p  < .001 (uncorrected), which resulted in a conjoint probability of  p  < .00001. Clusters of activations that involved less than ten voxels were discarded. In both analyses, locations reported by SPM were converted into Talairach coordinates ( Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ) by the MNI-to-Talairach transformation algorithm ( Lancaster, et al., 2007 ). The Talairach Daemon version 2.4.2 ( Lancaster, et al., 2000 ) was then used to determine the nearest gray matter. 
 
 
 Region-of-interest analyses 
 As discussed above, we expected that biological and social stimuli would both activate the amygdala. However, the full-attention condition results of Study 2 suggest that there may be differences in hippocampal activity during viewing pictures, as participants remembered social stimuli more vividly than biological stimuli. To address these possibilities, we structurally defined bilateral amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus, based on AAL atlas ( Tzourio-Mazoyer, et al., 2002 ) and performed region-of-interest (ROI) analyses, using the MarsBar toolbox ( Brett, Anton, Valabregue, & Poline, 2002 ). 
 
 
 Functional connectivity analyses 
 To examine functional connectivity with the amygdala, we applied a beta series correlation analysis ( Gazzaley, Cooney, Rissman, & D’Esposito, 2005 ;  Rissman, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2004 ). This allowed us to use trial-to-trial variability to characterize dynamic inter-regional interactions. As a first step, a new GLM design file was constructed where each individual trial for each condition was coded with a unique covariate, resulting in 196 independent variables. To reduce the confounding effects of the global signal change, the global mean signal level over all brain voxels was calculated for each time point and was used as a covariate. Second, the least squares solution of the GLM yielded a beta value for each trial for each individual subject. These beta values were then sorted by stimulus type. As in the univariate analyses, we collapsed positive and negative stimuli in each stimulus type. As a third step, mean activity (i.e., mean parameter estimates) was extracted for each individual trial from a seed region identified in the whole-brain analysis. For each stimulus type, we then computed correlations between the seed’s beta series and the beta series of all other voxels in the brain, thus generating condition-specific seed correlation maps. Correlation magnitudes were converted into  z -scores using the Fisher’s  r -to- z  transformation. Finally, condition-dependent changes in functional connectivity were assessed using random-effects analyses, which were thresholded at  p  < .005-uncorrected at voxel-level combined with a cluster extent threshold of 20 contiguous voxels. 
 
 
 
 Results and Discussion 
 Below, we describe results for emotional pictures first, followed by results for emotional words. 
 
 Brain areas shared by biological and social emotional pictures 
 A conjunction analysis between biological and social pictures revealed that both biological and social pictures induced activity in the left amygdala and the left MPFC ( Table 1 ,  Figure 6A and 6B ). These results suggest that biologically and socially emotional images share some neural mechanisms. 
 
 
 Brain areas sensitive to each type of emotional pictures 
 Despite the similarity revealed in the above conjunction analysis, a direct comparison revealed that relative to biological pictures, social pictures induced greater activity in bilateral MPFC ( Figure 7A ), which is a more dorsal part than the cluster revealed in the previous conjunction analysis. Dorsal MPFC has been implicated in elaborative processing of affective nature of stimuli (e.g.,  Ochsner, Knierim, et al., 2004 ). Thus, the greater MPFC activity to social stimuli seems consistent with our behavioral results that social stimuli need elaborative processing. Socially emotional pictures also activated other brain regions implicated in social cognition (e.g.,  Adolphs, 2003 ;  Saxe, 2006 ), such as the posterior cingulate, bilateral temporal-parietal junction (TPJ), and the bilateral anterior temporal gyri ( Table 2 ;  Figure 7B – 7D ). In contrast, a reversed contrast (biological > social) revealed greater activity in the occipital gyrus and cerebellum ( Figure 8 ). The stronger activity in the visual cortex for biological pictures is consistent with results in Study 1 that biological pictures hold visual attention more strongly than social pictures. 
 
 
 ROI analyses 
 The whole-brain analysis described above did not reveal significant differences between biological and social pictures in hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus activation. In ROI analyses, however, we found that social pictures produced greater activation in right hippocampus,  F (1, 14) = 3.66,  p  < .08,  η 2  = .21, and in right parahippocampal gyrus,  F (1, 14) = 8.80,  p  < .05,  η 2  = .39, than did biological pictures ( Figure 7E ). There were no significant differences in left hippocampus and left parahippocampal gyrus ( p s > .20). Thus, consistent with the more detailed memory for social pictures seen in Study 2, socially emotional pictures evoked stronger activity in memory-related regions than did biologically emotional pictures. In contrast, the bilateral amygdala showed similar activity between biological and social pictures ( ps  > .90;  Figure 6C and 6D ), which is consistent with the results from the previous conjunction analysis. 
 
 
 Functional connectivity analyses 
 To address the functional connectivity with the amygdala, a beta series correlation analysis was applied. As a seed region, we employed a 3-mm sphere surrounding the peak amygdala voxel from the conjunction analysis of brain regions shared by biological and social emotional pictures ([−34, −4, −24] hereafter all coordinates in text are in the MNI space). 
 This amygdala seed region had stronger functional connectivity with occipital lobe and inferior parietal lobe regions for biological pictures than social pictures ( Table 3 ;  Figure 9A ). This stronger interconnection between amygdala and visual processing might facilitate bottom-up visual attention to biologically emotional stimuli, which in turn could contribute to the stronger attention effects of biologically emotional pictures revealed in Study 1. 
 In contrast, the same amygdala seed region had a stronger correlation with left dorsal MPFC for social pictures than for biological pictures ( Figure 9B ). Thus, it appears that dorsal MPFC implements elaborative processing about socially emotional stimuli and sends its outcome to the amygdala during like/dislike judgments. In addition, the amygdala had stronger correlations with left uncus and with posterior parahippocampal gyrus for social pictures than for biological pictures ( Table 3 ). These results are consistent with the results from ROI analyses and Study 2, suggesting that people remember socially emotional stimuli more strongly than biologically emotional stimuli if they have enough cognitive resources. 
 
 
 Brain areas sensitive to emotional words 
 Finally, we examined brain activity induced by emotional words. Unlike emotional pictures, we did not find significant differences when we contrasted biologically emotional words to socially emotional words (and vice versa). This suggests that biologically and socially emotional words induce similar brain activity. To address this possibility, we employed two conjunction analyses. 
 
 
 Conjunction between emotional pictures and emotional words 
 First, we examined whether emotional words produced activity in similar regions to emotional pictures in each type of stimuli (i.e., biological and social). A conjunction analysis between social words and social pictures revealed activations in dorsal MPFC, posterior cingulate, TPJ and anterior temporal gyrus ( Table 4 ;  Figure 10 ). In contrast, there were no brain regions shared by biological words and biological pictures even at a lower threshold level ( p  < .005 -uncorrected for each contrast entered into the conjunction analysis). Thus, it appears that socially emotional stimuli recruit similar brain regions irrespective of stimulus formats, whereas biologically emotional words produce activity in different brain regions from biological pictures. 
 
 
 Conjunction analyses between socially and biologically emotional words 
 Next, we performed another conjunction analysis between biological words and social words. Although this conjunction analysis did not find any significant results at the same threshold level, we found activity in left anterior temporal lobe (−46, 12, −36: BA 38), left TPJ (−58, −64, 30: BA 39), left precuneus/posterior cingulate (−8, −66, 24: BA 31), and dorsal MPFC (−6, 58, 40: BA 8) at a lower threshold level ( p  < .005 -uncorrected for each contrast in the conjunction analysis). These clusters were similar to the clusters in which we found greater activity for socially emotional pictures than for biologically emotional pictures (see  Table 2 ), suggesting that biologically emotional words recruit similar brain regions to socially emotional stimuli. 
 To confirm this possibility, we performed another conjunction analysis, where we looked at the common regions among three contrasts (i.e., social pictures, social words, and biological words) with  p  < .005-uncorrected for each contrast entered in the conjunction analysis. This conjunction analysis revealed activity in left anterior temporal gyrus, dorsal MPFC, left TPJ and posterior cingulate ( Table 4 ). Thus, while biological words did not produce significant activity in any regions overlapping with biological pictures, they evoked activity in similar regions as social stimuli. These results suggest that once biologically emotional stimuli become abstract, they are processed in a similar way as socially emotional stimuli. 6 
 
 
 
 
 General Discussion 
 Past studies on emotion and cognition have shown that valence and arousal modulate attention and memory encoding (for reviews see  Dolcos & Denkova, 2008 ;  Kensinger, 2009 ;  Mather & Sutherland, in press ). However, the present study reveals that subjective arousal and valence are not enough to explain the effects of emotion; whether the image is directly relevant to biological motivations, such as survival or reproduction, is an additional important factor. 
 
 Effects of Biologically and Socially Emotional Stimuli on Attention and Memory 
 In Study 1, we found that biologically emotional images capture attention more than socially emotional images. Although we matched arousal and valence level between biologically and socially emotional images, socially emotional images did not impact attention differently than neutral images. Study 2 revealed that memory of socially emotional images is enhanced through elaborative processing, while memory of biologically emotional images is enhanced automatically: Participants’ memory of socially emotional pictures was impaired when their cognitive resources were deployed elsewhere, whereas the attention manipulation did not significantly influence memory of biologically emotional pictures. Furthermore, arousal and valence did not modulate the effects of biological relevance in either Studies 1 or 2. Additional analyses also confirmed similar results even after controlling for the effects of visual complexity or presence of people ( S-Figure 2 ; see  Supplementary Results  for details). Thus, our behavioral studies suggest that biologically emotional images can induce emotional reactions more automatically than socially emotional stimuli, which further results in automatic influences on attention and memory encoding (see  Figure 1 ). 
 Past studies have revealed that perceiving an emotional stimulus modulates subsequent cognitive processing, enhancing processing of high-salience stimuli while reducing processing of low-salience stimuli (see  Mather & Sutherland, 2011  for a review). The results from the current study further suggest that not all emotional materials can induce emotional reactions in an automatic/immediate way. Thus, it appears that biologically emotional stimuli can induce emotional reactions automatically and have a more direct and automatic pathway to influence cognition, while socially emotional stimuli require elaborative processing to modulate cognitive processing. 
 
 
 Neural Mechanisms Underlying Processing of Biologically and Socially Emotional Stimuli 
 Using fMRI, Study 3 revealed both similar and different brain regions involved in processing biologically emotional stimuli and socially emotional stimuli. We found that the amygdala and MPFC showed significant activity in response to both biologically and socially emotional pictures. In fact, these separate activations involved overlapping voxels as shown in the conjunction analysis. This suggests that biologically and socially emotional images share some neural mechanisms. However, there were also substantial differences in the brain regions involved in biologically versus socially emotional pictures. 
 Biologically emotional pictures recruited greater activity in the occipital gyrus than did socially emotional pictures. In addition, activity in the amygdala was more positively correlated with activity in the occipital gyrus during viewing of biologically emotional pictures than during viewing of social pictures. This greater visual cortex activation is consistent with the enhanced attention effects of biologically emotional pictures revealed in Study 1, suggesting that the amygdala’s arousal response is more related to the visual features of the biologically emotional pictures than to the visual aspects of the socially emotional pictures. 
 In contrast, socially emotional pictures induced greater activity in dorsal MPFC than did biologically emotional pictures. Furthermore, the amygdala was more positively correlated with dorsal MPFC for socially emotional images than for biological images. The dorsal MPFC has been associated with elaborative processing of emotional aspects of stimuli ( Cunningham, et al., 2003 ;  Ochsner, Knierim, et al., 2004 ) and with performing tasks that require deep processing of affective nature of stimuli (e.g.,  Johnson, et al., 2006 ;  J. P. Mitchell, Banaji, & Macrae, 2005 ;  Norris, et al., 2004 ;  Ochsner, Knierim, et al., 2004 ), such as emotion regulation ( Ochsner, Ray, et al., 2004 ;  Phan, et al., 2005 ), moral judgments ( Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, Eslinger, et al., 2002 ), and theory-of-mind task ( Gallagher, et al., 2000 ). In addition, activity in dorsal MPFC has been associated with successful memory encoding of socially emotional stimuli ( Harvey, Fossati, & Lepage, 2007 ). Together with these previous findings, our findings suggest that socially emotional pictures require more elaborative processing implemented by dorsal MPFC to modulate cognitive processing and to elicit the activity in the amygdala than do biologically emotional pictures. 
 
 Additional brain regions associated with socially emotional stimuli 
 In addition to dorsal MPFC, socially emotional pictures activated brain regions implicated in social cognition ( Adolphs, 2003 ;  Saxe, 2006 ), such as TPJ, anterior temporal lobe, and posterior cingulate/precuneus. Although these areas did not produce significant results in the functional connectivity analysis, they may also play important roles in processing of socially emotional pictures. 
 For instance, the anterior temporal lobe has been implicated in conceptual processing of social stimuli; it activates during semantic judgments about social stimuli ( J. P. Mitchell, Heatherton, & Macrae, 2002 ;  Zahn, et al., 2007 ;  Zahn, et al., 2009 ), retrieval of other people’s names ( Tsukiura, Mochizuki-Kawai, & Fujii, 2006 ), and learning of facts about other people (e.g., age, occupation;  Simmons, Reddish, Bellgowan, & Martin, 2010 ). 
 In contrast, posterior cingulate and precuneus have been implicated in self-referential processing ( Johnson, et al., 2006 ), perspective taking ( Ruby & Decety, 2001 ), episodic recollection ( Wagner, Shannon, Kahn, & Buckner, 2005 ), and simulation of others’ behaviors ( Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grezes, Passingham, & Haggard, 2005 ). Although a precise role of this area is still not fully understood, all of these tasks involve detailed mental representations. Thus, this area may help implement internally generated representations ( Cavanna & Trimble, 2006 ). 
 Finally, TPJ has been implicated in orienting attention to relevant stimuli that are outside the focus of attention ( Corbetta, Kincade, & Shulman, 2002 ;  J. P. Mitchell, 2008 ). For instance, TPJ activity was associated with social tasks that require people to direct their attention from what they think to what other people think, such as theory-of-mind task ( Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003 ;  Young, Cushman, Hauser, & Saxe, 2007 ). 
 These previous findings provide clues about the ensemble of cognitive processes needed for socially emotional stimuli: a) conceptual processing and semantic interpretation of presented stimuli -- implemented by the anterior temporal lobe, b) mental imagery about the represented situations to simulate others’ feelings or thoughts -- implemented by posterior cingulate/precuneus, and c) attention reoriented from one’s own feelings and thoughts to others’ thoughts or feelings -- implemented by the TPJ. Further research is needed to address how the dorsal MPFC and the amygdala interact with these brain regions during processing of socially emotional materials. 
 
 
 
 Underlying Mechanisms of Automatic Effects of Biologically Emotional Stimuli 
 Next, we turn to the question of why biologically emotional pictures modulate cognitive processing more automatically than do socially emotional pictures. 
 
 Evolutionary relevance 
 One possibility is that biologically emotional pictures involve evolutionary threats that have been recurrent problems in human ancestral environments, which might have resulted in the preferential processing of those stimuli. In fact, some of the biologically emotional stimuli employed in the current study have been considered to be evolutionarily threatening (e.g., snake, spider;  Öhman & Mineka, 2001 ) and revealed to be processed automatically ( Öhman, 2002 ;  Öhman, Flykt, et al., 2001 ), which is consistent with the findings about biologically emotional stimuli in the current study. 
 In Study 1, however, participants detected the dot-probe significantly slower after biological pictures than after social pictures, regardless of whether they were evolutionary threats or not (see  Supplementary Methods and Results  for details). Likewise, in Study 2, dividing attention did not have significant effects on memory for biologically emotional images not depicting an evolutionary threat. Furthermore, both in Studies 1 and 2, angry faces (i.e., evolutionarily threatening, but social stimuli) showed similar patterns to other socially emotional stimuli. Consistent with these results from post-hoc analyses, previous research which compared evolutionary threats (e.g., snakes) with non-evolutionary threats (e.g., guns) found that the two types of threats had similar effects on attention ( Blanchette, 2006 ;  Brosch & Sharma, 2005 ;  Carlson, et al., 2009 ;  Fox, et al., 2007 ) and aversive conditioning ( Hugdahl & Johnsen, 1989 ). Taken together, it seems unlikely that the automatic effects we observed with biologically emotional stimuli are attributable to the effects of evolutionary threats. 
 
 
 Saliency/ambiguity of physical manifestations 
 Instead, we argue that the differences in processing biological and social emotional stimuli are due to whether the physical manifestations of a situation are salient or ambiguous. Biologically emotional pictures depict situations highly related to survival or reproduction. Therefore, they would imply clear and direct physical outcomes, such as death, injuries, satiety, and sexual experiences, irrespective of contexts. This clear and context-independent nature of biologically emotional stimuli might allow people to extract the affective meanings of the stimuli without elaborative processing, which results in the automatic influences on cognitive processing. In contrast, the same social stimulus could have different meanings and outcomes depending on contexts. Thus, the meanings and the outcomes are less obvious in socially emotional stimuli, which could explain the absence of their automatic influences on cognitive processing. 
 In fact, the results from Study 3 suggest that the saliency of physical manifestations plays a more important role than whether stimuli are conceptually relevant with survival/reproduction or social life. In Study 3, we found little overlap between biological pictures and words, and biological words produced activity in similar regions as did socially emotional stimuli. Although biological words are conceptually related to survival or reproduction, the physical manifestations are less obvious from the visual features of biological words than from those of biological pictures. As a consequence, biological words might require more elaborative processing than biological pictures to elicit an affective reaction, which might have resulted in similar brain activation patterns to socially emotional stimuli. 
 However, past studies employing taboo words revealed that highly arousing biological words can have automatic influences on attention (e.g.,  Anderson, 2005 ;  MacKay, et al., 2004 ;  Mathewson, et al., 2008 ). Since these results were consistent with the findings about biologically emotional images in the current study, they suggest that biological relevance can have a significant impact even when the saliency of physical manifestations is low. Further research should manipulate both the biological/social relevance and the saliency of the physical outcomes to clarify the role of each factor in emotional processing. 
 In addition, there might be other differences between biological and social emotional stimuli that are more responsible for the current results than the biological/social relevance or the saliency of the physical outcome. In the current study, we controlled the effects of the two dimensions (i.e., arousal and valence) that have been predominantly examined in the past literature on emotion and cognition. Similar results were also obtained after controlling the effects of visual complexity, the presence of people, and the evolutionary threats. Furthermore, in Study 3, we controlled luminance and frequency. However, biologically and socially emotional stimuli might differ in other ways, such as semantic relatedness ( Talmi, et al., 2007 ), relevance to approach/avoidance behaviors ( Wentura, Rothermund, & Bak, 2000 ), or how strongly the stimulus induces certain actions/behaviors ( Frijda, Kuipers, & ter Schure, 1989 ). Future research should address the effects of biological/social relevance while considering these other factors to clarify which dimension of emotional stimuli is more crucial. 
 
 
 
 Questions for Future Research 
 Several other questions also remain for further work. First, past research found that highly arousing stimuli are attended to ( Anderson, 2005 ;  Knight, et al., 2007 ) and memorized ( Kensinger & Corkin, 2004 ) more automatically than low arousing stimuli. These observations are similar to the patterns we found in biologically emotional pictures, suggesting the possibility that some of the previous findings of arousal effects might be due to biological relevance, instead of arousal per se. In fact, in our two pilot rating studies and  S-Study 1 , relevance to survival/reproduction was positively correlated with arousal ratings even after controlling for the effects of the social relevance (see  S-Table 7 ). Future research should manipulate both arousal level and motivational relevance, to clarify the effects of motivational relevance, the effects of arousal and interactions between them. 
 Second, the current article focused on two kinds of emotional stimuli: those highly relevant to survival/reproduction and low in relation to social adaptation and those highly relevant to social adaptation but low in relation to survival/reproduction. Although this categorical approach allowed us to demonstrate the effects of the biological/social relevance, in real life, emotional stimuli sometimes relate to both survival/reproduction and social adaptation. For example, in addition to their survival value, certain foods (such as a birthday cake) might evoke emotion via their social meanings. Similarly, some social stimuli (e.g., one’s family) might have significance not only in social adaptation but also in reproduction (e.g., raising their offspring). In addition, we did not include stimuli that are related to participants’ own survival (e.g., real foods) or social life (e.g., their friends); these stimuli might influence cognitive processing differently from stimuli that depict biologically/socially emotional objects but are not actually relevant with participants’ own survival or social life (e.g., pictures depicting foods). Further research employing more fine-grained categorizations of emotional stimuli is needed to elucidate how the biological and social relevance modulate emotional processing. 
 A third question concerns whether biological and social relevance influence processing of neutral materials. In fact, previous studies demonstrated that neutral words rated for relevance to a grasslands survival scenario were remembered better than words encoded under other deep processing conditions (e.g.,  Nairne, Pandeirada, Gregory, & Van Arsdall, 2009 ;  Nairne, Pandeirada, & Thompson, 2008 ;  Weinstein, Bugg, & Roediger, 2008 ), suggesting that even the processing of neutral stimuli may benefit from survival relevance. 
 But it is difficult to disentangle the effects of biological relevance and arousal. For instance, rating neutral words for their relevance to a survival scenario was done in the context of higher arousal than in the control condition ( Soderstrom & McCabe, 2011 ). In the current research, biological relevance was positively correlated with arousal in the two pilot studies and  S-Study 1 , even after controlling the effects of social relevance (see  S-Table 7 ). Furthermore, when people had strong biological needs (e.g., thirst), neutral stimuli that satisfied the biological need (e.g., water) were evaluated positively (not as neutral stimuli;  Ferguson & Bargh, 2004 ). These results suggest that biological relevance increases emotionality, and that it is hard to define neutral but biologically relevant stimuli. In contrast, given that the social relevance had weaker correlations with arousal than biological relevance ( S-Table 7 ), there should be neutral stimuli relevant to social life (e.g.,  Norris, et al., 2004 ). These social but neutral stimuli might induce similar elaborative processing as socially emotional stimuli in order for people to interpret their meaning. Further research should address whether the social relevance has similar effects for emotional and neutral stimuli. 
 Another question concerns processing of angry faces. While angry faces have been associated with automatic attention (e.g.,  Öhman, Lundqvist, & Esteves, 2001 ), the reaction times to detect the dot-probe were not different across angry faces, other social stimuli and neutral stimuli in Study 1 (see  Supplementary Results  for details). Similarly, in Study 2, angry faces were remembered better than neutral pictures in the full-attention condition, but the enhancement disappeared in the divided-attention condition. These results were consistent with recent neuroimaging findings that processing emotional faces requires cognitive resources (e.g.,  Pessoa, McKenna, Gutierrez, & Ungerleider, 2002 ;  Pessoa, Padmala, & Morland, 2005 ). 
 One of the main reasons researchers have assumed that emotional faces are processed automatically is the substantial behavioral evidence showing faster detection of emotional faces than neutral faces ( Calvo & Nummenmaa, 2008 ;  Frischen, Eastwood, & Smilek, 2008 ;  Hansen & Hansen, 1988 ;  Horstmann, 2007 ;  Larson, Aronoff, & Stearns, 2007 ;  Lipp, 2006 ;  LoBue & DeLoache, 2010 ;  Mather & Knight, 2006 ). However, the faster detection of emotional faces can be at least partially accounted for by differences in perceptual salience among the facial features associated with different emotions ( Calvo & Nummenmaa, 2008 ). Thus, previous findings of faster detection of emotional faces may not reflect automatic attention to emotional stimuli. Indeed, recent research revealed that although angry faces activated the amygdala in a visual search task, the amygdala showed similar activity even for neutral but perceptually salient faces ( Santos, Mier, Kirsch, & Meyer-Lindenberg, 2011 ). Our findings further suggest that, once detected, emotional faces do not automatically elicit emotional responses that enhance attention or later memory – such responses instead require cognitive resources. 
 Several methodological questions remain for future studies. For example, the current study used a dot-probe task combined with a riddle-solving task to investigate the effects of biological and social emotional materials on attention. Although the riddle task helped us to increase participants’ engagements in the task, this is not a typical way to examine attention. In addition, we did not counterbalance target items and lures in the recognition tests, which might have produced bias effects in our memory results. Furthermore, the number of trials in Studies 1 and 3 was relatively low to address the effects of arousal and valence separately for each stimulus type category (social vs. biological). Further research addressing these issues is needed. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The present study provided evidence that emotional stimuli related to survival or reproduction modulate cognitive processing, such as memory encoding and attention, more automatically than those related to social life. We also found that these two kinds of emotional materials both induced activity in the amygdala, which is a key region in emotion processing ( Dolan, 2002 ;  Phelps, 2006 ). Despite this similarity, there were substantial differences in the brain regions involved in biologically and socially emotional materials. Socially emotional stimuli recruited dorsal MPFC, a region involved in elaborative processing of emotional stimuli, and yielded functional connectivity between amygdala and dorsal MPFC. In contrast, biologically emotional stimuli induced stronger activity in visual cortex and greater functional connectivity between amygdala and visual cortex. Such connectivity should facilitate bottom-up, automatic visual attention to biologically emotional stimuli. Since we controlled arousal and valence level across the socially and biologically emotional materials, our results are unlikely to be attributed to either valence or arousal. Taken together, our results suggest that the emotional nature of stimuli related to survival or reproduction is processed more automatically than the emotional nature of stimuli related to social life, and that subjective valence and arousal are not sufficient to explain automatic effects of emotion on cognitive processing. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows (19-8978) and by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (R01AG025340). 
 
 
 
 1 
 Because participants pressed the left key more quickly than the other two keys ( p s < .01), response key (left, middle, right) was used as a covariate. The response key did not modulate the effects of the stimulus type ( p  > .80). 
 
 
 2 
 The false alarm rate ( M  = .06) was not significantly different across stimulus type ( p  > .40). In addition, a similar analysis on the corrected recognition measure (i.e., hit rate minus false alarm rate) confirmed a significant effect of stimulus type,  F (2, 42) = 8.83,  R 2  = .17,  p  < .01, as participants had better memory for biological ( M  = .27) and social ( M  = .34) stimuli than neutral stimuli ( M  = .10),  t s(42) = 2.95, 4.20,  p s < .05. The difference between biological and social stimuli was not significant ( p  > .25). Thus, hit rate and corrected recognition measures yielded the same pattern of results. 
 
 
 3 
 Because participants reported better memories for pictures in the last two blocks than in the first two blocks ( ps  < .01), we added block order as a covariate. There were no significant interactions between block order and stimulus type. 
 
 
 4 
 A similar analysis on the false alarm rates did not find a significant interaction between stimulus type and attention ( p  > .45). The accuracy measure of recognition (i.e., hit-false alarm rates) also produced similar patterns to the hit rates; participants’ memory was significantly impaired in the divided-attention condition compared with the full-attention condition for socially emotional stimuli,  F (1, 88) = 17.37,  p  < .01, but not for biologically emotional stimuli ( p  > .05). 
 
 
 5 
 The remember rates to new items did not show a significant interaction between stimulus type and attention ( p  > .70). The corrected “Remember” rates (i.e., remember rates to old items minus remember rates to new items) also produced similar patterns; vivid memory for socially emotional pictures was impaired in the divided-attention condition compared with the full-attention condition,  F (1, 88) = 10.84,  p  < .01, while there were no significant differences between divided- and full- attention conditions in memory of biologically emotional pictures ( p  > .05). A 2 (attention) × 3 (stimulus type) ANOVA on the proportion of “Know” responses did not reveal a significant interaction between attention and stimulus type ( p  > .30). 
 
 
 6 
 A conjunction analysis between neutral words (i.e., neutral words > nonsense words) and neutral pictures (i.e., neutral pictures > nonsense pictures) revealed significant activity only in dorsal superior frontal gyrus (−16, 36, 52; BA6) and in occipital lobe (−10, −58, 0; BA 18). Thus, there were no significant activations in regions involved in socially emotional stimuli, such as MPFC and TPJ. Although previous research reported that emotional words produced activity in the amygdala (Kensinger & Schacter, 2006), neither whole brain analyses nor ROI analyses found significantly greater activity in the amygdala to biologically and socially emotional words than neutral or nonsense words. Therefore, we did not examine the functional connectivity with the amygdala for emotional words. Because the number of emotional words in the current study was relatively small compared to other studies (e.g., 120 negative, 120 neutral and 120 positive words in Kensinger & Schacter (2006)), we might not have had enough power to detect responses in the amygdala. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 Cognitive neuroscience of human social behavior 
 Nature Reviews: Neuroscience 
 4 
 165 
 178 
 10.1038/nrn1056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amano 
 S 
 
 
 Kondo 
 T 
 
 
 2000 
 Lexical properties of japanese 
 Tokyo 
 Sanshodo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amaral 
 DG 
 
 
 Behniea 
 H 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JL 
 
 
 2003 
 Topographic organization of projections from the amygdala to the visual cortex in the macaque monkey 
 Neuroscience 
 118 
 1099 
 1120 
 10.1016/S0306-4522(02)01001-1 
 12732254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amodio 
 DM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2006 
 Meeting of minds: The medial frontal cortex and social cognition 
 Nature Reviews: Neuroscience 
 7 
 268 
 277 
 10.1038/nrn1884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 2005 
 Affective influences on the attentional dynamics supporting awareness 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 134 
 258 
 281 
 10.1037/0096-3445.134.2.258 
 15869349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Panitz 
 D 
 
 
 De Rosa 
 E 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural correlates of the automatic processing of threat facial signals 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 5627 
 5633 
 12843265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Stappen 
 I 
 
 
 Panitz 
 D 
 
 
 Ghahremani 
 DG 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Dissociated neural representations of intensity and valence in human olfaction 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 196 
 202 
 10.1038/nn1001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arnell 
 KM 
 
 
 Killman 
 KV 
 
 
 Fijavz 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 Blinded by emotion: Target misses follow attention capture by arousing distractors in RSVP 
 Emotion 
 7 
 465 
 477 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.465 
 17683203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bäum 
 K 
 
 
 Kuhbandner 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Remembering can cause gorgetting—but not in negative moods 
 Psychological Science 
 18 
 111 
 115 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01857.x 
 17425528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blanchette 
 I 
 
 
 2006 
 Snakes, spiders, guns, and syringes: How specific are evolutionary constraints on the detection of threatening stimuli? 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 59 
 1484 
 1504 
 10.1080/02724980543000204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Codispoti 
 M 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Emotion and motivation i: Defensive and appetitive reactions in picture processing 
 Emotion 
 1 
 276 
 298 
 10.1037//1528-3542.1.3.276 
 12934687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Greenwald 
 MK 
 
 
 Petry 
 MC 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 1992 
 Remembering pictures: Pleasure and arousal in memory 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 18 
 379 
 390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Fitzsimmons 
 JR 
 
 
 King 
 W 
 
 
 Desai 
 P 
 
 
 2003 
 Activation of the visual cortex in motivated attention 
 Behavioral Neuroscience 
 117 
 369 
 380 
 10.1037/0735-7044.117.2.369 
 12708533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Anton 
 JL 
 
 
 Valabregue 
 R 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 2002 
 6 
 2–6 
 Region of interest analysis using an spm toolbox 
 Paper presented at the 8th international conference on functional mapping of the human brain 
 Sendai, Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Britton 
 JC 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural correlates of social and nonsocial emotions: An fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 397 
 409 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.11.027 
 16414281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brosch 
 T 
 
 
 Sander 
 D 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Scherer 
 KR 
 
 
 2008 
 Beyond fear: Rapid spatial orienting toward positive emotional stimuli 
 Psychological Science 
 19 
 362 
 370 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02094.x 
 18399889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brosch 
 T 
 
 
 Sander 
 D 
 
 
 Scherer 
 KR 
 
 
 2007 
 That baby caught my eye... Attention capture by infant faces 
 Emotion 
 7 
 685 
 689 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.685 
 17683225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brosch 
 T 
 
 
 Sharma 
 D 
 
 
 2005 
 The role of fear-relevant stimuli in visual search: A comparison of phylogenetic and ontogenetic stimuli 
 Emotion 
 5 
 360 
 364 
 10.1037/1528-3542.5.3.360 
 16187872 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buodo 
 G 
 
 
 Sarlo 
 M 
 
 
 Palomba 
 D 
 
 
 2002 
 Attentional resources measured by reaction times highlight differences within pleasant and unpleasant, high arousing stimuli 
 Motivation and Emotion 
 26 
 123 
 138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calvo-Merino 
 B 
 
 
 Glaser 
 DE 
 
 
 Grezes 
 J 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Haggard 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Action observation and acquired motor skills: An fMRI study with expert dancers 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 15 
 1243 
 1249 
 10.1093/cercor/bhi007 
 15616133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calvo 
 MG 
 
 
 Nummenmaa 
 L 
 
 
 2008 
 Detection of emotional faces: Salient physical features guide effective visual search 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 137 
 471 
 494 
 10.1037/a0012771 
 18729711 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carlson 
 JM 
 
 
 Fee 
 AL 
 
 
 Reinke 
 KS 
 
 
 2009 
 Backward masked snakes and guns modulate spatial attention 
 Evolutionary Psychology 
 7 
 534 
 544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cavanna 
 AE 
 
 
 Trimble 
 MR 
 
 
 2006 
 The precuneus: A review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates 
 Brain 
 129 
 564 
 583 
 10.1093/brain/awl004 
 16399806 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural systems for visual orienting and their relationships to spatial working memory 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 14 
 508 
 523 
 10.1162/089892902317362029 
 11970810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cunningham 
 WA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 JC 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Banaji 
 MR 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural components of social evaluation 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 85 
 639 
 649 
 10.1037/0022-3514.85.4.639 
 14561118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Argembeau 
 A 
 
 
 Van der Linden 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Influence of affective meaning on memory for contextual information 
 Emotion 
 4 
 173 
 188 
 10.1037/1528-3542.4.2.173 
 15222854 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeLoache 
 JS 
 
 
 LoBue 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 The narrow fellow in the grass: Human infants associate snakes and fear 
 Developmental Science 
 12 
 201 
 207 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00753.x 
 19120429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doerksen 
 S 
 
 
 Shimamura 
 AP 
 
 
 2001 
 Source memory enhancement for emotional words 
 Emotion 
 1 
 5 
 11 
 10.1037/1528-3542.1.1.5 
 12894807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Emotion, cognition, and behavior 
 Science 
 298 
 1191 
 1194 
 10.1126/science.1076358 
 12424363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 Denkova 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural correlates of encoding emotional memories: A review of functional neuroimaging evidence 
 Cell Science Reviews 
 5 
 78 
 122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2004 
 Interaction between the amygdala and the medial temporal lobe memory system predicts better memory for emotional events 
 Neuron 
 42 
 855 
 863 
 10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00289-2 
 15182723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain systems mediating cognitive interference by emotional distraction 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 15 
 2072 
 2079 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5042-05.2006 
 16481440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dreisbach 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 How positive affect modulates cognitive control: The costs and benefits of reduced maintenance capability 
 Brain and Cognition 
 60 
 11 
 19 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2005.08.003 
 16216400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drobes 
 DJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 EJ 
 
 
 Hillman 
 CH 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Food deprivation and emotional reactions to food cues: Implications for eating disorders 
 Biological Psychology 
 57 
 153 
 177 
 10.1016/S0301-0511(01)00093-X 
 11454438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2004 
 Why rejection hurts: A common neural alarm system for physical and social pain 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 8 
 294 
 300 
 10.1016/j.tics.2004.05.010 
 15242688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 2003 
 Does rejection hurt? An fMRI study of social exclusion 
 Science 
 302 
 290 
 292 
 10.1126/science.1089134 
 14551436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Emery 
 NJ 
 
 
 Amaral 
 DG 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 2000 
 The role of the amygdala in primate social cognition 
 Cognitive neuroscience of emotion 
 156 
 191 
 London 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fenske 
 MJ 
 
 
 Eastwood 
 JD 
 
 
 2003 
 Modulation of focused attention by faces expressing emotion: Evidence from flanker tasks 
 Emotion 
 3 
 327 
 343 
 10.1037/1528-3542.3.4.327 
 14674827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferguson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Bargh 
 JA 
 
 
 2004 
 Liking is for doing: The effects of goal pursuit on automatic evaluation 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 87 
 557 
 572 
 10.1037/0022-3514.87.5.557 
 15535771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Foote 
 R 
 
 
 Woodward 
 J 
 
 
 1973 
 A preliminary investigation of obscene language 
 The Journal of Psychology 
 83 
 263 
 275 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 E 
 
 
 Griggs 
 L 
 
 
 Mouchlianitis 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 The detection of fear-relevant stimuli: Are guns noticed as quickly as snakes? 
 Emotion 
 7 
 691 
 696 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.4.691 
 18039035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 E 
 
 
 Russo 
 R 
 
 
 Bowles 
 R 
 
 
 Dutton 
 K 
 
 
 2001 
 Do threatening stimuli draw or hold visual attention in subclinical anxiety? 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 130 
 681 
 700 
 10.1037/0096-3445.130.4.681 
 11757875 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 E 
 
 
 Russo 
 R 
 
 
 Dutton 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 Attentional bias for threat: Evidence for delayed disengagement from emotional faces 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 16 
 355 
 379 
 10.1080/02699930143000527 
 18273395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fredrickson 
 BL 
 
 
 Branigan 
 C 
 
 
 2005 
 Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and thought-action repertoires 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 19 
 313 
 332 
 10.1080/02699930441000238 
 21852891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frijda 
 NH 
 
 
 Kuipers 
 P 
 
 
 ter Schure 
 E 
 
 
 1989 
 Relations among emotion, appraisal, and emotional action readiness 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 57 
 212 
 228 
 10.1037/0022-3514.57.2.212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frischen 
 A 
 
 
 Eastwood 
 JD 
 
 
 Smilek 
 D 
 
 
 2008 
 Visual search for faces with emotional expressions 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 134 
 662 
 676 
 10.1037/0033-2909.134.5.662 
 18729567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gallagher 
 HL 
 
 
 Happe 
 F 
 
 
 Brunswick 
 N 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2000 
 Reading the mind in cartoons and stories: An fMRI study of ‘theory of mind’ in verbal and nonverbal tasks 
 Neuropsychologia 
 38 
 11 
 21 
 10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00053-6 
 10617288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gardiner 
 JM 
 
 
 Ramponi 
 C 
 
 
 Richardson-Klavehn 
 A 
 
 
 1998 
 Experiences of remembering, knowing, and guessing 
 Consciousness & Cognition 
 7 
 1 
 26 
 10.1006/ccog.1997.0321 
 9521829 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Cooney 
 JW 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Top-down suppression deficits underlies working memory impairment in normal aging 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 8 
 1298 
 1300 
 10.1038/nn1543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 DT 
 
 
 Silvera 
 DH 
 
 
 1996 
 Overhelping 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 70 
 678 
 690 
 10.1037/0022-3514.70.4.678 
 8636893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 Ely 
 TD 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Kilts 
 CD 
 
 
 1999 
 Amygdala activity related to enhanced memory for pleasant and aversive stimuli 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2 
 289 
 293 
 10.1038/6404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 Herman 
 RA 
 
 
 Nolan 
 CL 
 
 
 Wallen 
 K 
 
 
 2004 
 Men and women differ in amygdala response to visual sexual stimuli 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 7 
 411 
 416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hansen 
 CH 
 
 
 Hansen 
 RD 
 
 
 1988 
 Finding the face in the crowd: An anger superiority effect 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 54 
 917 
 924 
 10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.917 
 3397866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harvey 
 PO 
 
 
 Fossati 
 P 
 
 
 Lepage 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Modulation of memory formation by stimulus content: Specific role of the medial prefrontal cortex in the successful encoding of social pictures 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 19 
 351 
 362 
 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.2.351 
 17280522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horstmann 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Preattentive face processing: What do visual search experiments with schematic faces tell us? 
 Visual Cognition 
 15 
 799 
 833 
 10.1080/13506280600892798 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 Johnsen 
 BH 
 
 
 1989 
 Preparedness and electrodermal fear-conditioning: Ontogenetic vs phylogenetic explanations 
 Behavioral Research and Therapy 
 27 
 269 
 278 
 10.1016/0005-7967(89)90046-6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ihssen 
 N 
 
 
 Heim 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 The costs of emotional attention: Affective processing inhibits subsequent lexico-semantic analysis 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 19 
 1932 
 1979 
 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.12.1932 
 17892390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ihssen 
 N 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2009 
 The costs and benefits of processing emotional stimuli during rapid serial visual presentation 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 23 
 296 
 326 
 10.1080/02699930801987504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Immordino-Yang 
 MH 
 
 
 McColl 
 A 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Damasio 
 A 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural correlates of admiration and compassion 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 106 
 8021 
 8026 
 10.1073/pnas.0810363106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isen 
 A 
 
 
 Daubman 
 KA 
 
 
 1984 
 The influence of affect on categorization 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 47 
 1206 
 1217 
 10.1037/0022-3514.47.6.1206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isen 
 A 
 
 
 Daubman 
 KA 
 
 
 Nowicki 
 GP 
 
 
 1987 
 Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 52 
 1122 
 1131 
 10.1037/0022-3514.52.6.1122 
 3598858 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isen 
 A 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MMS 
 
 
 Mertz 
 E 
 
 
 Robinson 
 GF 
 
 
 1985 
 The influence of positive affect on the unusualness of word associations 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 48 
 1413 
 1426 
 10.1037/0022-3514.48.6.1413 
 4020605 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackson 
 PL 
 
 
 Meltzoff 
 AN 
 
 
 Decety 
 J 
 
 
 2005 
 How do we perceive the pain of others? A window into the neural processes involved in empathy 
 NeuroImage 
 24 
 771 
 779 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.09.006 
 15652312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jay 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 The utility and ubiquity of taboo words 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 4 
 153 
 161 
 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01115.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jay 
 T 
 
 
 Caldwell-Harris 
 C 
 
 
 King 
 K 
 
 
 2008 
 Recalling taboo and nontaboo words 
 The American Journal of Psychology 
 121 
 83 
 103 
 18437803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Raye 
 CL 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 KJ 
 
 
 Touryan 
 SR 
 
 
 Greene 
 EJ 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociating medial frontal and posterior cingulate activity during self-reflection 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 1 
 56 
 64 
 10.1093/scan/nsl004 
 18574518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Ihssen 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 Identification facilitation for emotionally arousing verbs during the attentional blink 
 Emotion 
 4 
 23 
 35 
 10.1037/1528-3542.4.1.23 
 15053724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 2009 
 Remembering the details: Effects of emotion 
 Emotion Review 
 1 
 99 
 113 
 10.1177/1754073908100432 
 19421427 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Corkin 
 S 
 
 
 2003a 
 Effect of divided attention on the memory benefit for negative as compared to neutral words 
 Brain and Cognition 
 51 
 223 
 225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Corkin 
 S 
 
 
 2003b 
 Memory enhancement for emotional words: Are emotional words more vividly remembered than neutral words? 
 Memory & Cognition 
 31 
 1169 
 1180 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Corkin 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Two routs to emotional memory: Distinct neural processes for valence and arousal 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
 101 
 3310 
 3315 
 10.1073/pnas.0306408101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Garoff-Eaton 
 RJ 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2007 
 Effects of emotion on memory specificity: Memory trade-offs elicited by negative visually arousing stimuli 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 56 
 575 
 591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knight 
 M 
 
 
 Seymour 
 TL 
 
 
 Gaunt 
 JT 
 
 
 Baker 
 C 
 
 
 Nesmith 
 K 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Aging and goal-directed emotional attention: Distraction reverses emotional biases 
 Emotion 
 7 
 705 
 714 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.4.705 
 18039037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kringelbach 
 ML 
 
 
 Lehtonen 
 A 
 
 
 Squire 
 S 
 
 
 Harvey 
 AG 
 
 
 Craske 
 MG 
 
 
 Holliday 
 IE 
 
 
 
 2008 
 A specific and rapid neural signature for parental instinct 
 PLoS One 
 3 
 e1664 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0001664 
 18301742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuhbandner 
 C 
 
 
 Hanslmayr 
 S 
 
 
 Maier 
 MA 
 
 
 Pekrun 
 R 
 
 
 Spitzer 
 B 
 
 
 Pastötter 
 B 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of mood on the speed of conscious perception: Behavioural and electrophysiological evidence 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 4 
 286 
 293 
 10.1093/scan/nsp010 
 19351693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Tordesillas-Gutierrez 
 D 
 
 
 Martinez 
 M 
 
 
 Salinas 
 F 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Bias between mni and talairach coordinates analyzed using the icbn-152 brain template 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 28 
 1194 
 1205 
 10.1002/hbm.20345 
 17266101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Parsons 
 LM 
 
 
 Liotti 
 M 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Automated talairach atlas labels for functional brain mapping 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 10 
 120 
 131 
 10.1002/1097-0193(200007)10:3<120::AID-HBM30>3.0.CO;2-8 
 10912591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 1997 
 International affective picture system (iaps): Technical manual and affective ratings 
 Nimh center for the study of emotion and attention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Fitzsimmons 
 JR 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 Scott 
 JD 
 
 
 Moulder 
 B 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Emotional arousal and activation of the visual cortex: An fMRI analysis 
 Psychophysiology 
 35 
 199 
 210 
 9529946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 CL 
 
 
 Aronoff 
 J 
 
 
 Stearns 
 JJ 
 
 
 2007 
 The shape of threat: Simple geometric forms evoke rapid and sustained capture of attention 
 Emotion 
 7 
 526 
 534 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.526 
 17683209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 CL 
 
 
 Steuer 
 EL 
 
 
 2009 
 Motivational relevance as a potential modulator of memory for affective stimuli: Can we compare snakes and cakes? 
 Emotion Review 
 1 
 116 
 117 
 10.1177/1754073908100434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lipp 
 OV 
 
 
 2006 
 Of snakes and flowers: Does preferential detection of pictures of fear-relevant animals in visual search reflect on fear-relevance? 
 Emotion 
 6 
 296 
 308 
 10.1037/1528-3542.6.2.296 
 16768561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LoBue 
 V 
 
 
 DeLoache 
 JS 
 
 
 2008 
 Detecting the snake in the grass: Attention to fear-relevant stimuli by adults and young children 
 Psychological Science 
 19 
 284 
 289 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02081.x 
 18315802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LoBue 
 V 
 
 
 DeLoache 
 JS 
 
 
 2010 
 Superior detection of threat-relevant stimuli in infancy 
 Developmental Science 
 13 
 221 
 228 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00872.x 
 20121878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lykins 
 A 
 
 
 Meana 
 M 
 
 
 Kambe 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 Detection of differential viewing patterns to erotic and non-erotic stimuli using eye-tracking methodology 
 Archives of Sexual Behavior 
 35 
 569 
 575 
 10.1007/s10508-006-9065-z 
 17031585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacKay 
 DG 
 
 
 Shafto 
 M 
 
 
 Taylor 
 J 
 
 
 Marian 
 D 
 
 
 Abrams 
 L 
 
 
 Dyer 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 Relations between emotion, memory, and attention: Evidence from taboo stroop, lexical decision, and immediate memory tasks 
 Memory & Cognition 
 32 
 474 
 488 
 10.3758/bf03195840 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Emotional arousal and memory binding: An object-based framework 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 2 
 33 
 52 
 10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00028.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Carstensen 
 LL 
 
 
 2005 
 Aging and motivated cognition: The positivity effect in attention and memory 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 9 
 496 
 502 
 10.1016/j.tics.2005.08.005 
 16154382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Gorlick 
 M 
 
 
 Nesmith 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 The limits of arousal’s memory impairing effects on nearby information 
 The American journal of psychology 
 122 
 349 
 369 
 19827704 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Knight 
 MR 
 
 
 2006 
 Angry faces get noticed quickly: Threat detection is not impaired among older adults 
 The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 
 61 
 54 
 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 KJ 
 
 
 Raye 
 CL 
 
 
 Novak 
 DL 
 
 
 Greene 
 EJ 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 2006 
 Emotional arousal can impair feature binding in working memory 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 18 
 614 
 625 
 10.1162/jocn.2006.18.4.614 
 16768364 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Nesmith 
 K 
 
 
 2008 
 Arousal-enhanced location memory for pictures 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 58 
 449 
 464 
 10.1016/j.jml.2007.01.004 
 19190722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Sutherland 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Arousal-biased competition in perception and memory 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 6 
 114 
 133 
 10.1177/1745691611400234 
 21660127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Sutherland 
 M 
 
 
 in press 
 Arousal-biased competition in perception and memory 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathewson 
 K 
 
 
 Arnell 
 KM 
 
 
 Mansfield 
 C 
 
 
 2008 
 Capturing and holding attention: The impact of emotional words in rapid serial visual presentation 
 Memory & Cognition 
 36 
 182 
 200 
 10.3758/mc.36.1.182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mickley 
 KR 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 2008 
 Emotional valence influences the neural correlates associated with remembering and knowing 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 8 
 143 
 152 
 10.3758/cabn.8.2.143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 2008 
 Activity in right temporo-parietal junction is not selective for theory-of-mind 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 262 
 271 
 10.1093/cercor/bhm051 
 17551089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Banaji 
 MR 
 
 
 Macrae 
 CN 
 
 
 2005 
 The link between social cognition and self-referential thought in the medial prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 1306 
 1315 
 16197685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Heatherton 
 TF 
 
 
 Macrae 
 CN 
 
 
 2002 
 Distinct neural systems subserve person and object knowledge 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 99 
 15238 
 15243 
 10.1073/pnas.232395699 
 12417766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 KJ 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Raye 
 CL 
 
 
 Greene 
 EJ 
 
 
 2006 
 A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of short-term source and item memory for negative pictures 
 NeuroReport 
 17 
 1543 
 1547 
 10.1097/01.wnr.0000234743.50442.e5 
 16957605 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mogg 
 K 
 
 
 Bradley 
 BP 
 
 
 Hyare 
 H 
 
 
 Lee 
 S 
 
 
 1998 
 Selective attention to food-related stimuli in hunger: Are attentional biases specific to emotional and psychopathological states, or are they also found in normal drive states? 
 Behaviour Research and Therapy 
 36 
 227 
 237 
 10.1016/S0005-7967(97)00062-4 
 9613028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 de Oliveira-Souza 
 R 
 
 
 Bramati 
 IE 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional networks in emotional moral and nonmoral social judgments 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 696 
 703 
 10.1006/nimg.2002.1118 
 12169253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 de Oliveira-Souza 
 R 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bramati 
 IE 
 
 
 Mourao-Miranda 
 J 
 
 
 Andreiuolo 
 PA 
 
 
 
 2002 
 The neural correlates of moral sensitivity: A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of basic and moral emotions 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 22 
 2730 
 2736 
 11923438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 Oliveira-Souza 
 Rd 
 
 
 2001 
 Frontopolar and anterior temporal cortex activation in a moral judgment task: Preliminary functional MRI results in normal subjects 
 Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria 
 59 
 657 
 664 
 10.1590/S0004-282X2001000500001 
 11593260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 JS 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Involvement of human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in hunger-enhanced memory for food stimuli 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 21 
 5304 
 5310 
 11438606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most 
 SB 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 Widders 
 DM 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 2005 
 Attentional rubbernecking: Cognitive control and personality in emotion-induced blindness 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 12 
 654 
 661 
 10.3758/BF03196754 
 16447378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nairne 
 JS 
 
 
 Pandeirada 
 JNS 
 
 
 Gregory 
 KJ 
 
 
 Van Arsdall 
 JE 
 
 
 2009 
 Adaptive memory: Fitness relevance and the hunter-gatherer mind 
 Psychological Science 
 20 
 740 
 746 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02356.x 
 19422622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nairne 
 JS 
 
 
 Pandeirada 
 JNS 
 
 
 Thompson 
 SR 
 
 
 2008 
 Adaptive memory: The comparative value of survival processing 
 Psychological Science 
 19 
 176 
 180 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02064.x 
 18271866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nashiro 
 K 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 (in press) 
 The effect of emotional arousal on memory binding in normal aging and alzheimer’s disease 
 American Journal of Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 JB 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Rusch 
 BD 
 
 
 Fox 
 AS 
 
 
 Oakes 
 TR 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Orbitofrontal cortex tracks positive mood in mothers viewing pictures of their newborn infants 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 583 
 592 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.005 
 14980560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norris 
 CJ 
 
 
 Chen 
 EE 
 
 
 Zhu 
 DC 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 2004 
 The interaction of social and emotional processes in the brain 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 1818 
 1829 
 10.1162/0898929042947847 
 15701231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2000 
 Are affective events richly recollected or simply familiar? The experience and process of recognizing feelings past 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 129 
 242 
 261 
 10.1037/0096-3445.129.2.242 
 10868336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Knierim 
 K 
 
 
 Ludlow 
 DH 
 
 
 Hanelin 
 J 
 
 
 Ramachandran 
 T 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Reflecting upon feelings: An fMRI study of neural systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 1746 
 1772 
 10.1162/0898929042947829 
 15701226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Chopra 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 
 2004 
 For better or for worse: Neural systems supporting the cognitive down- and up- regulation of negative emotion 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 483 
 499 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.030 
 15488398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Öhman 
 A 
 
 
 2002 
 Automaticity and the amygdala: Nonconscious responses to emotional faces 
 Current Directioni in Psychological Science 
 11 
 62 
 66 
 10.1111/1467-8721.00169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Öhman 
 A 
 
 
 Flykt 
 A 
 
 
 Esteves 
 F 
 
 
 2001 
 Emotion drives attention: Detecting the snake in the grass 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 130 
 466 
 478 
 10.1037/0096-3445.130.3.466 
 11561921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Öhman 
 A 
 
 
 Lundqvist 
 D 
 
 
 Esteves 
 F 
 
 
 2001 
 The face in the crowd revisited: A threat advantage with schematic stimuli 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 80 
 381 
 396 
 10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.381 
 11300573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Öhman 
 A 
 
 
 Mineka 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and fear learning 
 Psychologial Review 
 108 
 483 
 522 
 10.1037/0033-295X.108.3.483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Payne 
 JD 
 
 
 Stickgold 
 R 
 
 
 Swanberg 
 K 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 2008 
 Sleep preferentially enhances memory for emotional components of scenes 
 Psychological Science 
 19 
 781 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02157.x 
 18816285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 McKenna 
 M 
 
 
 Gutierrez 
 E 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural processing of emotional faces requires attention 
 Proceedings of National Academic Science 
 99 
 11458 
 11463 
 10.1073/pnas.172403899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Padmala 
 S 
 
 
 Morland 
 T 
 
 
 2005 
 Fate of unattended fearful faces in the amygdala is determined by both attentional resources and cognitive modulation 
 Neuroimage 
 28 
 249 
 255 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.05.048 
 15993624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 GJ 
 
 
 Uhde 
 TW 
 
 
 Tancer 
 ME 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural substrates for voluntary suppression of negative affect: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 57 
 210 
 219 
 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.10.030 
 15691521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 2006 
 Emotion and cognition: Insights from studies of the human amygdala 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 57 
 27 
 53 
 10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070234 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pratto 
 F 
 
 
 John 
 OP 
 
 
 1991 
 Automatic vigilance: The attention-grabbing power of negative social information 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 61 
 380 
 391 
 1941510 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rakison 
 DH 
 
 
 Derringer 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Do infants possess an evolved spider-detection mechanism? 
 Cognition 
 107 
 381 
 393 
 10.1016/j.cognition.2007.07.022 
 17825812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a cognitive task 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 752 
 763 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.035 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 G 
 
 
 Hirsh 
 JB 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 2007 
 Positive affect increases the breadth of attentional selection 
 Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences 
 104 
 383 
 388 
 10.1073/pnas.0605198104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruby 
 P 
 
 
 Decety 
 J 
 
 
 2001 
 Effect of subjective perspective taking during simulation of action: A pet investigation of agency 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 4 
 546 
 550 
 10.1038/87510 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 Carroll 
 JM 
 
 
 1999 
 On the bipolarity of positive and negative affect 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 125 
 3 
 30 
 10.1037/0033-2909.125.1.3 
 9990843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santos 
 A 
 
 
 Mier 
 D 
 
 
 Kirsch 
 P 
 
 
 Meyer-Lindenberg 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Evidence for a general face salience signal in human amygdala 
 NeuroImage 
 54 
 3111 
 3116 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.024 
 21081170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Uniquely human social cognition 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 16 
 235 
 239 
 10.1016/j.conb.2006.03.001 
 16546372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2003 
 People thinking about thinking people. The role of the temporo-parietal junction in “Theory of mind” 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 1835 
 1842 
 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00230-1 
 12948738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schimmack 
 U 
 
 
 2005 
 Attentional interference effects of emotional pictures: Threat, negativity, or arousal? 
 Emotion 
 5 
 55 
 66 
 10.1037/1528-3542.5.1.55 
 15755219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schupp 
 HT 
 
 
 Junghöfer 
 M 
 
 
 Weike 
 AI 
 
 
 Hamm 
 AO 
 
 
 2003 
 Emotional facilitation of sensory processing in the visual cortex 
 Psychological Science 
 14 
 7 
 13 
 10.1111/1467-9280.01411 
 12564747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Reddish 
 M 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 The selectivity and functional connectivity of the anterior temporal lobes 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 20 
 813 
 825 
 10.1093/cercor/bhp149 
 19620621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Kaube 
 H 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2004 
 Empathy for pain involves the affective but not sensory components of pain 
 Science 
 303 
 1157 
 1162 
 10.1126/science.1093535 
 14976305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soderstrom 
 N 
 
 
 McCabe 
 D 
 
 
 2011 
 Are survival processing memory advantages based on ancestral priorities? 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 18 
 564 
 569 
 10.3758/s13423-011-0060-6 
 21327372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subramaniam 
 K 
 
 
 Kounios 
 J 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Jung-Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 A brain mechanism for facilitation of insight by positive affect 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 21 
 415 
 432 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21057 
 18578603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sutherland 
 M 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 (under review) 
 Emotional arousal increases the impact of bottom-up salience in visual attention 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 New York 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talmi 
 D 
 
 
 Schimmack 
 U 
 
 
 Paterson 
 T 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 The role of attention and relatedness in emotionally enhanced memory 
 Emotion 
 7 
 89 
 102 
 10.1037/1528-3542.7.1.89 
 17352566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsukiura 
 T 
 
 
 Mochizuki-Kawai 
 H 
 
 
 Fujii 
 T 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociable roles of the bilateral anterior temporal lobe in face-name associations: An event-related fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 30 
 617 
 626 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.09.043 
 16275140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tukey 
 JW 
 
 
 1977 
 Exploratory data analysis 
 Reading, MA 
 Addison-Wesley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 Papathanassiou 
 D 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Delcroix 
 N 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Automated anatomical labeling of activations in spm: Using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the mni MRI single-subject brain 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 273 
 289 
 10.1006/nimg.2001.0978 
 11771995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2005 
 Parietal lobe contributions to episodic memory retrieval 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 9 
 445 
 453 
 10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.001 
 16054861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weinstein 
 Y 
 
 
 Bugg 
 JM 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 
 
 2008 
 Can the survival recall advantage be explained by basic memory processes? 
 Memory & Cognition 
 36 
 913 
 919 
 10.3758/MC.36.5.913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wentura 
 D 
 
 
 Rothermund 
 K 
 
 
 Bak 
 P 
 
 
 2000 
 Automatic vigilance: The attention-grabbing power of approach- and avoidance-related social information 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 78 
 1024 
 1037 
 10.1037/0022-3514.78.6.1024 
 10870906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young 
 L 
 
 
 Cushman 
 F 
 
 
 Hauser 
 M 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 2007 
 The neural basis of the interaction between theory of mind and moral judgment 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 104 
 8235 
 8240 
 10.1073/pnas.0701408104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zahn 
 R 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 Krueger 
 F 
 
 
 Huey 
 ED 
 
 
 Garrido 
 G 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Social concepts are represented in the superior anterior temporal cortex 
 Proceedings of National Academic Science 
 104 
 6430 
 6435 
 10.1073/pnas.0607061104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zahn 
 R 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 Paiva 
 M 
 
 
 Garrido 
 G 
 
 
 Krueger 
 F 
 
 
 Huey 
 ED 
 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural basis of human social values: Evidence from functional MRI 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 276 
 283 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn080 
 18502730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Proposed mechanisms by which biologically and socially emotional stimuli modulate cognitive processing. (A) Biologically emotional stimuli imply clear/direct physical outcomes. Therefore, their emotional nature can be detected even with just automatic processing, and they can modulate cognitive processing without elaborative processing. (B) In contrast, socially emotional stimuli have ambiguous meanings and outcomes. Thus, each social stimulus has to be interpreted by each individual in each context in order to elicit an emotion and to modulate cognitive processing. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 (A) A schematic representation of procedures in Study 1. On each trial, participants viewed a riddle and then saw a picture (in the biological, social, and neutral conditions) or asterisks (in the control condition). After 150 ms of the picture or the asterisks (150 ms), the red dot appeared at one of eight possible locations. Participants were asked to indicate the location of the dot as quickly and as accurately as possible. Immediately after they answered the correct location of the dot, the dot was replaced by the solution to the riddle. (B) Eight possible locations for the dot probe and the correct key response for each of them. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Effects of stimulus type (biologically vs. socially emotional stimuli) on attention in Study 1. Error bars represent standard errors. (A) Reaction times to detect the dot-probe were slower after biologically emotional pictures than other conditions, while the reaction times did not differ across social, neutral and control conditions. (B) The valence category and subjective arousal did not modulate the results in reaction times. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Results of the hit rates from the picture memory test in Study 2. Error bars represent standard errors. (A)When people have enough cognitive resources at encoding, they remembered both biologically and socially emotional stimuli better than neutral stimuli. In contrast, when participants’ attention was focused elsewhere, it impaired their memory for social stimuli, but not for biological stimuli. (B) Valence and (C) subjective arousal did not modulate the patterns. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Results of the Remember rates from the picture memory test in Study 2. Error bars represent standard errors. (A) Attentional resources influenced encoding detailed memories for socially emotional stimuli more than for biologically emotional stimuli; although social stimuli produced higher remember rates than biological stimuli in the full attention condition, dividing attention impaired memory for socially emotional stimuli, but not for biologically emotional stimuli. Similar results were obtained regardless of (B) valence and (C) subjective arousal. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Brain areas in which activity was associated with both biological and social pictures in Study 3: (A) left amygdala (Y = −5) and (B) left MPFC (x = −11). ROI analyses also revealed that both biologically and socially emotional pictures produced similar activity in (C) left and (D) right amygdala. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Brain regions showing greater activity for socially emotional pictures than biological pictures (Study 3). Socially emotional pictures induced activity in dorsal MPFC (A), posterior cingulate (circled in (B)), bilateral temporo-parietal junction (circled in (C) and (D)), and bilateral anterior temporal gyri (pointed to with arrows in (C) and (D)). (E) Right hippocampus and right parahippocampal gyrus showed greater activity in response to social pictures than to biological pictures. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Right occipital gyrus showed greater activity for biologically emotional pictures than for social ones (x = 34) in Study 3. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 Brain regions showing differential functional connectivity with the amygdala across biologically and socially emotional pictures (Study 3). (A) Inferior parietal lobe (circled), and occipital cortex (pointed to with arrows) showed stronger connectivity with left amygdala for biological pictures than for social pictures. (B) In contrast, dorsal MPFC showed stronger connectivity for social pictures than for biological pictures. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10 
 
 Results from the conjunction analysis between socially emotional words and socially emotional pictures in Study 3. Posterior cingulate (circled in (A)), MPFC (pointed to by an arrow in (A) and (B)), temporo- parietal junction (circled in (C)), and anterior temporal gyrus (pointed to by an arrow in (C)) showed greater activity for both socially emotional words and socially emotional pictures. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Regions activated by both biologically and socially emotional pictures as revealed by a conjunction analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 Area 
 H 
 BA 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 T-value 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 L 
 
 −34 
 −4 
 −24 
 −32 
 −3 
 −18 
 4.86 
 
 
 
 L 
 
 −24 
 −6 
 −24 
 −23 
 −5 
 −18 
 4.76 
 
 
 MPFC 
 L 
 9 
 −10 
 58 
 22 
 −10 
 50 
 29 
 4.32 
 
 
 
 L 
 9 
 −10 
 52 
 14 
 −10 
 46 
 21 
 4.07 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 L 
 13 
 −46 
 24 
 4 
 −44 
 20 
 9 
 4.51 
 
 
 Superior Parietal Lobule 
 R 
 7 
 28 
 −60 
 54 
 24 
 −63 
 47 
 5.11 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 R 
 37 
 52 
 −60 
 −14 
 47 
 −57 
 −13 
 7.05 
 
 
 Inferior/Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 L 
 18 
 −46 
 −86 
 −4 
 −44 
 −81 
 −8 
 9.41 
 
 
 
 L 
 19 
 −42 
 −76 
 6 
 −40 
 −73 
 2 
 6.74 
 
 
 
 R 
 37 
 48 
 −70 
 4 
 43 
 −68 
 2 
 7.78 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 44 
 −84 
 −8 
 40 
 −80 
 −10 
 6.52 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 L 
 
 −44 
 −54 
 −30 
 −42 
 −49 
 −28 
 7.17 
 
 
 
 L 
 
 −42 
 −66 
 −26 
 −40 
 −61 
 −26 
 5.18 
 
 
 
 L 
 
 −40 
 −78 
 −20 
 −38 
 −72 
 −21 
 7.64 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 42 
 −52 
 −34 
 38 
 −47 
 −30 
 5.44 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 44 
 −58 
 −28 
 40 
 −54 
 −25 
 4.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain regions showing greater activity for each type of emotional pictures. 
 
 
 
 
 Area 
 H 
 BA 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 K 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Social pictures > Biological pictures 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate/Precuneus 
 L 
 23 
 0 
 −62 
 26 
 −1 
 −62 
 22 
 1659 
 
 
 
 L 
 31 
 −10 
 −58 
 28 
 −11 
 −58 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 31 
 12 
 −68 
 18 
 10 
 −67 
 14 
 
 
 
 MPFC 
 L 
 8 
 −8 
 54 
 40 
 −9 
 45 
 44 
 432 
 
 
 
 L 
 8 
 −4 
 50 
 34 
 −5 
 42 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 9 
 −10 
 64 
 22 
 −10 
 56 
 29 
 
 
 
 Anterior Temporal Gyrus 
 R 
 21 
 56 
 −4 
 −28 
 51 
 −3 
 −20 
 310 
 
 
 
 R 
 21 
 48 
 6 
 −40 
 44 
 7 
 −30 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 47 
 34 
 14 
 −30 
 31 
 14 
 −21 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 21 
 −58 
 −8 
 −26 
 −54 
 −7 
 −21 
 221 
 
 
 
 L 
 21 
 −54 
 0 
 −24 
 −51 
 1 
 −18 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 20 
 −48 
 −6 
 −32 
 −45 
 −4 
 −26 
 
 
 
 Temporal-Parietal Junction 
 R 
 39 
 56 
 −56 
 12 
 51 
 −55 
 11 
 608 
 
 
 
 R 
 22 
 56 
 −40 
 0 
 51 
 −39 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 19 
 56 
 −70 
 10 
 51 
 −68 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 39 
 −56 
 −60 
 12 
 −53 
 −58 
 9 
 272 
 
 
 
 L 
 39 
 −40 
 −62 
 24 
 −38 
 −61 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 39 
 −44 
 −68 
 32 
 −42 
 −68 
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biological pictures > Social pictures 
 
 
 
 Middle/Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 R 
 18 
 34 
 −88 
 8 
 30 
 −85 
 4 
 184 
 
 
 
 R 
 18 
 32 
 −90 
 20 
 28 
 −88 
 14 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 L 
 
 −32 
 −60 
 −28 
 −30 
 −55 
 −27 
 203 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 32 
 −50 
 −34 
 29 
 −46 
 −30 
 216 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 28 
 −66 
 −28 
 25 
 −61 
 −26 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 28 
 −48 
 −22 
 25 
 −45 
 −19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Results from functional connectivity analyses. Areas showing greater correlation with left amygdala for either biological or social pictures. 
 
 
 
 
 Area 
 H 
 BA 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 T-value 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biological pictures > Social pictures 
 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 R 
 40 
 46 
 −54 
 44 
 41 
 −56 
 39 
 5.19 
 
 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 R 
 19 
 38 
 −82 
 12 
 34 
 −79 
 8 
 3.33 
 
 
 Occipital Lobe, Lingual Gyrus 
 R 
 6 
 36 
 −74 
 8 
 32 
 −72 
 5 
 4.60 
 
 
 
 R 
 18 
 6 
 −80 
 −4 
 4 
 −76 
 −6 
 3.98 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 R 
 7 
 10 
 −76 
 56 
 7 
 −77 
 48 
 4.91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Social pictures > Biological pictures 
 
 
 
 MPFC 
 L 
 8 
 −16 
 46 
 36 
 −16 
 38 
 40 
 3.93 
 
 
 Posterior Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 L 
 30 
 −26 
 −54 
 4 
 −25 
 −52 
 2 
 5.05 
 
 
 
 L 
 30 
 −20 
 −48 
 10 
 −20 
 −47 
 8 
 3.26 
 
 
 Uncus 
 L 
 20 
 −34 
 −6 
 −32 
 −32 
 −4 
 −26 
 4.13 
 
 
 Middle Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 24 
 −12 
 6 
 52 
 −13 
 −1 
 51 
 3.95 
 
 
 
 R 
 24 
 22 
 −4 
 44 
 19 
 −9 
 43 
 5.99 
 
 
 
 R 
 31 
 18 
 −16 
 38 
 15 
 −20 
 37 
 4.84 
 
 
 
 R 
 24 
 14 
 −8 
 40 
 11 
 −13 
 39 
 4.10 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 L 
 4 
 −18 
 −18 
 56 
 −18 
 −23 
 52 
 6.21 
 
 
 
 L 
 4 
 −28 
 −20 
 60 
 −28 
 −25 
 55 
 5.01 
 
 
 
 R 
 4 
 14 
 −24 
 68 
 11 
 −30 
 63 
 4.79 
 
 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 L 
 31 
 −6 
 −26 
 48 
 −7 
 −30 
 45 
 5.98 
 
 
 
 L 
 5 
 −12 
 −26 
 56 
 −13 
 −31 
 52 
 5.19 
 
 
 
 R 
 5 
 22 
 −32 
 54 
 19 
 −36 
 50 
 4.35 
 
 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 L 
 3 
 −26 
 −28 
 58 
 −26 
 −33 
 53 
 4.47 
 
 
 
 L 
 4 
 −34 
 −34 
 60 
 −33 
 −39 
 54 
 4.52 
 
 
 Inferior/Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 L 
 20 
 −48 
 −12 
 −26 
 −45 
 −10 
 −21 
 4.17 
 
 
 
 L 
 21 
 −52 
 −4 
 −28 
 −49 
 −3 
 −22 
 3.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Results from conjunction analyses between emotional words and emotional pictures in Study 4. 
 
 
 
 
 Area 
 H 
 BA 
 MNI 
 Talairach 
 T-value 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Social words and Social pictures 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 L 
 31 
 −4 
 −58 
 26 
 −5 
 −58 
 22 
 6.11 
 
 
 MPFC 
 L 
 9 
 −2 
 56 
 16 
 −3 
 49 
 23 
 5.84 
 
 
 
 R 
 9 
 10 
 60 
 16 
 8 
 53 
 24 
 5.80 
 
 
 
 L 
 9 
 −8 
 60 
 26 
 −9 
 52 
 32 
 5.16 
 
 
 Temporal-Parietal junction 
 L 
 19 
 −50 
 −64 
 18 
 −48 
 −63 
 14 
 5.02 
 
 
 
 L 
 39 
 −56 
 −72 
 18 
 −53 
 −70 
 13 
 4.63 
 
 
 Anterior Temporal Gyrus 
 L 
 38 
 −38 
 16 
 −42 
 −36 
 17 
 −33 
 4.53 
 
 
 
 L 
 21 
 −50 
 0 
 −36 
 −47 
 2 
 −29 
 4.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biological words, Social words and Social pictures 
 
 
 
 Anterior Temporal Gyrus 
 L 
 38 
 −46 
 12 
 −36 
 −43 
 13 
 −28 
 4.85 
 
 
 
 L 
 21 
 −52 
 4 
 −38 
 −49 
 6 
 −30 
 4.05 
 
 
 Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate 
 L 
 31 
 −8 
 −64 
 24 
 −9 
 −63 
 20 
 3.88 
 
 
 
 L 
 30 
 −4 
 −60 
 16 
 −5 
 −59 
 13 
 3.71 
 
 
 Temporal-Parietal junction 
 L 
 39 
 −56 
 −72 
 22 
 −53 
 −70 
 17 
 3.66 
 
 
 
 L 
 39 
 −46 
 −68 
 20 
 −44 
 −67 
 15 
 3.18 
 
 
 MPFC 
 L 
 8 
 −6 
 58 
 40 
 −7 
 49 
 45 
 3.56 
 
 
 
 
 
