
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 
 Neuroimage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 22001264 
 3254828 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.066 
 NIHMS330706 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Routes to the past: Neural substrates of direct and generative autobiographical memory retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 Donna Rose 
 
 1 
 2 
 * 
 
 
 
 Knapp 
 Katie 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 Reece P. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 Daniel L. 
 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, The University of Auckland 
 2 Centre for Brain Research, The University of Auckland 
 3 Department of Psychology, Harvard University 
 
 
 * Corresponding author: Donna Rose Addis, Dept. of Psychology, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand, Tel: +64 (9) 373 7599 extn 88552; Fax: +64 (9) 373 7450,  d.addis@auckland.ac.nz 
 
 
 23 
 10 
 2011 
 
 
 6 
 10 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2012 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2013 
 
 59 
 3 
 2908 
 2922 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Models of autobiographical memory propose two routes to retrieval depending on cue specificity. When available cues are specific and personally-relevant, a memory can be directly accessed. However, when available cues are generic, one must engage a generative retrieval process to produce more specific cues to successfully access a relevant memory. The current study sought to characterize the neural bases of these retrieval processes. During functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), participants were shown personally-relevant cues to elicit direct retrieval, or generic cues (nouns) to elicit generative retrieval. We used spatiotemporal partial least squares to characterize the spatial and temporal characteristics of the networks associated with direct and generative retrieval. Both retrieval tasks engaged regions comprising the autobiographical retrieval network, including hippocampus, and medial prefrontal and parietal cortices. However, some key neural differences emerged. Generative retrieval differentially recruited lateral prefrontal and temporal regions early on during the retrieval process, likely supporting the strategic search operations and initial recovery of generic autobiographical information. However, many regions were activated more strongly during direct versus generative retrieval, even when we time-locked the analysis to the successful recovery of events in both conditions. This result suggests that there may be fundamental differences between memories that are accessed directly and those that are recovered via the iterative search and retrieval process that characterizes generative retrieval. 
 
 
 autobiographical memory 
 retrieval 
 fMRI 
 partial least squares 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health  : NIMH 
 R01 MH060941-12 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Autobiographical memories (AM) of past experiences can be often elicited spontaneously; something we encounter in our environment or in our thoughts directly transports us back in time to mentally re-experience that one particular event ( Berntsen and Hall, 2004 ). Other times, however, AM retrieval is much more effortful: we have to actively search for a memory to answer some specific question about our past. Models of AM distinguish between these two forms of retrieval. When a specific and personally-relevant cue is encountered (e.g., “breaking my leg”), the ensuing retrieval is described as direct ( Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ) or associative ( Moscovitch, 1992 ), as the cue provides a direct entry-point into the specific event. However, when available cues are generic (e.g., “leg”), one must engage in an iterative search and retrieval process, termed generative ( Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ) or strategic ( Moscovitch, 1992 ) retrieval, to generate increasingly more specific cues that eventually access a relevant AM. 
 Direct and generative retrieval are related processes; in both cases, retrieval is successful when an AM that meets the search criteria is recovered. In other words, direct retrieval of a memory is the ultimate endpoint ( Conway, 2005 ), and thus the difference between these processes relates to whether an effortful memory search is required: the  route  to successful retrieval differs. Although informal comparisons of existing studies of direct or generative retrieval give some indication that these processes have different neural signatures, as yet no study has directly contrasted generative and direct retrieval.  Svoboda, McKinnon, & Levine (2006)  argue that research comparing these two forms of retrieval is important for better understanding the strategic aspects of AM retrieval unique to generative retrieval. Moreover, they assert that the use of multivariate neuroimaging analyses examining the regions associated with AM retrieval would be an important complement to this approach. The current study was designed to achieve these two specific aims. 
 In direct retrieval studies, personalized cues relating to specific AMs are collected prior to scanning, either at the time of event occurrence (the prospective method;  Cabeza et al., 2004 ;  Levine et al., 2004 ;  St. Jacques et al., in press ;  Svoboda and Levine, 2009 ) or during a prescan interview with the participant (e.g.,  Addis et al., 2004b ;  Maguire and Mummery, 1999 ;  Maguire et al., 2001 ;  Steinvorth et al., 2005 ) or a close relative ( Gilboa et al., 2004 ), and later used during scanning to elicit direct AM retrieval. Such studies typically report activation of medial and left-lateralized regions, including medial and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), medial and lateral parietal cortex, temporal polar cortex and the medial temporal lobes (MTL; for reviews, see  Cabeza and St Jacques, 2007 ;  Maguire, 2001 ;  Svoboda et al., 2006 ). This set of regions is activated quickly upon cue presentation, indicative of direct access to AMs that does not require a protracted search phase. It is proposed that the direct cue interacts with the memory trace (i.e., ecphory;  Tulving, 1983 ) and the hippocampus mediates the reactivation and reintegration of the details comprising the AM stored in posterior cortical regions, enabling distributed memory details to be remembered in a cohesive way ( Nadel and Moscovitch, 1998 ). After a memory is reactivated, the ventromedial and dorsolateral PFC contribute to evaluating the contents of retrieval, to assess whether the AM is a real memory (i.e., reality monitoring;  Johnson et al., 1988 ) and whether it meets the search criteria ( Schacter et al., 1998 ). Ventromedial PFC activity may reflect a quick “feeling-of-rightness” evaluation of retrieved AMs ( Moscovitch and Winocur, 2002 ) as well as the self-referential nature of the retrieved AM ( Northoff and Bermpohl, 2004 ). Consistent with this model of the functional neuroanatomy of AM retrieval, it has been reported that activity in the hippocampus during AM retrieval occurs prior to activity in regions mediating the content of the memory (e.g., posterior visuospatial regions;  Daselaar et al., 2008 ) and post-retrieval monitoring (e.g., medial PFC;  Cabeza et al., 2004 ). In sum, existing neuroimaging studies on direct AM retrieval provide an indication of the neural regions whose activation should be the common end point of both direct and generative retrieval. 
 When only generic cues are available, a generative search process is required before direct access can occur. If a specific AM is the goal of retrieval, the memory cue is used to launch an iterative search-retrieve-evaluate-elaborate cycle through the different levels of AM: abstract conceptual knowledge about lifetime periods; generic memories of repeated or extended events; and episodic memories of specific past events ( Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ). For instance, if provided with a generic cue such as “dog”, one might first access knowledge of a time when they owned a dog, or general events with their dog (e.g., daily walks). These retrieved memories are evaluated, and if the search criteria are not met, the retrieved information is used as further cues to access a more specific AM (e.g., losing the dog on one occasion; see Table 7 in  Conway, 2005 , for further examples). 
 Studies of generative retrieval typically use common nouns as generic cues (i.e., Crovitz cueing paradigm;  Crovitz and Schiffman, 1974 ). The retrieval trial contains a search/construction phase that ends in ecphory that is followed by the elaboration of the event (i.e., fleshing out the event in vivid detail) and post-retrieval processes. Thus, some generative paradigms have had participants indicate (with a button press) when a specific event memory is retrieved to delineate the search phase from subsequent elaboration and post-retrieval processes ( Addis et al., 2007 ;  Conway et al., 1999 ;  Daselaar et al., 2008 ;  Hennessey et al., 2011 ). Early neuroimaging studies of generative retrieval linked AM search processes with left lateral PFC activation ( Conway et al., 1999 ) prior to spreading activation to posterior temporal and occipital cortices reflecting the retrieval of the contents of the memory ( Conway et al., 2001 ;  Conway et al., 2003 ). However, more recent studies have found right-lateralized ( Daselaar et al., 2008 ) or bilateral ( Hennessey et al., 2011 ;  St. Jacques et al., 2011 ;  Vandekerckhove et al., 2005 ) activity in the lateral PFC during generative retrieval. 
 A recent meta-analysis ( Svoboda et al., 2006 ) called into question the link between generative search processes and ventrolateral PFC: while half of the 24 studies reviewed showed ventrolateral PFC activity, these studies were a mix of both generative and direct retrieval paradigms. Similarly, the studies that did not report ventrolateral PFC engagement also included both studies of generative and direct retrieval. These mixed findings may result from methodological differences. Paradigms differ in their strategic load due to cue type (e.g., personalized cues generated by participants may require less strategic retrieval versus personalized cues provided by relatives) or the age of the AMs (e.g., retrieval of recent AMs may require less strategic search processes). Moreover, the control tasks vary in strategic load and contrasts may therefore result in an apparent absence of lateral PFC activity ( Addis et al., 2007 ). The inconsistent findings regarding both the recruitment and laterality of lateral PFC activity during generative retrieval highlight the need to directly contrast generative retrieval with direct retrieval to identify the unique neural correlates of the search phase of AM retrieval. 
 Previous research has indicated that general AMs are often retrieved early during the iterative search-retrieval-evaluation-elaboration cycle. For instance, a study sampling the contents of consciousness during generative AM retrieval confirmed that general AMs are accessed prior to specific AMs ( Haque and Conway, 2001 ). Thus, it is likely that neural activity in lateral anterior temporal cortex supporting the retrieval of generic events ( Addis et al., 2004a ;  Graham et al., 2003 ) will be evident during the early stages of generative retrieval. 
 The aim of the current study was to contrast direct and generative AM retrieval. To this end, we presented individuals with personalized and generic cues but matched exposure to, and processing of, these cues in a prescan session. As both forms of retrieval ended in specific AM retrieval, it was predicted that there would be evidence of common engagement of regions typically evident in studies of direct retrieval. In addition, we also expected there would be neural differences, with early activity in ventrolateral PFC and anterior temporal cortex evident in the generative AM condition. Because this study was designed to examine two retrieval processes that differ not only in terms of spatial patterns of activity but also in terms of the unfolding of these processes on a temporal scale, we analyzed these data using spatiotemporal partial least squares (ST-PLS), a multivariate technique that identifies whole brain patterns of activity correlated with tasks across the length of an event ( McIntosh et al., 2004 ). Notably, ST-PLS is not dependent upon assumptions about the shape and time course of the hemodynamic response function (HRF), and can thus be used to examine neural differences between tasks wherever they emerge across the duration of the trial ( Addis et al., 2004a ). We predicted that direct retrieval should result in the immediate engagement of regions associated with successful AM retrieval (which would be evident in blood oxygen level dependent signal approximately 6–8 seconds after cue onset), while activation of this set of regions would be delayed in generative retrieval, given the need for an initial memory search. However, once a specific AM is recovered in both conditions, these regions should be similarly engaged. 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Twenty healthy, right-handed young adults with no prior history of neurological or psychiatric impairment were enrolled in this study and provided informed written consent in a manner approved by the Harvard and Massachusetts General Hospital Institutional Review Boards. Two participants dropped out of the study prior to the fMRI session, and three others were excluded due to issues during the fMRI session (i.e., excessive movement, data collection problems, or detection of an anatomical abnormality). Thus, data from 15 healthy participants (9 males; mean age, 22 years; range, 18–33) were analysed. 
 
 
 2.2 Stimuli 
 Ninety-six highly imageable, frequent and concrete nouns were selected from the  Clark and Paivio (2004)  extended norms for use in this study. These nouns were divided into lists that did not differ in terms of imagability, frequency or concreteness ( F  values < .637,  p  values > .531); see  Appendix A . These lists cycled through the conditions comprising the experiment: (1) direct retrieval condition; (2) the generative retrieval condition; (3) the visuospatial control condition; and (4) the semantic processing control condition 1 . Participants were randomly assigned to a counterbalanced version, such that across participants, the same cues were presented in direct, generative, and control conditions. 
 
 
 2.3 Pre-scan Session 
 Approximately one month prior to scanning, participants completed a 2-hour pre-scan session in the laboratory. The aim of this session was to collect AMs from generic cues that could then be used to create personalized cues to be shown during scanning. Thus, during this session participants silently completed 16 trials in a  “direct retrieval pre-scan”  condition (see  Figure 1a ). For each of these trials, a generic cue (noun) was shown for 20 seconds, and an instruction to retrieve a specific past event related to the cue, either from the last year or the last 5–20 years. On each trial, participants made a button press when a specific event was retrieved; they then elaborated on the event, generating as much detail as possible, for the remainder of the 20 seconds. 
 Participants also silently completed 16 trials in a  “generative retrieval pre-scan”  condition (see  Figure 1b ). For these trials, the 16 nouns that would later be used as generic cues during the scan session were presented. For trials in this condition, participants saw each noun for 20 seconds and an instruction to imagine a future event related to the cue; they pressed a button when they had an event in mind, and then elaborated or fleshed out the imaginary event for the remainder of the 20 seconds. Importantly, the generation of a future event requires exposure to and processing of the cue, but not in a way that would directly link the generic cue word with one specific past experience. Although it is likely that the simulation of future events activates various AMs or details comprising AMs ( Schacter and Addis, 2007 ), it is highly unlikely that this process would result in the cue word then being a direct pointer to one particular AM. 
 Trials in both conditions were randomly presented during this pre-scan session. The prescan session ended with a semi-structured interview, where participants were re-presented with each cue and asked to describe the past or future event they had generated for that cue. From this information, the experimenter later created personalized AM cues for use as fMRI stimuli for the direct retrieval condition. Information regarding future events imagined during the pre-scan session was also collected (even though it was not later used during scanning) in order to match exposure and processing of cues in both conditions. 
 
 
 2.4 Scanning session 
 Participants were familiarized with the task instructions, and introduced to the rating scales they would complete during scanning. Participants then completed six practice trials before entering the MR environment. Participants were aware that following the scan, they would be shown each cue and asked to describe the AM recalled during scanning. Throughout the duration of the scanning session, participants completed 16 trials of each of four conditions: direct AM retrieval, generative AM retrieval, semantic control and imagery control 2 . Each trial was separated by jittered fixation (mean = 4  s ; range = 2 – 6  s ). The scanning session was divided into six runs, during which 16 trials were presented in random order. All stimuli were presented using black text on a white background. All responses to the rating scales were made on a five button MRI-compatible response box. 
 
 2.4.1 AM tasks 
 Each personalized cue used in the direct AM retrieval condition identified a specific past event  and  included the cue word shown in the pre-scan session that elicited that AM (see  Figure 1c ). Participants were instructed to retrieve the memory associated with the personalized cue. For the generative retrieval condition, stimuli consisted of the cue words used to elicit future events in the prescan session (see  Figure 1d ). Although participants were exposed to these cues previously, we believe they were still generic cues for AM retrieval because in the prescan condition they were used for a different cognitive task (i.e., future simulation), and moreover, the temporal distance was switched. In other words, a cue word used to elicit a  future  event in the next  year  was now used to elicit a  past  event from the past  5–20 years  (see  Figure 1 ). Participants were instructed that all AMs should be specific in time and place, and to remember these events from a field perspective. 
 For all AM trials, the participant saw a cueing screen for 20  s . This screen included the task instruction, the time frame from which the AM should come (past year, past 5–20 years), and the personalized or generic cue (see  Figure 1 ). Once participants had an event in mind, they made a button press and elaborated or fleshed out the memory for the remainder of the trial. Three rating scales then followed, each shown for 5  s : (1) level of detail recalled (1 = no/few details; 5 = highly detailed); (2) emotionality of the AM (1 = detachment; 5 = intense emotional experience); (3) the main perspective (field or observer) of the AM (1 = own eyes; 2 = see self). 
 
 
 2.4.2 Control tasks 
 In order to isolate regions unique to the AM conditions, two control conditions were also included in this study: a semantic and a visuospatial task ( Addis et al., 2007 ). These two tasks were chosen to control for the fact that AMs, being multifaceted in nature, typically include both semantic and visual elements ( Levine et al., 2002 ). Thus, together these two tasks controlled for general processes associated with retrieving semantic and visual information. Moreover, these tasks were designed to control for the two phases of the autobiographical tasks: 1) the retrieval and integration of information during the construction phase and, 2) during the elaboration phase, the generation of as much detail as possible about the information retrieved during construction. 
 Specifically, on semantic control trials, participants were presented with a noun; they were instructed to think of two related words, arrange all three words into a sentence, and make a button press. The remainder of the 20  s  trial involved semantically defining the three words. On visuospatial control trials, participants were presented with a noun and thought of two objects related to the stimulus – one larger and one smaller than the named object – and mentally visualized all three objects in a triangular arrangement. Once the arrangement was in mind, they made a button press and for the remainder of the 20  s  trial, they focused on the visual features of the three objects. This was followed by three rating scales (shown for 5  s  each): (1) level of detail of semantic/visual information (1 = no/few details; 5 = highly detailed); (2) relatedness of the words/objects generated to the cue (1= unrelated; 5 = very related); (3) the difficulty of the task (1 = easy; 5 = difficult). 
 
 Post-Scan Interview 
 Immediately after scanning, all participants completed a post-scan interview. They were presented with the direct and generative AM cues they had seen during scanning, and were asked to describe the events they had remembered in response to each cue. Participants also dated each event and indicated when the event had been last rehearsed. 
 
 
 
 2.4.3 MRI data acquisition 
 MR data were collected on a 3 Tesla Siemens Allegra MRI scanner. Detailed anatomical data were collected using a multiplanar rapidly acquired gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence. Functional images were acquired using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence (TR = 2000 ms, TE = 23 ms, FOV = 200 mm, flip angle = 90°). Twenty-five coronal oblique slices, each 5mm thick, were acquired at an angle perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus in an interleaved fashion. 
 
 
 
 2.5 Analysis of fMRI data 
 
 2.5.1 Pre-processing 
 Standard pre-processing was conducted using SPM2 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), including discarding the first four functional images to allow scanner equilibrium effects, rigid-body motion correction and unwarping, slice timing correction, spatial normalization to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template (resampled at 4×4×4mm voxels) and spatial smoothing (using an 8mm full-width half maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel). 
 
 
 2.5.2 Analysis 
 Data were analyzed using Spatiotemporal Partial Least Squares (ST-PLS), a multivariate technique that identifies whole brain patterns of activity that are correlated with experimental design (i.e., conditions) across the length of an event ( Addis, et al., 2004 ; Lin, et al., 2003; Lobaugh, West, & McIntosh, 2001;  McIntosh, Chau, & Protzner, 2004 ). PLS is robustly validated (McIntosh, Bookstein, Haxby, & Grady, 1996;  McIntosh, et al., 2004 ) and has been used in a number of studies on autobiographical memory and related processes ( Addis et al., 2004a ;  Addis et al., 2009 ;  Burianova and Grady, 2007 ;  Burianova et al., 2010 ;  Spreng and Grady, 2010 ;  Spreng et al., 2010 ). Although ST-PLS and the more traditional univariate approach are both variations of the general linear model, and detect comparable patterns of activity (e.g.,  Addis et al., 2009 ;  McIntosh et al., 2004 ; Salami et al., 2010), ST-PLS offers a number of advantages. As mentioned earlier, ST-PLS is not dependent upon assumptions about the shape and time course of the HRF, and can identify neural differences between tasks wherever they emerge across the duration of the trial. Moreover, ST-PLS analyses tend to have increased statistical power for several reasons: the increased sensitivity of the multivariate approach ( Fletcher et al., 1996 ;  Lukic et al., 2002 ), especially in situations where the dependent measures are correlated; the conservative nature of univariate random effects analyses (based on Random Field Theory); and the use of a canonical hrf (sensitivity is reduced if the voxel s response differs from the canonical hrf). For instance, some investigations have demonstrated that multivariate covariance-based methods using singular value decomposition – as ST-PLS does – are more sensitive to mean differences in signal than are voxel-wise  t -tests (e.g.,  Lukic et al., 2002 ). 
 For this analysis, we used the non-rotated version of task ST-PLS (e.g.,  Addis, Pan, et al., 2009 ; McIntosh & Lobaugh, 2004; Rajah & McIntosh, 2008), enabling us to specify  a priori  non-orthogonal contrasts. In the current study, two contrasts (design matrices) were specified. The first contrast examined whether direct and generative AM retrieval engaged a common network relative to the control tasks (AM vs. Control). The second contrast examined the differences between direct and generative AM retrieval (Direct vs. Generative AM). 
 A data matrix was constructed that contained all of the voxels across the length of each event following the onset of each trial (specified as a 10 TR or 20 s temporal window), across all subjects and all conditions. MR signals were normalized within trials with respect to the signal at the onset of the trial. The resulting data matrix was then cross-correlated with the design matrix for the contrast. The dot product of the contrasts with the data matrix was computed, resulting in a matrix of voxel saliences. The weighted value of the salience can be either positive or negative, depending on whether the voxel exhibits a positive or negative relation to the specified contrast of conditions. For example, voxels in which activity (increases or decreases) is associated with a negatively-weighted condition(s) (and other voxels showing the same pattern) will have negatively weighted saliences. 
 For each  a priori  contrast, the non-rotated analysis produced a series of dot product images (one for each 2  s  TR) displaying the relative increases and decreases in whole-brain activity related to the positively and negatively weighted conditions. Moreover, brain scores for each condition in each contrast for each subject were also derived; these scores are analogous to factor scores in a factor analysis, as they indicate how much of the spatiotemporal brain pattern is expressed by a subject within a condition. Examination of average brain scores for each condition with confidence intervals indicated how reliably each condition contributed to the spatiotemporal pattern associated with the contrast (i.e., if the error bars crossed zero, a condition was considered to not contribute reliably to the pattern). Moreover, examining average brain scores across the TRs comprising the event (temporal brains cores) enabled identification of the TR(s) when activation for conditions was maximal. 
 The statistical significance of the results was determined using permutation testing (500 permutations were computed), conducted using the sums of squares of the dot product images (which is equivalent to the ‘singular value’ – the amount of covariance accounted for by the contrast, McIntosh & Lobaugh, 2004). This procedure involved randomly re-ordering the data matrix rows, re-running the non-rotated analysis, and determining the new singular value for each re-ordering. Thus, significance reflects the probability based on the number of times the singular value from the permuted data exceeds the original singular value (McIntosh, et al., 1996). A threshold of  p  ≤ .05 was used. Note that as the entire spatiotemporal pattern was assessed in one analytic step rather computing a series of voxelwise statistical tests, correction for multiple comparisons is not required. 
 The reliability of the voxel saliences was determined using bootstrap estimation of the standard errors. This procedure involved randomly resampling subjects with replacement, and computing the standard error of the saliences after a number of bootstrap samples (McIntosh et al., 1996). In the present study, this sampling and analysis procedure was carried out 300 times. Clusters of 5 or more voxels in which bootstrap ratios were greater than ±2.8 (roughly equal to a  z -score, and  p  < .005), were considered to represent reliable voxels ( Addis, et al., 2004 ). Note that for the AM>Control contrast, the effect was so robust, most of these saliences survived a more conservative threshold of 3.2 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .001), and for brevity only these saliences are reported here. Moreover, given our focus on regions typically associated with AM retrieval (i.e., the AM retrieval network), we focus our findings on regions identified in the meta-analysis by  Svoboda et al. (2006)  as core and secondary regions associated with AM retrieval. Local maxima co-ordinates (i.e., voxels showing the highest bootstrap ratios) are reported for each cluster during peak TRs (as determined with reference to the temporal brain score plots). For localization purposes, MNI co-ordinates were converted to Talairach space and localized in reference to a standard stereotaxic atlas (Talairach and Tournoux, 1988). 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Results 
 The number of trials, response time (RT) data, and phenomenological ratings for the various conditions are presented in  Table 1 . For all conditions, only trials on which a button press (indicating AM retrieval) was recorded were analyzed. For AM trials, analysis was further restricted to trials on which the AM retrieved during scanning was a specific event, and was recounted during the post-scan interview. The resulting number of trials (i.e., bin size) differed by condition,  F (2.22,31.02) =11.26,  p <.001, as indicated by a repeated measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA). Post-hoc Bonferroni tests indicated that direct retrieval had significantly more successful trials than generative retrieval and the control conditions ( p  values < .05); generative retrieval and both control conditions did not differ ( p  values > .66). 
 An important manipulation check was to determine whether the presentation of the cues in the generative condition facilitated later retrieval of AMs during the scanning session, despite the fact that during the prescan session these cues were only processed with respect to imagined future events and not retrieved past events. There were two instances of generative retrieval in this experiment that allowed for such a comparison to be made: in the direct AM condition during the prescan session (i.e., the initial retrieval of an AM that was later cued directly during scanning;  Figure 1a ), and in the generative AM condition during scanning ( Figure 1d ). The only difference between these instances of generative retrieval was that in the generative condition, the cue had been previously presented and processed during the prescan session (in terms of eliciting an imagined future event). A paired  t -test of RT data from these two sets of retrieval trials failed to provide any evidence that generative retrieval during scanning was significantly faster than the initial (generative) retrieval of AMs in the direct condition during the prescan session,  t (13)  =1.29,  p  = .220. 
 We also examined how RTs in the AM and control conditions differed during the scan session. A RM-ANOVA revealed a main effect of condition,  F (2.14,30.15) =40.01,  p <.001, and post-hoc Bonferroni tests confirmed that as predicted, RTs for direct retrieval were significantly faster than generative retrieval ( p  < .001). Both AM conditions had significantly faster RTs than the control conditions ( p  values ≤ .05). RT did not differ between the control conditions ( p =1.00). 
 A chi-square test indicated that the frequencies of field and observer ratings did not significantly differ in frequency between AMs in the direct and generative conditions (χ 2  = .936,  p  = .432). The phenomenological ratings were compared across AM conditions using Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Tests. Directly retrieved AMs were rated as more detailed ( Z =−2.22,  p <.05) and more significant ( Z =−3.12,  p <.01) but not more emotional ( Z =−1.36,  p =.17) than AMs retrieved through generative retrieval. Given that AMs in the direct task were retrieved more quickly, participants had more time for elaboration, which in turn may have led to inflated detail ratings. To investigate this possibility, we ran correlations of detail ratings and RTs using Spearman s Rho correlations. No significant correlations were found for AMs in either the direct ( r s  = −0.181,  p =.520) or generative ( r s  = −0.145,  p =.607) retrieval conditions. 
 The AMs retrieved in the direct and generative conditions did not differ significantly in terms of event recency (time since the event occurred),  t (14) =1.21,  p =.25. However, as expected, these events differed in rehearsal recency (time since the last rehearsal of the AM),  t (14) =8.14,  p<.001 , with direct events last rehearsed at the prescan session 3–4 weeks prior, and general AMs last rehearsed over a year before the scan. 
 
 
 3.2 Non-Rotated ST-PLS – AM versus Control Tasks 
 The contrast of autobiographical (direct and generative) tasks relative to the control tasks was significant,  p <.001, and explained 40.82% of the crossblock covariance. The brain scores plot ( Figure 2a ) indicates that all four conditions reliably contributed to this overall pattern (as the confidence intervals did not cross zero for any condition). The temporal brain scores plot shows brain scores for both AM conditions and both control conditions, as well as the mean of each pair of conditions ( Figure 2b ). This plot shows that the differentiation of the autobiographical and control tasks was, in part, related to differing temporal profiles: mean activation associated with the AM tasks peaked between TRs 5–8 (with the highest activity at TR 6), while mean activation associated with the control tasks peaked later during TRs 6–10 (with the highest activity at TR 9). 
 AM retrieval and control tasks are also differentiated spatially, associated with distinct patterns of neural activity. The regions associated with the control tasks (negative saliences) are provided as supplementary information ( Table 2 ) and are visible in cool colours in  Figure 3 . The control tasks recruited a set of regions that mapped primarily onto the dorsal attention and fronto-parietal networks, as well as inferior frontal gyrus. In contrast, the regions associated with AM retrieval (indicated by positive saliences; listed in  Table 3  and shown in warm colors in  Figure 3 ) included all of the major components of the AM retrieval network ( Svoboda et al., 2006 ): bilateral medial parietal cortices (including posterior cingulate, precuneus and retrosplenial cortex extending into cuneus), MTL (including hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex), lateral temporal cortex, medial PFC (including frontopolar cortex) and left angular gyrus. Examination of HRFs extracted from these regions ( Figure 3 ) supports the overall pattern evident in the temporal brain scores, with activity peaking at approximately TR 6. Interestingly, although the overall result of this contrast demonstrates common activation of these regions during both forms of AM retrieval relative to the control tasks ( Figure 2 ,  3 ), activity in many regions was stronger for direct relative compared to generative retrieval. This difference is clearly evident in the temporal brain scores ( Figure 2 ), and a  t -test on these brain scores at TR 6 indicated this difference was significant,  t (14)  = 4.65,  p  <.001. These neural differences were confirmed by our next PLS analysis. 
 
 
 3.3 Non-Rotated ST-PLS – Direct versus Generative AM retrieval 
 The contrast of direct and generative AM retrieval was significant,  p =.006, and explained 25.27% of the crossblock covariance. The brain scores ( Figure 4a ) indicate that a difference between these two forms of AM retrieval contributed reliably to this result (as the confidence intervals did not cross zero for either AM condition). Interestingly, this plot also shows that the semantic control condition shared some commonalities with the generative retrieval condition. The temporal brain scores ( Figure 4b ) revealed that brain activity associated with direct retrieval was very strong relative to that associated with generative retrieval, and peaked during TRs 5 and 6. There were also distinct peaks of activity for generative retrieval (confirmed by extracted HRF data) at TRs 2–3 and later at TRs 8–10. 
 During the peak TRs associated with direct retrieval, regions engaged included: bilateral medial PFC, inferior frontal gyrus, medial parietal cortex (including posterior cingulate, precuneus and retrosplenial cortex, lateral parietal cortex and posterior visuospatial cortices (e.g., cuneus), and the left MTL (including hippocampus, parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices; see  Figure 5a  and  Table 4a ). The HRF data extracted from these regions ( Figure 5a ) illustrates that while there is strong activity during direct retrieval, activation of these regions during generative retrieval is minimal. In contrast, generative retrieval engaged a small set of regions (see  Figure 6  and  Table 4b ) early on during the retrieval process (TRs 2–3), likely reflecting the early search-retrieval processes uniquely associated with generative retrieval. Such regions included left middle and right inferior frontal gyri, bilateral temporal and lateral parietal cortex, and left precuneus. HRF data extracted from these regions confirmed there was an early peak of activation, unique to the generative condition. Later, in TR 8, another subset of regions in left PFC (medial, superior and inferior frontal gyri) exhibited more activity during the generative condition. For example, the HRF data extracted from the inferior frontal gyrus indicates this region showed more sustained activity during the generative AM task. 
 
 
 3.4 Supplementary Non-Rotated ST-PLS Analyses 
 Although both conditions eventually ended in the successful recovery of an AM, there were still strong neural differences between generative and direct retrieval evident later in the trial when we predicted that both tasks would engage regions comprising the AM retrieval network ( Svoboda et al., 2006 ). Specifically, direct retrieval was associated with increased engagement of bilateral medial prefrontal and parietal cortices and the left MTL. In order to better understand whether this was a true neural difference between direct and generative AMs, or an artifact of differences in bin size, detail of the memories, and/or the time needed for retrieval, a series of additional PLS analyses were conducted. 
 There were significantly more successful trials for the direct versus generative condition (see  Table 1 ), and because only successful trials were entered into the analysis, this difference may have artificially increased the power to detect activation for the direct AM condition. Additionally, participants assigned significantly higher detail ratings for AMs retrieved directly versus those retrieved generatively (see  Table 1 ), and previous work has demonstrated that constructing more detailed events is associated with more neural activity in AM network regions (e.g.,  Addis et al., 2004b ;  Addis and Schacter, 2008 ;  Gilboa et al., 2004 ;  Viard et al., 2007 ). To rule out these two explanations of neural differences between direct and generative retrieval, we re-ran the PLS analyses using only a subset of direct AM trials that did not differ significantly from generative retrieval in terms of the number of trials and detail ratings. To create these matched subsets of memories, we randomly removed 2–3 direct AM trials from each participant (to match trial numbers) and then compared the detail ratings. This process was repeated until a subset was identified in which the detail ratings of direct and generative AMs did not differ significantly ( p  values > .05). We also randomly removed 2–3 control trials, so as to match bin-size across all conditions. Thus, in this matched analysis there were, on average, approximately 13 trials per condition. Both non-rotated ST-PLS contrasts were re-computed. The results were nearly identical to the original analyses, with the contrasts of AM versus Control tasks (p=.006) and Direct versus Generative AM ( p <.001) both achieving the same level of significance as in the previous analyses, and explaining approximately the same level of cross-block covariance as the original analyses (AM versus Control, 25.81%; Direct versus Generative AM, 40.09%). Inspection of the spatiotemporal pattern of activations revealed that overall, the same brain regions were activated in response to these contrasts as reported above, although the cluster sizes in the matched analysis were slightly increased for regions associated with AM retrieval (versus Control), and Direct AM retrieval (versus Generative). However, some of the clusters associated with Generative AM retrieval (versus Direct) were reduced in extent in the matched analysis. For clarity, we have included notation in  Tables 3  and  4  to indicate which activations were evident in both sets of analyses. 
 Another, possibly more likely, explanation of the difference in the activation of regions comprising the AM retrieval network is that it results from differing time-courses of retrieval. When a direct cue is presented, recovery of the relevant AM ensues more quickly and with a more regular time-course across trials. In contrast, when a generic cue is presented, the time to retrieval is slower given the need for a memory search, and could vary greatly depending on the direct relevance of the cue. In the current experiment, not only were direct AMs accessed more quickly than generative AMs, but the variance of direct AM RTs was nearly half of that for generative AMs (see  Table 1 ); this difference in variance between conditions was significant ( p =.006). The larger spread of response times for generative AMs may have limited the power to detect neural effects because fewer trials (and associated neural activity) would be occurring at the same time, resulting in apparently lower activity spread across the duration of the trial. To align the neural event of AM recovery in both conditions, we used RT as an anchor by specifying the onset of every trial as 1  s  before RT. Both non-rotated ST-PLS contrasts were then re-computed. 
 Both contrasts were still significant (AM versus Control tasks, p=.002; Direct versus Generative AM, p<.001), explaining a significant amount of cross-block covariance (49.96% and 50.04%, respectively). Interestingly, although the amount of covariance explained by the contrast of AM versus Control tasks was similar to the original analysis (40.82%), for the contrast of Direct vs. Generative AM it was nearly double that of the original analysis (25.27%). This increase suggests that accounting for the RT difference had an impact on the contrast of Direct vs. Generative AM. We examined the HRF data from the time-locked analysis extracted from regions that were identified in the original analysis as differentially associated with direct retrieval (see  Figure 5b ). Although the time-locking resulted in the peaking of the HRF for direct and generative retrieval to be more in line with each other in many regions, this pattern was not evident for all regions (e.g., right posterior hippocampus) and in many regions a considerable difference between levels of activity remained (e.g., left inferior frontal gyrus). These differences in the level of activity were present in similar regions to those identified in the original analysis. For instance, at TR 3 (approximate 4–6  s  after RT, when activity in the time-locked analysis peaked; see  Table 5 ), direct AM retrieval was associated with more activity in posterior visual processing areas, while generative AM retrieval was associated with lateral temporal regions. Importantly, however, the time-locked analysis revealed new distinctions between direct and generative retrieval that were not evident in the original analysis. One interesting example of this is that differential hippocampal activity was now evident during both retrieval conditions (rather than just the direct retrieval condition): direct AM retrieval was still associated with left hippocampal activity while generative AM retrieval was associated with right hippocampal activity ( Figure 7 ). 
 For completeness, we also re-computed this time-locked ST-PLS analysis using only the subset of trials that allowed for matched bin-sizes and detail ratings across the autobiographical conditions. This analysis produced near identical results and, as indicated in  Table 5 , all activations in the original time-locked analysis were still evident when matching conditions for bin-size and detail. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 It is widely accepted that AMs can be retrieved either directly or generatively depending on the specificity of available cues; however, very little is known about the neural commonalities and differences between these forms of retrieval. The current study was designed to directly compare the two forms of AM retrieval. While both forms of retrieval significantly engaged regions known to comprise the AM retrieval network ( Svoboda et al., 2006 ) relative to the control tasks, important differences also emerged between generative and direct retrieval. 
 When retrieving an AM from a generic cue, one must engage in an iterative search-retrieve-evaluate-elaborate cycle ( Burgess and Shallice, 1996 ;  Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ;  Moscovitch, 1992 ). It has been argued by some that left ventrolateral PFC plays a critical role in the early stages of a controlled and effortful memory search, by mediating the specification and refinement of semantic cues to be used for retrieval ( Moscovitch and Winocur, 2002 ). Using event-related potentials (ERP), Conway found that the left PFC was active during the initial search phase prior to the retrieval of the AM ( Conway et al., 2001 ;  Conway et al., 2003 ). In line with these findings, we found that generic cues that elicit generative retrieval resulted in early activation of the left anterior middle and right inferior frontal gyri. However, there has been some debate as to whether the unique PFC activation associated with generative retrieval is left- lateralized ( Cabeza and St Jacques, 2007 ;  Conway et al., 2003 ), right- lateralized ( Daselaar et al., 2008 ) or bilateral ( Hennessey et al., 2011 ;  St. Jacques et al., 2011 ;  Vandekerckhove et al., 2005 ). For instance,  Burgess and Shallice (1996)  argue that early specification of retrieval cues – a retrieval stage that is more likely required during generative than direct retrieval – is mediated by the right inferior frontal gyrus. The present results add further support to the idea that bilateral aspects of anterolateral PFC are involved in the early phase of generative retrieval. This finding is consistent with evidence that bilateral aspects of lateral and anterior PFC are involved in the strategic search for AMs, and that these regions interact with medial PFC and MTL during the initial construction of an AM ( St. Jacques et al., 2011 ). Interestingly, St. Jacques et al. found these regional interactions were modulated by the accessibility of the AM during construction, suggesting that the degree of top-down control and strategic search operations needed to recover an AM from a generic cue may influence the activation and interaction of these regions. 
 The regions uniquely recruited by generative AM retrieval were also associated with the semantic control task. This overlap is not surprising given the early retrieval of conceptual autobiographical information that characterizes generative retrieval. Moreover, like the generative AM task, the semantic task was also generative in nature, such that participants had to engage strategic retrieval processes mediated by lateral prefrontal regions (e.g.,  Moscovitch and Winocur, 2002 ) to generate two words related to the presented cue. Another important aspect to the generative process engendered by both tasks concerns the need to select from competing semantic alternatives, a process also known to engage left ventral PFC ( Thompson-Schill et al., 1997 ). Indeed, other studies have reported similar overlap between semantic and autobiographical retrieval tasks. For instance,  Nyberg et al. (2002)  reported a study examining the similarities and differences between different forms of autobiographical, episodic, and semantic retrieval tasks. Specifically, they found that lateral prefrontal and temporal regions were common to all tasks requiring retrieval from long term memory (as opposed to working memory tasks). These regions map onto those identified here as being common to the generative AM and semantic tasks. More recently,  Burianova & Grady (2007)  found overlap in regions recruited by generative AM and semantic retrieval, and consistent with the current findings, these common regions included bilateral ventral anterolateral PFC. 
 Later during generative retrieval, activity was evident in the left PFC (inferior, superior and medial gyri). Although this activation was not unique to generative retrieval (e.g., left inferior frontal activity was also evident for direct retrieval), it reached higher levels and was sustained longer in the generative condition. Similarly, later activation of the left PFC was also observed in a generative retrieval study by  Daselaar et al. (2008) ; these authors argue this activation reflects control and working memory processes required by the elaboration of recovered AMs. This interpretation fits with the pattern evident here, given that these elaboration processes are recruited during both forms of AM retrieval, but as our results suggest, more so when AMs are retrieved in a generative fashion. 
 While in most instances, the end goal of this generative retrieval process is the recovery of a specific AM, the search process usually involves the retrieval of conceptual autobiographical knowledge and generic events prior to accessing the specific event that fulfils the search criteria ( Graham et al., 2003 ;  Haque and Conway, 2001 ). Behavioral studies have revealed that general events are typically retrieved prior to the retrieval of specific episodic events ( Haque and Conway, 2001 ). Thus, we predicted that brain regions supporting retrieval of generic AMs, such as lateral temporal cortex ( Addis et al., 2004a ;  Graham et al., 2003 ) would exhibit early activation. This hypothesis was supported: the generative condition was associated with unique early activity during TRs 2 and 3 in the lateral temporal cortex. Thus, these results converge with behavioral studies indicating that during generative retrieval, recovery of generic conceptual information precedes access of specific event memories. 
 In contrast to this early activity in lateral temporal cortex, generative retrieval was also associated with later left prefrontal activity, during TR 8. It is likely that this frontal activity is related to the later stage of iterative retrieval process – post-retrieval monitoring. When retrieving an AM from a generic cue, as opposed to direct retrieval, it follows that more monitoring and evaluation of the contents of retrieval are required to determine whether the memory meets the retrieval criteria (e.g., a specific event). That this prefrontal activity was evident after the peak of activity in medial temporal and lateral parietal regions (TR 6) further supports the post-retrieval monitoring interpretation. This finding is broadly consistent with ERP studies that report sustained prefrontal potentials (albeit right-lateralized) following successful retrieval and associated posterior ERP components; similar patterns have been reported for both episodic (e.g.,  Vallesi and Shallice, 2006 ;  Wilding and Rugg, 1996 ) and autobiographical ( Conway et al., 2001 ;  Conway et al., 2003 ) memory tasks.  Vallesi and Shallice (2006)  also found that memories for which confidence was low were associated with increased post-retrieval monitoring demands and more prefrontal activity. It is possible that confidence was lower for memories retrieved via a generative versus a direct route; future behavioural research will be needed to determine if low confidence of AMs is associated with additional prefrontal activity. 
 In line with an iterative retrieval process, most of the regions comprising the network differentially associated with generative retrieval exhibited a phasic temporal profile of activation. Regions exhibiting this pattern included left lateral prefrontal and temporal cortex, and the right hippocampus. This phasic temporal profile was unique to generative retrieval, consistent with conceptualization of this form of retrieval as protracted and iterative in nature: pieces of relevant autobiographical information are retrieved and then used to cue more specific AMs ( Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ).  Summerfield, Hassabis and Maguire (2010)  recently observed that regions in the AM network, including the MTL, exhibit a phasic response during scene construction. Summerfield et al. slowed down the process of constructing a scene by having participants construct the scenario one element at a time. They argue that retrieval, integration and working memory operations may be engaged and disengaged throughout the construction of a scene. Although this study was examining imaginary scenes, a similar process likely occurs when re-constructing remembered scenarios - when one has to piece back together the elements of that previous experience ( Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2000 ). 
 In contrast to this phasic activation pattern, direct retrieval resulted in strong activation of AM regions approximately 8 to 12 seconds after the provision of a personalized memory cue. Overall, activity in these regions, including medial prefrontal and parietal cortex and the left hippocampus, was higher during direct than generative retrieval despite the fact that all trials in both conditions ended with the recovery of a specific AM. One explanation of this difference is related to the differing time-courses of retrieval. Unlike direct retrieval, the time to AM retrieval was more variable in the generative condition which may have reduced the power to detect activation of the AM network in this condition. We thus repeated the analysis, time-locking the onset to RT. Although these supplementary analyses still revealed significant differences between direct and generative retrieval, with activity in many regions being lower for generative versus direct AMs, the peaks of the HRFs were more in line with each other indicating that the time-locking analysis was successful in this respect. 
 However, even after adjusting for the differences related to RT, activation differences remain. One such difference emerged in the hippocampus: the time-locked analysis revealed that direct retrieval was associated with activation of the left hippocampus while generative retrieval was associated with right hippocampal activity. The finding of hippocampal activity in both conditions likely reflects the process of recovering the specific AM (i.e., ecphory;  Tulving, 1983 ), as such activity has been documented previously in both studies using direct and generic cues. The findings in the literature are mixed; although the majority of studies using direct retrieval paradigms have found left-lateralized or bilateral hippocampal activity (for a review, see  Svoboda et al., 2006 ), studies using generative paradigms report activation of the left ( Burianova et al., 2010 ;  Vandekerckhove et al., 2005 ), right ( Daselaar et al., 2008 ) or bilateral ( St. Jacques et al., 2011 ) hippocampus. The current study, however, is the first to directly compare the two forms of retrieval, and although direct and generative retrieval both recruit bilateral hippocampus (as evident by common activity relative to the control task), they  differentially  recruit left and right hippocampus, respectively. We do not have evidence to determine whether direct versus generative AMs differ with respect to levels of narrative and spatial content – which are thought to influence reliance on the left and right hippocampus, respectively ( Burgess et al., 2002 ). A task for future research, however, will be to investigate why these different forms of retrieval exhibit hippocampal laterality differences and how these are related to differences in content. 
 The overall pattern of findings suggests that, aside from RT differences, there may be other distinctions between AMs that are retrieved directly versus generatively. Direct AMs were associated with stronger activity across the AM network than generative AMs, including increased engagement of posterior visuospatial processing regions, even when the analysis was adjusted for RT differences. In line with the finding of activation in such regions, AMs in the direct retrieval condition were rated as significantly more detailed and personally significant than those retrieved in the generative condition. Together, these results imply that the specificity of the cue and the ensuing retrieval process affects the memory that is ultimately retrieved during that particular reconstruction of the memory. This result is somewhat surprising, given that the AMs in the direct condition were initially retrieved using generic cues (in the pre-scan session), and thus should not have been affected by a selection bias. One possible explanation is that increased time to elaborate directly retrieved AMs (due to faster RTs) resulted in the production of more detailed memories. The current data speak against this explanation, as detail ratings did not correlate with RT data. Moreover, when we analyzed a subset of data for which the detail ratings did not differ significantly across conditions, the same neural differences were still evident. Another possibility is that the ease of directly accessing an event from a personalized cue results in one assigning a higher detail and significance rating than when retrieval is more effortful. However, previous work examining the phenomenology of AMs directly elicited involuntarily by environmental cues and those generatively retrieved from word cues report little difference in the rated vividness and importance of these AMs ( Berntsen and Hall, 2004 ). 
 The higher detail ratings of AMs in the direct condition could be attributable to an effect of rehearsal and retrieval practice: AMs in this condition were rehearsed more recently than the AMs in the generative condition, due to retrieval during the pre-scan session. Indeed, this possibility is consistent with the findings of robust “testing effects”, where multiple retrievals of a memory increases the clarity and detail of that representation (e.g.,  Carrier and Pashler, 1992 ; for a review, see  Roediger and Karpicke, 2006 ). Interestingly, although  Svoboda and Levine (2009)  reported that detail ratings of AMs increased with repeated retrievals, they also observed that activity across the AM network decreased when the AM had been rehearsed in the 3 days prior to scanning. This finding would suggest then that if rehearsal was having an appreciable effect on neural activity after one month (the delay between the prescan and scanning session), activity during direct retrieval should be less than that evident during generative retrieval. 
 The possibility remains, though, that there are simply fundamental differences in this reconstructive process when personalized rather than generic cues are available. Such reconstruction involves locating the various elements or details that comprise an AM, and reactivating and reintegrating these details into a coherent yet temporary mental representation ( Moscovitch, 1992 ). Is it that when an element of the memory (i.e., the direct cue) is provided, the rest of the memory is reactivated with ease (i.e., pattern completion;  McClelland et al., 1995 ;  Schacter et al., 1998 ) but that when a generic cue is presented, the reactivation of an AM is more piecemeal and possibly incomplete? Indeed, Greenberg and Rubin ( Greenberg and Rubin, 2003 ) have argued that the visual aspects of AMs are most critical to the reactivation of the entire memory trace, and that a direct cue results in a “cascade of activation” of other sensory components of the memory. Although we did not provide visual aspects of the AMs, the direct cues did contain elements of the memory. Moreover, in the direct condition, it is possible that the word cue had become a part of the memory representation: participants had already associated the word cue with the AM during the pre-scan condition, and this reactivation of the memory in conjunction with the cue may have resulted in the cue word being incorporated into the memory trace (episodic memory updating;  Hupbach et al., 2007 ). In contrast, it may be that in generative retrieval, the cues produced during the iterative search process are never as direct as personalized cues and thus the reactivation of the memory trace is not as full. This speculation provides an interesting task for future behavioral research – to understand the differences in the access and the reactivation of a memory trace that result from the specificity of the cue. 
 In summary, while both direct and generative retrieval engaged regions comprising the AM retrieval network, some important differences between these forms of retrieval emerged. Generative retrieval was distinctly associated with early activity in lateral prefrontal and temporal regions, likely supporting the strategic search operations and initial recovery of generic autobiographical information. However, many regions comprising the AM network were activated more strongly during direct versus generative retrieval. This result suggests that there may be fundamental differences between memories that are accessed directly and those that are recovered via the iterative search and retrieval process that characterizes generative retrieval. 
 
 
 
 We thank Aleea Devitt, Adrian Gilmore, Melissa Inger, Heidi Koschwanez, Yonatan Matus and Rose McLiver for assistance with data collection, processing and analysis. This research was funded by National Institute of Mental Health grant MH060941 awarded to D.L.S. D.R.A. was supported by a Royal Society of NZ Marsden Grant (UOA0810) and a Grant-in-Aid for Research and Study Leave from The University of Auckland. 
 
 
 Abbreviations 
 
 
 AM 
 
 Autobiographical Memory 
 
 
 
 MTL 
 
 medial temporal lobe 
 
 
 
 PFC 
 
 prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 ST-PLS 
 
 spatiotemporal partial least squares 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 2004a 
 Characterizing spatial and temporal features of autobiographical memory retrieval networks: a partial least squares approach 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 1460 
 1471 
 15589110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 2004b 
 Recollective qualities modulate hippocampal activation during autobiographical memory retrieval 
 Hippocampus 
 14 
 752 
 762 
 15318333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Pan 
 L 
 
 
 Vu 
 MA 
 
 
 Laiser 
 N 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2009 
 Constructive episodic simulation of the future and the past: Distinct subsystems of a core brain network mediate imagining and remembering 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 2222 
 2238 
 19041331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2008 
 Effects of detail and temporal distance of past and future events on the engagement of a common neural network 
 Hippocampus 
 18 
 227 
 237 
 18157862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Wong 
 AT 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2007 
 Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elaboration 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 1363 
 1377 
 17126370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berntsen 
 D 
 
 
 Hall 
 NM 
 
 
 2004 
 The episodic nature of involuntary autobiographical memories 
 Mem Cognit 
 32 
 789 
 803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 The human hippocampus and spatial and episodic memory 
 Neuron 
 35 
 625 
 641 
 12194864 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 1996 
 Confabulation and the control of recollection 
 Memory 
 4 
 359 
 411 
 8817460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2007 
 Common and unique neural activations in autobiographical, episodic, and semantic retrieval 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 19 
 1520 
 1534 
 17714013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2010 
 A common functional brain network for autobiographical, episodic, and semantic memory retrieval 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 865 
 874 
 19744566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 DL 
 
 
 Budde 
 M 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2004 
 Brain activity during episodic retrieval of autobiographical and laboratory events: an fMRI study using a novel photo paradigm 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 16 
 1583 
 1594 
 15622612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 St Jacques 
 P 
 
 
 2007 
 Functional neuroimaging of autobiographical memory 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 11 
 219 
 227 
 17382578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carrier 
 M 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 1992 
 The influence on retrieval on retention 
 Memory and Cognition 
 20 
 632 
 642 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 JM 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 2004 
 Extensions of the Paivio, Yuille, and Madigan (1968) norms 
 Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers 
 36 
 371 
 383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 2005 
 Memory and the self 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 53 
 594 
 628 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Pleydell-Pearce 
 CW 
 
 
 2000 
 The construction of autobiographical memories in the self-memory system 
 Psychological Review 
 107 
 261 
 288 
 10789197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Pleydell-Pearce 
 CW 
 
 
 Whitecross 
 SE 
 
 
 2001 
 The neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: A slow cortical potential study of autobiographical memory retrieval 
 Journal of Memory & Language 
 45 
 493 
 524 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Pleydell-Pearce 
 CW 
 
 
 Whitecross 
 SE 
 
 
 Sharpe 
 H 
 
 
 2003 
 Neurophysiological correlates of memory for experienced and imagined events 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 334 
 340 
 12457758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Turk 
 DJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Logan 
 J 
 
 
 Nebes 
 RD 
 
 
 Meltzer 
 CC 
 
 
 Becker 
 JT 
 
 
 1999 
 A positron emission tomography (PET) study of autobiographical memory retrieval 
 Memory 
 7 
 679 
 702 
 10659092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crovitz 
 HF 
 
 
 Schiffman 
 H 
 
 
 1974 
 Frequency of episodic memories as a function of their age 
 Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 
 4 
 517 
 518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Rice 
 HJ 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 DL 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2008 
 The spatiotemporal dynamics of autobiographical memory: Neural correlates of recall, emotional intensity, and reliving 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 217 
 229 
 17548799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Fracowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1996 
 Is multivariate analysis of PET data more revealing than that univariate approach? Evidence from a study of episodic memory retrieval 
 Neuroimage 
 3 
 209 
 215 
 9345492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilboa 
 A 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Hevenor 
 SJ 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Remembering our past: functional neuroanatomy of recollection of recent and very remote personal events 
 Cereb Cortex 
 14 
 1214 
 1225 
 15166099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 Lee 
 AC 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 2003 
 The neural basis of autobiographical and semantic memory: new evidence from three PET studies 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 3 
 234 
 254 
 14672158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 DL 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2003 
 The neuropsychology of autobiographical memory 
 Cortex 
 39 
 687 
 728 
 14584549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haque 
 S 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 2001 
 Sampling the process of autobiographical memory construction 
 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 
 13 
 529 
 547 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hennessey 
 JA 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Giovanello 
 KS 
 
 
 2011 
 Differential neural activity during search of specific and general autobiographical memories elicited by musical cues 
 Neuropsychologia 
 49 
 2514 
 2526 
 21600227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hupbach 
 A 
 
 
 Gomez 
 R 
 
 
 Hardt 
 O 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Reconsolidation of episodic memories: a subtle reminder triggers integration of new information 
 Learning and Memory 
 14 
 47 
 53 
 17202429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Foley 
 MA 
 
 
 Suengas 
 AG 
 
 
 Raye 
 CL 
 
 
 1988 
 Phenomenal characteristics of memories for perceived and imagined autobiographical events 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 117 
 371 
 376 
 2974863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 Svoboda 
 E 
 
 
 Hay 
 JF 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Aging and autobiographical memory: dissociating episodic from semantic retrieval 
 Psychology & Aging 
 17 
 677 
 689 
 12507363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 Turner 
 GR 
 
 
 Tisserand 
 D 
 
 
 Hevenor 
 SJ 
 
 
 Graham 
 SJ 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 2004 
 The functional neuroanatomy of episodic and semantic autobiographical remembering: a prospective functional MRI study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 1633 
 1646 
 15601525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lukic 
 AS 
 
 
 Wernick 
 MN 
 
 
 Strother 
 SC 
 
 
 2002 
 An evaluation of methods for detecting brain activations from functional neuroimages 
 Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 
 25 
 69 
 88 
 12009264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2001 
 Neuroimaging studies of autobiographical event memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 
 Series B: Biological Sciences 
 356 
 1441 
 1451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Differential modulation of a common memory retrieval network revealed by positron emission tomography 
 Hippocampus 
 9 
 54 
 61 
 10088900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Vargha-Khadem 
 F 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 The effects of bilateral hippocampal damage on fMRI regional activations and interactions during memory retrieval 
 Brain 
 124 
 1156 
 1170 
 11353732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 McNaughton 
 BL 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 1995 
 Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory 
 Psychological Review 
 102 
 419 
 457 
 7624455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Chau 
 WK 
 
 
 Protzner 
 AB 
 
 
 2004 
 Spatiotemporal analysis of event-related fMRI data using partial least squares 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 764 
 775 
 15488426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 1992 
 Memory and working-with-memory: a component process model based on modules and central systems 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 4 
 257 
 267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 2002 
 The frontal cortex and working with memory 
 Principles of Frontal Lobe Function 
 188 
 209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Hippocampal contributions to cortical plasticity 
 Neuropharmacology 
 37 
 431 
 439 
 9704984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 Bermpohl 
 F 
 
 
 2004 
 Cortical midline structures and the self 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 8 
 102 
 107 
 15301749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Forkstam 
 C 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain imaging of human memory systems: between-systems similarities and within-system differences 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 13 
 281 
 292 
 11958972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 
 
 Karpicke 
 JD 
 
 
 2006 
 The power of testing memory: Basic research and implications for educational practice 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 1 
 181 
 210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 2007 
 On the constructive episodic simulation of past and future events 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 30 
 299 
 351 
 17963565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 1998 
 The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 49 
 289 
 318 
 9496626 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2010 
 Patterns of brain activity supporting autobiographical memory, prospection, and theory-of-mind and their relationship to the default mode network 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 
 1112 
 1123 
 19580387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Stevens 
 WD 
 
 
 Chamberlain 
 JP 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2010 
 Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition 
 Neuroimage 
 53 
 303 
 317 
 20600998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 St Jacques 
 PL 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 in press 
 Gender differences in autobiographical memory for everyday events: Retrieval elicited by SenseCam images versus verbal cues 
 Memory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 St Jacques 
 PL 
 
 
 Kragel 
 PA 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2011 
 Dynamic neural networks supporting memory retrieval 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 608 
 616 
 21550407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinvorth 
 S 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 Corkin 
 S 
 
 
 2005 
 Medial temporal lobe structures are needed to re-experience remote autobiographical memories: evidence from H.M. and W.R 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 479 
 496 
 15716139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 JJ 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2010 
 Differential engagement of brain regions within a core network during scene construction 
 Neuropsychologia 
 48 
 1501 
 1509 
 20132831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Svoboda 
 E 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 The effects of rehearsal on the functional neuroanatomy of episodic autobiographical and semantic remembering: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 3073 
 3082 
 19279244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Svoboda 
 E 
 
 
 McKinnon 
 MC 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 The functional neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: A meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 2189 
 2208 
 16806314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 S 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge: A reevaluation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 94 
 14792 
 14797 
 9405692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 1983 
 Elements of episodic memory 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York, N.Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vallesi 
 A 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 2006 
 Prefrontal involvement in source memory: An electrophysiological investigation of accounts concerning confidence and accuracy 
 Brain Research 
 1124 
 111 
 125 
 17070783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandekerckhove 
 MMP 
 
 
 Markowitsch 
 HJ 
 
 
 Mertens 
 M 
 
 
 Woermann 
 FG 
 
 
 2005 
 Bi-hemispheric engagement in the retrieval of autobiographical episodes 
 Behav Neurol 
 16 
 203 
 210 
 16518010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viard 
 A 
 
 
 Piolino 
 P 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Chételat 
 G 
 
 
 Lebreton 
 K 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 Young 
 A 
 
 
 De La Sayette 
 V 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 2007 
 Hippocampal activation for autobiographical memories over the entire lifetime in healthy aged subjects: An fMRI study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 17 
 2453 
 2467 
 17204823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilding 
 EL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 1996 
 An event-related potential study of recognition memory with and without retrieval of source 
 Brain 
 889 
 905 
 8673500 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 Participants also completed two other imagination conditions; however, given the focus of this study on AM retrieval, these conditions will not be discussed further. 
 
 
 2 
 There were also 32 trials in other imagination conditions that are not part of the current analysis. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Autobiographical Tasks 
 For the direct AM condition, participants retrieved AMs in response to nouns (a) and this information was used to create direct cues later shown during scanning to elicit direct AM retrieval (c). For the generative AM condition, participants imagined future events in response to another set of nouns (b) in order to match exposure to and processing of these words that were later used during scanning as general cues to elicit generative retrieval (d). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 ST-PLS Contrast of AM and Control Tasks 
 (a) Average brain scores with 95% confidence intervals for the AM (direct, generative) and control (imagery, semantic) tasks. (b) Average brain scores plotted across TRs (i.e., temporal brain scores) for each condition, the average of the AM tasks and the average of the control tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Network Associated with AM Retrieval relative to Control Tasks 
 Shown in warm colors are the regions comprising the network associated with the AM tasks: right medial prefrontal cortex (upper left panel, xyz = −8 60 −12); left medial parietal cortex (lower left panel, xyz = 4 −60 12); left angular gyrus (upper right panel, xyz = −48 −76 28); and left hippocampus (lower right panel, xyz = −16 −12 −20). The crosshair indicates the location of the peak voxel. Corresponding plots of percent signal change for AM and control tasks extracted from these regions are also presented. Some of the regions comprising the network associated with the control tasks are also visible in the images of activation (in cool colors). Images of activation are superimposed over a standard anatomical template and thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.2 (equivalent to  p  < .001). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 ST-PLS Contrast of Direct and Generative AM Tasks 
 (a) Average brain scores with 95% confidence intervals for the AM (direct, generative) and control (imagery, semantic) tasks. (b) Average brain scores plotted across TRs (i.e., temporal brain scores) for the direct and generative conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Network Associated with Direct relative to Generative AM Retrieval 
 Shown in warm colors are the regions comprising the network differentially associated with direct retrieval relative to generative retrieval. At TR 4, this network included left parahippocampal gyrus (upper left panel, xyz = −24 −28 −20) and left medial prefrontal cortex (lower left panel, xyz = −4 52 24). Regions peaking at TR 6 included left inferior frontal gyrus (upper right panel, xyz = −56 24 −8), left medial parietal cortex (middle right panel, xyz = −4 −56 40), left hippocampus/entorhinal cortex (lower right panel, xyz = −12 −8 −20). The crosshair indicates the location of the peak voxel. Corresponding plots of percent signal change for direct and generative AM retrieval extracted from the original analysis (a) and the time-locked analysis (b) are presented. Images of activation are superimposed over a standard anatomical template and thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±2.8 (equivalent to  p  < .005). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Network Associated with Generative relative to Direct AM Retrieval 
 Shown in cool colors are the regions comprising the network differentially associated with generative retrieval relative to direct retrieval. Activation of this network emerged early in the trial: in TR 2, this network included left anterior middle frontal gyrus (upper left panel, xyz = −32 60 −12) and right lateral temporal cortex (upper right panel, xyz = 60 −28 −12); and in TR 3, it included left lateral temporal cortex (lower left panel, xyz = −52 −8 −40) and left inferior frontal gyrus (lower right panel, xyz = −32 24 −12). The crosshair indicates the location of the peak voxel. Corresponding plots of percent signal change for direct and generative AM retrieval extracted from the original analysis are presented. Images of activation are superimposed over a standard anatomical template and thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±2.8 (equivalent to  p  < .005). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Differential Hippocampal Activity Associated with Direct and Generative AM Retrieval 
 The PLS analysis time-locked to RT revealed differential hippocampal activity for both AM retrieval conditions: generative retrieval was associated with right hippocampal activity (cool colors; upper panel, xyz = 36 −20 −12) while direct retrieval was associated with left hippocampal activity (warm colors; lower panel, xyz = −24 −20 −16). The crosshair indicates the location of the peak voxel. Corresponding plots of percent signal change for direct and generative AM retrieval extracted from the time-locked analysis are presented. Images of activation are superimposed over a standard anatomical template and thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±2.8 (equivalent to  p  < .005). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Average behavioral data for AM and Control Conditions 
 
 
 
 
 Variable 
 AM Conditions
 
 Control Conditions
 
 
 
 Direct 
 Generative 
 Semantic 
 Imagery 
 
 
 
 
 Mean reaction time, pre-scan session (ms) 
 9079.14 (1761.73) 
 8634.72 (1431.12) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean reaction time, scan session (ms)  *** 
 5126.22 b  (1302.33) 
 8199.77 a  (1861.68) 
 9101.44 c  (1840.57) 
 9300.11 c  (2146.18) 
 
 
 Mean number of successful trials (max. 16) *** 
 15.40 d  (0.83) 
 12.50 e  (2.47) 
 14.67 e  (1.72) 
 14.87 e  (1.25) 
 
 
 Mean number of trials, matched analysis 
 12.87 e  (0.92) 
 12.50 e  (2.47) 
 12.67 e  (1.72) 
 12.87 e  (1.25) 
 
 
 Mean detail rating (1–5)  * 
 3.00 (0.67) 
 2.69 (0.57) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean emotion rating (1–5) 
 2.08 (0.72) 
 1.87 (0.61) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean personal significance rating (1–5)  ** 
 2.32 (0.58) 
 1.99 (0.41) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean time since event occurrence (years) 
 4.65 (1.30) 
 5.25 (1.81) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean time since last rehearsal (weeks)  *** 
 3.82 (0.85) 
 88.11 (40.47) 
 
 
 
 
 Mean percentage of trials with field perspective 
 95% (0.06) 
 94% (0.08) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. Standard deviations are given in parentheses. Main effect of condition: 
 
 
 * 
 p<.05; 
 
 
 ** 
 p<.01; 
 
 
 *** 
 p<.001. For repeated-measures ANOVAs, lettering indicates which conditions differ as revealed by post-hoc Bonferroni tests (conditions with different letters differ significantly; conditions with the same letter do not differ). Max = maximum; ms = milliseconds. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Regions differentially associated with the control tasks relative to the AM tasks 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 MNI co-ordinates
 
 BSR 
 TRs Active 
 
 
 X 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 TR 6 
 
 
 
  R Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 12 
 −64 
 48 
 −4.69 
 4 5 6* 7 8 
 
 
 
 TR 7 
 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 −48 
 40 
 4 
 −10.06 
 3 4 5 6 7* 8 9 10 
 
 
  L Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 −4 
 4 
 60 
 −8.28 
 4 5 6 7* 8 9 10 
 
 
  Insula 
 −32 
 16 
 4 
 −6.03 
 6 7* 8 9 10 
 
 
 
 TR 8 
 
 
 
  L Inferior Temporal/Fusiform Gyrus (BA 37) 
 −52 
 −60 
 −20 
 −10.78 
 4 5 6 7 8* 9 10 
 
 
 
 TR 9 
 
 
 
  R Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 9/46) 
 48 
 40 
 28 
 −7.44 
 5 6 7 8 9* 10 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 45) 
 −44 
 16 
 4 
 −3.66 
 9* 
 
 
 
 TR 10 
 
 
 
  L Cerebellum 
 24 
 −72 
 −32 
 −5.59 
 5 10* 
 
 
  R Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 44) 
 56 
 12 
 24 
 −4.81 
 7 8 9 10* 
 
 
  L Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 −20 
 −80 
 40 
 −9.18 
 4 5 6 7 8 9 10* 
 
 
  R Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 52 
 −40 
 36 
 −9.74 
 4 5 6 7 8 9 10* 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 44) 
 −56 
 12 
 4 
 −11.98 
 5 6 7 8 9 10* 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Only clusters peaking during TRs 6 – 10 are reported here. For each cluster, the TRs of activation are noted, and the peak of activation (from which the bootstrap ratio and coordinates are taken) is indicated by an asterisk. Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.2 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .001), and clusters had a spatial extent of at least 5 voxels (4×4×4 mm 3 ). BA = Brodmann area; BSR = Bootstrap ratio; L = left; R = right. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regions differentially associated with the AM tasks relative to control tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 MNI co-ordinates
 
 BSR 
 TRs Active 
 
 
 X 
 y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 TR 5 
 
 
 
  R Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 47) 
 32 
 32 
 −24 
 7.09 
 4,5*,6,8,9 
 
 
  L Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 21) 
 −56 
 12 
 −32 
 9.03 
 5*,6,7,8,9,10 
 
 
  L Lingual Gyrus (BA 19) 
 −20 
 −84 
 −16 
 4.48 
 5* 
 
 
 
 TR 6 
 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 −40 
 12 
 52 
 4.49 
 6* 
 
 
  R Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) ‡ 
 8 
 12 
 64 
 3.99 
 6* 
 
 
  L Uncus/Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 28/35) 
 −20 
 8 
 −24 
 4.28 
 6*,7,9 
 
 
  L Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 35)  § 
 −24 
 −28 
 −16 
 5.93 
 5,6*,7,8,9 
 
 
  L Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 34) 
 −16 
 −12 
 −20 
 4.81 
 6*,7,8 
 
 
  L Angular Gyrus (BA 39) 
 −48 
 −76 
 28 
 6.34 
 5,6*,7,8 
 
 
  L Middle Occipital Gyrus (BA 18) 
 −32 
 −96 
 4 
 4.24 
 6* 
 
 
 
 TR 7 
 
 
 
  L Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 9) 
 −20 
 40 
 36 
 5.23 
 4,7* 
 
 
  R Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 39) 
 52 
 −68 
 24 
 7.02 
 4,5,6,7*,8,9,10 
 
 
  L Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 37) 
 −36 
 −52 
 −8 
 3.77 
 7* 
 
 
  R Medial Parietal Cortex (BA 23/30/31) 
 4 
 −60 
 12 
 12.21 
 4,5,6,7*,8,9,10 
 
 
 
 TR 8 
 
 
 
  L Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 −8 
 60 
 −12 
 13.65 
 4,5,6,7,8*,9,10 
 
 
  R Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 28) 
 20 
 −12 
 −20 
 5.66 
 6,7,8*,9 
 
 
  L Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA 36) ‡ 
 −32 
 −16 
 −24 
 3.69 
 8* 
 
 
  L Cerebellum 
 −36 
 −88 
 −40 
 7.72 
 5,6,7,8*,9 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Only clusters peaking during TRs 4 – 8 and falling within the AM network (core and secondary regions;  Svoboda et al., 2006 ) are reported here. For each cluster, the TRs of activation are noted, and the peak of activation (from which the bootstrap ratio and coordinates are taken) is indicated by an asterisk. Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.2 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .001), and clusters had a spatial extent of at least 5 voxels (4×4×4 mm 3 ). BA = Brodmann area; BSR = Bootstrap ratio; L = left; R = right; 
 
 
 ‡ 
 Peak voxel not active when controlling for detail and bin-size; 
 
 
 § 
 Cluster extends into hippocampus when controlling for detail and bin-size. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regions differentially associated with direct or generative AM retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 MNI co-ordinates
 
 BSR 
 TRs active 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Direct Retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 
 TR 5 
 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 9) 
 −32 
 48 
 28 
 5.78 
 5* 7 9 10 
 
 
  L Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 9) 
 −4 
 52 
 24 
 4.63 
 3 4 5* 6 8 
 
 
  R Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 4 
 64 
 16 
 5.96 
 2 3 4 5* 6 7 8 9 10 
 
 
  L Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 21/37) 
 −56 
 −44 
 −8 
 6.58 
 5* 6 7 8 9 10 
 
 
  R Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 21) 
 56 
 −4 
 −24 
 10.5 
 4 5* 6 
 
 
  L Hippocampus/Amygdala 
 −20 
 −8 
 −20 
 9.64 
 4 5*6 
 
 
  L Parahippocampal Gyrus/HC (BA36) 
 −24 
 −28 
 −20 
 5.56 
 4,5*,6,7,9,10 
 
 
  L Inferior/Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7/40) 
 −36 
 −64 
 52 
 8.97 
 4,5*,6,7,8,9,10 
 
 
  R Cuneus (BA 18/19) 
 20 
 −84 
 20 
 4.2 
 5*,6,7 
 
 
 
 TR 6 
 
 
 
  B Medial Prefrontal Cortex (BA 10) 
 0 
 64 
 16 
 4.86 
 3 6* 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 45/44) 
 −56 
 24 
 −8 
 7.36 
 3 4 6* 9 10 
 
 
  R Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 47/45) 
 55 
 28 
 −8 
 5.33 
 3 4 5 6* 7 9 10 
 
 
  L Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 −8 
 4 
 72 
 6.36 
 4,5,6* 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 11) 
 −32 
 44 
 −8 
 3.53 
 4,6* 
 
 
  R Parahippocampal Gyrus (BA28) 
 16 
 8 
 −28 
 6.78 
 3 4 5 6* 7 9 10 
 
 
  L Hippocampus/Entorhinal Cortex (BA 34) 
 −12 
 −8 
 −20 
 5.30 
 6* 7 
 
 
  R Inferior/Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 37) 
 48 
 −60 
 −20 
 6.49 
 5 6* 7 8 9 10 
 
 
  R Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 39) 
 36 
 −60 
 24 
 4.14 
 6* 
 
 
  L Medial Parietal Cortex(BA 7/23/31) † 
 −4 
 −56 
 40 
 7.34 
 4 5 6* 7 8 9 10 
 
 
  L Inferior Parietal/Supramarginal Gyrus (BA 40) 
 −64 
 −36 
 28 
 5.29 
 5,6*,7 
 
 
  R Inferior/Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7/40) 
 36 
 −52 
 40 
 7.38 
 4,5,6*,7,8,9,10 
 
 
  L Occipital Cortex (BA 17/18/19) 
 −4 
 −68 
 0 
 5.10 
 3,4,5,6*,7,8,9,10 
 
 
  R Middle Occipital Gyrus (BA 19) 
 52 
 −80 
 −8 
 4.71 
 5,6*,7 
 
 
 
 
 Generative Retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 
 TR 2 
 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 −32 
 60 
 −12 
 −5.05 
 2* 9 
 
 
  R Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 44)  ‡ 
 56 
 12 
 16 
 −3.83 
 2* 8 
 
 
  L Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 21) 
 −56 
 −32 
 −4 
 −3.48 
 2* 
 
 
  R Middle Temporal Gyrus (BA 21) 
 60 
 −28 
 −12 
 −4.03 
 2* 
 
 
  L Precuneus (BA 31)  ‡ 
 −12 
 −72 
 20 
 −3.62 
 2*4 
 
 
  L Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40)  ‡ 
 −48 
 −40 
 40 
 −3.24 
 2* 
 
 
  R Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40)  ‡ 
 52 
 −36 
 40 
 −3.26 
 2* 
 
 
  R Middle Occipital Gyrus (BA 19) 
 28 
 −92 
 20 
 −4.33 
 2* 
 
 
  R Cerebellum 
 48 
 −68 
 −40 
 −4.67 
 2* 4 5 6 7 8 10 
 
 
 
 TR 3 
 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 9)  ‡ 
 −36 
 28 
 40 
 −4.46 
 2 3* 4 
 
 
  L Inferior Temporal Gyrus (BA 21) 
 −52 
 −8 
 −40 
 −4.82 
 3* 
 
 
 
 TR 8 
 
 
 
  L Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 8/9) 
 −12 
 36 
 32 
 −4.60 
 8* 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 47) 
 −32 
 24 
 −12 
 −5.74 
 7 8* 10 
 
 
  L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 45) 
 −44 
 32 
 4 
 −4.20 
 8* 
 
 
  L Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 −20 
 48 
 8 
 −3.64 
 8* 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Only clusters falling within the AM network (core and secondary regions;  Svoboda et al., 2006 ) are reported here. Reported clusters peak during TRs 4–7 for direct retrieval and TRs 2–3 and 8–10 for generative retrieval. For each cluster, the TRs of activation are noted, and the peak of activation (from which the bootstrap ratio and coordinates are taken) is indicated by an asterisk. Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±2.8 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .005), and clusters had a spatial extent of at least 5 voxels (4×4×4 mm 3 ). BA = Brodmann area; BSR = Bootstrap ratio; L = left; R = right. 
 
 
 † 
 Extends bilaterally; 
 
 
 ‡ 
 Peak voxel not active when controlling for detail and bin-size. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Regions differentially associated with direct or generative AM retrieval from the time-locked PLS analysis 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 MNI co-ordinates
 
 BSR 
 TRs active 
 
 
 x 
 Y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Direct Retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 R Superior/Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 −4 
 4 
 60 
 3.97 
 3* 4 5 
 
 
 L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 −36 
 −4 
 56 
 4.27 
 3* 4 5 
 
 
 R Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 46) 
 60 
 28 
 24 
 8.40 
 3* 4 5 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 44) 
 −56 
 8 
 32 
 9.11 
 2 3* 4 5 6 7 8 
 
 
 L Hippocampus 
 −24 
 −20 
 −16 
 3.31 
 3* 4 5 6 7 
 
 
 R Uncus (BA 28) 
 24 
 4 
 −32 
 7.05 
 3* 4 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 −36 
 −56 
 48 
 7.08 
 2 3* 4 5 6 
 
 
 L Supramarginal Gyrus (BA 39/40) 
 −60 
 −56 
 24 
 3.43 
 3* 4 
 
 
 R Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 28 
 −68 
 40 
 5.04 
 2 3* 4 5 6 
 
 
 R Occipital Cortex (BA 17/18/19) 
 20 
 −84 
 −16 
 7.92 
 2 3* 4 5 
 
 
 
 
 Generative Retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 R Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 12 
 −8 
 60 
 −3.85 
 3* 
 
 
 R Orbitofrontal Gyrus (BA 11) 
 8 
 48 
 −28 
 −3.52 
 2 3* 
 
 
 R Cingulate Gyrus (BA 24) 
 4 
 −8 
 40 
 −4.64 
 2 3* 
 
 
 L Superior Temporal Gyrus (BA 22/39) 
 −32 
 −56 
 16 
 −5.07 
 3* 
 
 
 R Superior Temporal Gyrus (BA 22) 
 48 
 −8 
 0 
 −4.31 
 3* 
 
 
 R Hippocampus 
 36 
 −20 
 −12 
 −4.36 
 2 3* 6 7 8 9 
 
 
 R Posterior Cingulate Gyrus (BA 31) 
 12 
 −24 
 44 
 −3.82 
 3* 9 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 68 
 −28 
 24 
 −3.90 
 3* 7 9 
 
 
 R Inferior Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 36 
 −40 
 48 
 −4.59 
 3* 
 
 
 R Superior Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 24 
 −56 
 64 
 −6.00 
 3* 
 
 
 L Cerebellum 
 −4 
 −56 
 −16 
 −5.19 
 3* 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Only clusters peaking during TR 3 and falling within the AM network (core and secondary regions;  Svoboda et al., 2006 ) are reported here. Note all clusters were evident when controlling for detail and bin size. For each cluster, the TRs of activation are noted, and the peak of activation (from which the bootstrap ratio and coordinates are taken) is indicated by an asterisk. Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±2.8 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .005), and clusters had a spatial extent of at least 5 voxels (4×4×4 mm 3 ). BA = Brodmann area; BSR = Bootstrap ratio; L = left; R = right. 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix A 
 
 Lists of Cue Words 
 
 
 
 
 List A 
 List B 
 List C 
 
 
 
 
 PENCIL 
 DOLL 
 CAR 
 
 
 OVEN 
 HORSE 
 BOWL 
 
 
 INSTRUMENT 
 SUGAR 
 POTATO 
 
 
 ANKLE 
 KETTLE 
 CANDY 
 
 
 TRUCK 
 REVOLVER 
 STAR 
 
 
 ROCK 
 FOX 
 TREE 
 
 
 STAIN 
 LIP 
 FLOWER 
 
 
 TOBACCO 
 PEACH 
 LEMON 
 
 
 BOOK 
 CAT 
 UMBRELLA 
 
 
 STRAWBERRY 
 SHOES 
 PEPPER 
 
 
 INSECT 
 LETTER 
 BOTTLE 
 
 
 PHOTOGRAPH 
 MEAT 
 COFFEE 
 
 
 TOAST 
 SNAKE 
 IRON 
 
 
 FLAG 
 PIANO 
 JELLY 
 
 
 WINDOW 
 BRAIN 
 FUR 
 
 
 BULLET 
 LOBSTER 
 DOOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List D 
 
 
 List E 
 
 
 List F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WINE 
 DRESS 
 STRING 
 
 
 TOY 
 TABLESPOON 
 CHAIR 
 
 
 BABY 
 ARM 
 BIRD 
 
 
 SHIP 
 BODY 
 MOSS 
 
 
 FIREPLACE 
 REFRIGERATOR 
 TOWER 
 
 
 RATTLE 
 MICROSCOPE 
 FORK 
 
 
 GRASS 
 PIPE 
 CLAW 
 
 
 TICKET 
 POLE 
 BEAVER 
 
 
 COIN 
 DOLLAR 
 VEHICLE 
 
 
 NEWSPAPER 
 PAPER 
 BUTTER 
 
 
 CLOCK 
 HAMMER 
 ELEPHANT 
 
 
 COTTON 
 APPLE 
 TOOL 
 
 
 TABLE 
 PLANT 
 PALACE 
 
 
 CORN 
 SALAD 
 DIAMOND 
 
 
 SLIPPER 
 NAIL 
 LIME 
 
 
 ENGINE 
 FROG 
 BUTTERFLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Personal and generic cues used to elicit direct and generative autobiographical memory retrieval 
 
 
 Both retrieval tasks engaged regions previous associated with autobiographical memory 
 
 
 Many of these regions were more active during direct versus generative retrieval 
 
 
 Generative retrieval differentially engaged lateral prefrontal and temporal cortex 
 
 
 
 
