
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101541838 
 38415 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Developmental cognitive neuroscience 
 
 1878-9293 
 1878-9307 
 
 
 22247751 
 3256931 
 10.1016/j.dcn.2011.06.002 
 NIHMS304001 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 White Matter Development in Adolescence: The Influence of Puberty and Implications for Affective Disorders 
 
 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 Cecile D. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Peper 
 Jiska S. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Crone 
 Eveline A. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Dahl 
 Ronald E. 
 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
 2 Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands 
 3 School of Public Health, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 
 
 Corresponding Author: Cecile D. Ladouceur, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3811 O’Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA, 15213.  ladouceurcd@upmc.edu 
 
 
 15 
 6 
 2011 
 
 
 1 
 1 
 2012 
 
 
 01 
 1 
 2013 
 
 2 
 1 
 36 
 54 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 
 There have been rapid advances in understanding a broad range of changes in brain structure and function during adolescence, and a growing interest in identifying which of these neurodevelopmental changes are directly linked with pubertal maturation—at least in part because of their potential to provide insights into the numerous emotional and behavioral health problems that emerge during this developmental period. This review focuses on what is known about the influence of puberty on white matter development in adolescence. We focus on white matter because of its role in providing the structural architectural organization of the brain and as a structural correlate of communication within complex neural systems. We begin with a review of studies that report sex differences or sex by age interactions in white matter development as these findings can provide, although indirectly, information relevant to puberty-related changes. Studies are also critically reviewed based on methodological procedures used to assess pubertal maturation and relations with white matter changes. Findings are discussed in light of their implications for the development of neural systems underlying the regulation of emotion and behavior and how alterations in the development of these systems may mediate risk for affective disorders in vulnerable adolescents. 
 
 
 puberty 
 white matter development 
 white matter volume 
 diffusion tensor imaging 
 affective disorders 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 K01 MH083001-01 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 The onset of adolescence, specifically the emergence of puberty, represents a key developmental window for understanding physical, emotional, cognitive, and social changes, which may mediate the emergence of a broad range of behavioral and emotional health problems during adolescent development ( Dahl & Spear, 2004 ;  Steinberg, 2005 ). The onset of puberty in early adolescence initiates a cascade of dramatic physical, psychological, and social changes ( Schulz et al., 2009 ;  Spear, 2010 ). It is a time during which there are substantial increases in hormonal levels as well as physical growth and alterations in physical appearance (e.g., emergence of secondary sexual characteristics and changes in body proportion, as well as sexually dimorphic facial appearance including alterations in facial bone structure, facial hair, and fullness of lips). Amidst these changes in early adolescence arise sharp increases in the rate of problems associated with the regulation of emotion and behavior, including increases in risk-taking behaviors, sensation-seeking, experimenting with alcohol and substance use, the number of accidents, suicide, as well as the prevalence of affective disorders ( Dahl & Spear, 2004 ; Centers for Disease Control, 2009). Such changes in the regulation of emotion and behavior may be mediated by puberty-specific changes in brain development. Indeed, a growing number of neuroimaging studies demonstrate that adolescence involves ongoing changes in brain structure and function ( Galvan, 2011 ;  Giedd et al., 1999 ;  Lenroot & Giedd, 2006 ;  Luna et al., 2011 ;  Peper et al., 2011 ). 
 A central component to pubertal maturation is the sharp increase in reproductive hormones, which has been shown in animal work to be responsible for the development of secondary sexual characteristics influencing the physical appearance and function but also for key aspects of neural function through binding to testosterone and estrogen receptors in specific neural regions ( Schulz et al., 2009 ;  Spear, 2010 ). Research studies, for instance, have used rodent models to demonstrate that the effects of exposure to reproductive hormones during adolescence persist after hormones have been removed, suggesting that the onset of puberty and secretion of puberty-related hormones may have a significant impact on brain development ( Schulz & Sisk, 2006 ;  Sisk & Foster, 2004 ). In addition, evidence from animal studies suggest that gonadal steroids influence brain development in various ways such as neurogenesis and neurite outgrowth ( McEwen & Alves, 1999 ), axonal myelination ( Yates & Juraska, 2008 ), and growth of astrocyte processes in white matter ( Chowen et al., 2000 ). Some studies have documented high densities of steroid hormone receptors in medial temporal regions ( Sarkey et al., 2008 ), including amygdala and hippocampus, as well as the prefrontal cortex ( Simerly et al., 1990 ). Furthermore, administration of androgens to pubertal rats yielded increased neuronal spine density within the amygdala and hippocampus ( Cunningham et al., 2007 ). Thus, puberty would appear to have specific influences on several developing neural systems, including corticolimbic systems implicated in emotion regulation. In humans, it has been hypothesized that puberty constitutes a sensitive period for gonadal steroids to organize the brain ( Romeo, 2003 ;  Schulz et al., 2009 ). Yet, relatively little is known about how puberty specifically influences adolescent brain development (see  Blakemore et al., 2010 ;  Forbes & Dahl, 2010 ). 
 Recently, a number of research studies have emerged providing some evidence about the relation between puberty and white matter development. White matter consists of myelin-coated axons that are bundled into tracts concentrated mostly in the inner-portion of the brain. These tracts serve to facilitate communication between neural regions creating neural networks ( Paus, 2010 ). Some of these neural networks implicate cortico-cortical as well as cortico-subcortical connections that subserve cognitive and affective functions. In order to better understand the developmental mechanisms underlying changes in neural systems implicated in the regulation of emotion and behavior in adolescence, we therefore focused this review on the specific influence of puberty on white matter development as determined through structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) techniques. 
 We are aware of reviews that have examined brain development during adolescence (e.g.,  Blakemore et al., 2010 ;  Casey et al., 2010 ), including reviews focusing on sex differences (sexual dimorphism) ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2010 ), sex steroids ( Peper et al., 2011 ), puberty ( Giedd et al., 2006 ) and white matter development in adolescence ( Paus, 2010 ;  Schmithorst & Yuan, 2010 ). In contrast to prior reviews on adolescent brain development, our review focuses on recent findings documenting  puberty-specific changes in white matter development . It also includes a critical review of methodological procedures used to assess pubertal maturation, discussing, for instance, how studies are able to disentangle age effects from pubertal maturation since age and puberty are closely correlated with each other (and chronological age is measured with a much greater precision than categories for pubertal stage) ( Shirtcliff et al., 2009 ;  Spear, 2010 ). To begin, we provide an overview of the hormonal and physical changes associated with puberty and how pubertal maturation is commonly assessed (for a more detailed review, see  Blakemore et al., 2010 ;  Dorn et al., 2006 ;  Shirtcliff et al., 2009 ). We then review studies that report a main effect of sex or sex by age interaction in a sample of adolescents. These findings represent indirect influences of puberty on white matter development in light of evidence suggesting that puberty typically begins earlier in girls (7–13 years old) than boys (9–13 years old) ( Grumbach & Styne, 2003 ). This sets the stage for our critical review of the current literature pertaining to puberty-specific influences on the development of white matter in the adolescent brain. Findings are discussed in terms of their implications for elucidating potential vulnerability markers for affective disorders in at-risk youth. 
 
 1.1 Articles selected for review 
 For this review, we conducted a 2-step literature search. First, we conducted a comprehensive PUBMED search in the English-language literature to identify putative MRI studies that focus on the effects of puberty and/or sexual hormones on brain structure (i.e., white matter) in healthy adolescents, with a particular focus on changes in white matter volume and microstructure. In our search, we also included studies that examined developmental changes in brain structure in adolescents but limited our review to studies that reported significant sex differences. The search terms entered in PUBMED were “puberty AND MRI”, “puberty AND magnetic resonance imaging”, “puberty AND white matter”, “adolescents AND MRI”. The search also included these terms with DTI or diffusion tensor imaging in place of MRI and magnetic resonance imaging. To qualify for inclusion in this review, studies must have 1) been an original paper published in a peer-reviewed journal, 2) examined white matter volume using MRI techniques such as voxel-based morphemetric (VBM) or white matter microstructure using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 3) studied healthy participants between the ages of 8 and 18 years, 4) assessed pubertal maturation using either physical examinations, self-reports and/or included hormonal assessments. We also included MRI studies in adolescents even though they did not include pubertal maturation measures. However, such studies had to meet criteria 1) to 3) as well as include analyses that examined main effects of sex and/or age by sex interactions. A listing of all the articles that meet these criteria is given in  Table 1 , including first author, journal, year of publication, along with some pertinent details about the sample, study design (neuroimaging technique, pubertal maturation assessment), and a summary of the main findings. 
 In the current review, we excluded studies that focused solely on age-related changes in white matter during adolescence as these studies have been the focus of previous reviews (e.g.,  Schmithorst & Yuan, 2010 ). In addition, we excluded studies that included participants with endocrinological disorders (e.g., sex chromosomal aberrations) that may affect pubertal maturation (e.g., pubertas praecox, pubertas tarda, Klinefelter syndrome) as well as studies that included participants at risk for or diagnosed with a medical or neurological disorder. Although these studies may be informative, they introduce potential confounding factors. 
 
 
 
 2. What is puberty? 
 
 2.1 Definition 
 Puberty refers to a specific set of processes implicating changes in physical and reproductive maturation. It is often considered as the beginning of adolescence, a developmental period between childhood and adulthood that encompasses changes at multiple levels. This transitional developmental period not only implicates changes associated with hormonal changes but also changes in physical growth, psychological functioning and social experiences ( Dahl & Spear, 2004 ;  Dorn et al., 2006 ). Here, we focus on the influence of pubertal maturation on the development of white matter. It is important to keep in mind, however, that maturational changes in white matter occurs along with other developmental changes, which, in turn, could indirectly impact brain development (e.g., changes in social experiences) ( Forbes & Dahl, 2010 ;  Spear, 2010 ). 
 
 
 2.2. Neuroendocrine changes 
 Puberty includes important changes in the functioning of the neuroendocrine system (for a review, see  Blakemore et al., 2010 ;  Dorn et al., 2006 ;  Shirtcliff et al., 2009 ). The earliest phase of puberty or “prepuberty”, which begins between 6 and 9 years old in girls and about one year later in boys ( Cutler et al., 1990 ;  Parker, 1991 ), involves the rising of androgens that are secreted by the adrenal glands. These include dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), its sulfate (DHEAS), and androstendione ( Grumbach & Styne, 2003 ). The rising of these hormones refers to what is known as the beginning of  adrenarche . 
 The maturation of primary sexual characteristics (i.e., ovaries and testes) and the full development of secondary sexual characteristics (i.e., pubic hair, breast, and genital development) is associated with the re-activation of the hypo-thalamic-pituitary gonadal (HPG) axis ( Delemarre-van de Waal, 2002 ;  Demir et al., 1996 ).The initial activation of the HPG axis occurs during the fetal and neonatal developmental period. Reactivation of the HPG axis occurs with the pulsating secretion of the luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) as well as the increased secretion of gonadal steroids. The rising of these sexual hormones represents a second phase of puberty known as  gonadarche , which begins at about 9–10 years old in girls and approximately 1 year later in boys ( Marshall & Tanner, 1969 ,  1970 ). This pubertal period includes the onset of menses, or  menarche , in girls, and the onset of nocturnal emission, or  spermarche , in boys. Menarche in girls tends to be an event that occurs rather late in the pubertal process. Spermarche in boys represents the transition from prepubertal to pubertal, and occurs on average at approximately 13–14 years old ( Marshall & Tanner, 1969 ,  1970 ). The development of secondary sexual characteristics occurs gradually and as such, has been organized into stages (e.g., Tanner stages), which has allowed clinicians and researchers to assess variations in pubertal maturation. 
 
 
 2.3 Measures of puberty in adolescence 
 Because pubertal maturation involves a complex and gradual developmental process that implicates various endocrine and physical changes, it is important that researchers give careful consideration when selecting a measure of pubertal maturation. The selection of this measure will depend on the nature of the research question ( Dorn et al., 2006 ;  Shirtcliff et al., 2009 ). 
 There are two types of measures that can be used to assess puberty: physical measures and hormonal measures. One of the most widely used physical measures of puberty is the Tanner stages.  Tanner (1962)  described five stages of puberty ranging from 1 (no development) to 5 (adult development) ( Tanner, 1962 ). The “Tanner stages” capture visible secondary sexual characteristics such as pubic hair growth and breast/genital development. Typically, the measurement of pubertal status according to this method involves a physical exam conducted by a nurse or physician that employs Tanner’s method ( Dorn et al., 2006 ). Although such a method can provide a good assessment of pubertal maturation in terms of changes in secondary sexual characteristics, it requires specialized training and can be difficult to accomplish in non-medical settings. In order to overcome such limitations, some groups have adapted the “Tanner stages” into a self-report method. One method, the Picture-Based Interview about Puberty (PBIP), requires adolescents to examine photographs or line drawings of models that map directly onto each of the Tanner stages and to indicate which of the images most closely resembles their own physical appearance ( Morris & Udry, 1980 ). An alternative method is the Pubertal Development Scale (PDS) ( Petersen et al., 1988 ), which is a self-report questionnaire that includes items asking adolescents to answer questions about their physical development but it does not map directly onto the Tanner stages. Although these self-report measures are often used in developmental research studies, there has been little evidence documenting their reliability and concordance with the physical exam. A recent study suggests, however, that the PDS is highly correlated with a physical exam and hormonal measures and may constitute an adequate measure of pubertal maturation ( Shirtcliff et al., 2009 ). 
 Measuring changes in hormonal concentrations is another method that has been used to assess puberty. Including measures of hormonal concentrations in studies of adolescent development provide important information that can help address specific questions regarding mechanisms underlying neurodevelopmental changes, which are particularly relevant in neuroimaging studies. Studies that have included measures of hormonal concentrations examined changes in concentration of adrenal adrogens, gonadal steroids, and gonadotropins via blood spot, urine, or saliva ( Dorn et al., 2006 ). There are many factors to consider when considering hormonal concentrations in research protocols. For instance, it is important to consider the phase of the menstrual cycle as the hormonal characteristics will be different in girls who have just begun menstruating compared to those who have been menstruating for several years. Other issues include decisions about assay methods, the influence of age, gender, and race, and what substance will be used (e.g., blood, urine, saliva).  Dorn et al. (2006)  provide a more detailed discussion about these methodological considerations. 
 The earliest measurable endocrinological marker of puberty is a nocturnal rise in luteinizing hormone (LH) produced by the anterior pituitary gland ( Delemarre-van de Wall et al., 1991 ). It is considered as an early marker of puberty as LH-pulses can be detected before the secondary sexual characteristics become visible ( Demir et al., 1996 ). Together with the gonadotropin follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), LH stimulates the secretions of gonadal steroids leading to the production of sex steroid hormones (i.e. testosterone and estrogen). Because the beginning of the rising of adrenal hormones is typically not accompanied by any visible external signs of puberty, including measures of hormonal concentrations as part of research designs is critical to addressing puberty-specific questions. Furthermore, because these hormones begin to increase in childhood (earlier in girls than boys), this suggests that researchers need to consider recruiting younger subjects and to take into account the differences in onset of pubertal maturation in boys and girls when determining the age range of their sample. Including LH measures in neuroimaging protocols, for example, would allow researchers to address specific questions pertaining to associations between the timing of the onset of pubertal maturation and brain development and how these changes may be related to changes in behavior in adolescence. 
 Changes in the release of growth hormone (GH), which underlies changes in physical growth and body size, also occur during pubertal maturation ( Reiter & Rosenfeld, 2003 ). The increases in GH during puberty contribute to accelerated physical growth (particularly increased height velocity) and show a somewhat different pattern in males and females ( Parent et al., 2003 ). However, it is unclear to what extent the increases in GH secretion may specifically impact brain development. 
 
 
 
 3. Measure of white matter development 
 
 3.1 Volumetric studies 
 There are several techniques that are being used to examine white matter volume. A number of studies have used manual tracing methods of white matter structures. Although this approach has several strengths such as characterizing volumes based on more accurate boundaries. Manual tracing of white matter structures in the brain is very time consuming and requires considerable expertise to accurately identify structure boundaries. Thus, some researchers have developed automated and semi-automated segmentation tools (e.g.,  Niogi et al., 2007 ). These methods are less time-consuming and generate less inter- and intra-rater variability than manual segmentation. Another more commonly used technique is voxel-based morphometry (VBM). VBM is an analytical technique within the neuroimaging software Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) that uses a voxel-by-voxel comparison of tissue concentration between different groups of subjects ( Ashburner & Friston, 2000 ). The tissue concentration can be identified as gray or white matter. High-resolution anatomical magnetic resonance images are acquired and submitted to particular preprocessing procedures, which involve spatially normalizing images for all subjects in the study into the same stereotactic space. The next step entails segmenting the images based on the research question (i.e., gray matter or white matter). Then a modulation step can be applied to compensate for the effect of spatial normalization and to allow computation of absolute volume, for instance. The following step is smoothing of the corresponding images. Finally, voxelwise parametric statistical tests are performed to compare the smoothed images between the different groups. Such analyses yield measures of relative concentration of white or gray matter compared to other tissue types within a specific region. Some of these measures include white matter thickness, volume, and density. Thus, there are several types of analysis can be performed to address questions pertaining to these various measures. For instance, studies using “modulated” data focus on differences in volume (i.e., the absolute amount of white matter in different regions). Additionally, studies that use “unmodulated” data focus on identifying differences in white matter density (i.e., concentration or proportion white matter relative to other tissue types within a region). Some developmental studies have interpreted age-related increases in white matter density in terms of changes in diameter or myelination of the axons forming particular white matter fiber tracts ( Barnea-Goraly et al., 2005 ). It is generally recommended to account for overall brain volume in analyses, particularly when focusing on sex differences, given evidence that males typically have overall greater white matter volume than females ( Giedd et al., 1997 ). 
 
 
 3.2 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) techniques are used to examine the integrity of white matter tracks. In contrast to volumetric studies, which focus on the proportion of white matter to other tissues in particular regions, DTI provides more specific information about the microstructural components of white matter, including myelination, and axonal organization. It uses the magnetic resonance signal to visualize water movement within axons, which can help characterize axonal microstructure. Information about the diffusion of water is considered as anisotropic because it is directionally predisposed along the parallel axis of axons ( Basser & Jones, 2002 ). Fractional anisotropy (FA) is a frequently used intravoxel metric that yields values between 0 (isotropic diffusion: diffusion that is equal in all directions) and 1 (maximum anisotropic diffusion: the hypothetical case of diffusion along one axis). Thus, voxels containing water moving predominantly along the principal diffusion direction, rather than the transverse direction, have higher FA. FA is sensitive to a number of neurobiological characteristics of white matter such as axonal size, density, and organization as well as the degree of myelination ( Paus, 2005 ,  2010 ). Thus, greater FA could reflect greater myelination of white matter fibers, greater number of myelinated fibers, or greater longitudinal versus oblique directional alignment of fibers. Another DTI measure that is often used is radial diffusivity (RD) ( Hasan, 2006 ). RD is an index of diffusivity in directions that are perpendicular to the principal axis of diffusion (i.e., an average of the transverse directions). Mean diffusivity (MD) is also often used as a metric in DTI studies and is an index of the mean overall diffusion. Some studies also report changes in apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), which is a metric of the magnitude of diffusion within white matter tissue. ADC measures provide information about the properties of diffusion (i.e., rate of water diffusion) occurring within a particular voxel and can then be mapped as an image, using diffusion as the contrast. Moreover, low ADC values are associated with more organized white matter fiber tracts whereas high ADC values are associated with more disorganized tracts. Furthermore, a technique called tractography is used as a way to determine the structure of neural tracts ( Correia et al., 2008 ). Tractography is performed using DTI. It is a method used to examine inter-voxel diffusion coherence capable of producing images of gross white matter organization in the brain. White matter tracts are segmented by starting at a 'seed point' with streamlines fitted through consecutive voxels. Thus, the topography of the tracts resulting from tractography is highly dependent on the seed location. This analytical process requires a minimum number of image acquisition parameters and as such involves a longer scanning session but it can provide a rich description of the structure of white matter tracts. 
 
 
 
 4. Sex differences and white matter in adolescence 
 Sexual dimorphism (i.e., sex differences in brain structure and function) of the brain in animals and humans has been the focus of numerous research studies over the past century ( Allen & Gorski, 1986 ,  1990 ;  Benes et al., 1994 ;  Giedd et al., 1997 ). Early work in this area, primarily in rats, focused on the effects of sex steroids hormones on brain morphology during critical developmental periods (for a more detailed review, see  McEwen, 1983 ). Human neuroimaging studies have documented sexual dimorphism in several brain regions including the hypothalamus, the amygdala, the hippocampus, the striatum, the cerebellum, and various regions of the cerebral cortex (e.g.,  Giedd et al., 1996 ;  Murphy et al., 1996 ;  Paus et al., 1996 ;  Tiemeier et al., 2010 ). With regard specifically to white matter, most of the findings pertain to tracts involved in interhemispheric connectivity ( Allen & Gorski, 1987 ;  Highley et al., 1999 ;  Nopoulos et al., 2000 ;  Witelson, 1989 ), such as the corpus callosum ( Shin et al., 2005 ). Such differences in interhemispheric connectivity might be related to sex differences in structural and functional hemispheric asymmetry (e.g.,  Galaburda et al., 1990 ;  Witelson & Nowakowski, 1991 ;  Zaidel et al., 1995 ). Most of these human neuroimaging studies, however, were conducted in adults. Focusing on adolescence may help elucidate potential developmental mechanism toward sexual dimorphism of white matter. 
 Several studies report sex differences in the development of white matter during adolescence ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2010 ). As described in the above section, puberty onset occurs generally later in males than females. Thus, findings from studies that report significant sex-related differences (sexual dimorphism) or sex by age interactions in a sample of subjects in early- or mid-puberty could be interpreted in terms of puberty-specific changes. That is, even though certain MRI studies do not include direct measures of pubertal maturation (e.g., hormone levels, self-report), findings indicating significant sex differences and sex by age interactions could be interpreted in terms of hormonal influences on white matter development or onset of puberty (see  Table 1 ). 
 With regard to white matter volume, one of the first studies to examine longitudinal changes in white matter volume in childhood and adolescence reported significant sex differences ( Giedd et al., 1999 ). In particular, this large longitudinal study reported significantly less linear increase in white matter volume with age in females than males. A more recent and even larger longitudinal study in normally developing youth (n = 387, ages 3–27 years old, scanned every two years) also demonstrated that neurodevelopmental trajectories of white matter were significantly different in males than in females ( Lenroot et al., 2007 ). Total white matter volume increased with age in both males and females, with peak volumes observed at 14.5 years in males and 10.5 years in females. Although gray matter volumes also followed the inverted U shape and peaked earlier in females, white matter continued to increase in both males and females. In particular, white matter volume increased linearly at a faster pace in males than in females, which contributed to the greater white matter in males than females as a function of age. After covarying for total brain volume, there were significant sex-related differences in shape and height of trajectories in individual regions ( Lenroot et al., 2007 ). In particular, there were sex differences in the developmental trajectories of white matter in the frontal and occipital lobes. The shape of the trajectory was different between males and females in the frontal lobe and the height of the trajectory of the occipital lobe was different suggesting that males have larger white matter volumes in childhood and later in adolescence. Furthermore, the mid-sagittal area of the corpus callosum was larger in females than in males. 
 A more recent longitudinal morphometric MRI study documented sex-differences in the developmental trajectory of the cerebellum ( Tiemeier et al., 2010 ). Although the organization of white matter within the cerebellum is somewhat distinct compared to the rest of the brain, there is evidence suggesting that cerebellar volume may be influenced by pubertal maturation ( Ikeda & Nagai, 2006 ). A total of 50 individuals between the age of 5 and 24 years were scanned at least three times at approximately 2-year intervals. Results indicated that the total cerebellum volume was larger in males than in females and followed an inverted U shape peaking later in males (i.e., 15.6 years) than in females (i.e., 11.8 years), which is consistent with previous longitudinal findings ( Lenroot et al., 2007 ;  Sowell et al., 2003 ). Furthermore, there were significant sex differences in the trajectory of subregions of the cerebellum. For instance, after covarying for total brain volume, the superior and inferior posterior lobes were significantly larger in males than females. These regions play an important role in the inhibition of involuntary movement via inhibitory neurotransmitters, especially GABA, which are relevant for the regulation of behavior and emotion ( Quirk & Beer, 2006 ). There was also evidence of effects related to laterality, with a significant sex by age interaction in the right superior posterior lobe. The cerebellum contains estrogen and progesterone receptors, which suggests that pubertal maturation most likely influences developmental changes in this region ( Ikeda & Nagai, 2006 ). Given the role of the cerebellum not only in motor function but also in higher-order executive function and emotion ( Schutter & Van Honk, 2009 ;  Stoodley & Schmahmann, 2010 ) as well as its implication in neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., ADHD, and schizophrenia), such findings have important implications for the investigation of specific neurodevelopmental markers of vulnerability or risk for psychiatric disease ( Baldaçara et al., 2008 ;  Rapoport et al., 2000 ). 
 Other studies have used cross-sectional designs to examine sex differences in white matter volume. Using VBM,  DeBellis et al. (2001)  reported a significant sex by age interaction, suggesting that males had a 45.1% increase in total white matter volume and 58.5% increase in corpus callosum area as a function of age whereas females had a 17% and 27% increases, respectively ( De Bellis et al., 2001 ). This effect was also present when analyses were conducted with Tanner stage measures. These cross-sectional findings are inconsistent with findings from previous cross-sectional studies reporting the absence of sex differences in white matter, which may be associated with methodological and sample size differences ( Jernigan & Tallal, 1990 ;  Pfefferbaum et al., 1994 ). Nevertheless, they suggest differences in age-related changes in white matter between males and females, which are consistent with findings from longitudinal studies ( Giedd et al., 1999 ). Males and females not only differ in relative white matter volume, with males having greater volume than females, they also differ in the ratio of neurons to neuronal processes (i.e., transmission of signal between neurons) ( de Courten-Myers, 1999 ). That is, females tend to have greater neuronal processes and lower neuronal numbers compared with males. One hypothesis is that white matter tracts may include fewer, but thicker and more organized fibers, in males but more crossing fiber tracts in females ( Schmithorst et al., 2008 ). If this is the case, then there may be a differential influence of pubertal maturation on the microstructure and organization of white matter tracts in males and females that could help explain these sex differences in white matter volume and neuron to neuronal process ratio. It is, therefore, possible that sex differences may be better captured using neuroimaging techniques that assess the microstructual organization of white matter. Recent studies have begun to use DTI to examine the influence of puberty on white matter microstructure, providing complimentary findings to volumetric studies. 
 A recent DTI voxelwise study investigated age-related structural white matter changes in adolescence in a group of 42 healthy adolescent subjects (22 males, 20 females; age range 13.5– 21 years, using a novel DTI approach to test for voxelwise correlations between diffusion parameters and age within each age group ( Giorgio et al., 2008 ) . Although the authors report significant increase in FA and decrease in perpendicular diffusivity, they did not report any sex differences or sex by age interactions ( Giorgio et al., 2008 ). This may be due to the fact that the study included mostly older adolescents in mid- to late- puberty as well as young adults and that the adolescents had an uneven male:female ratio. However, another voxelwise DTI study in a larger sample (n = 106) of children and adolescents (ages 5–18 years) did find sex differences in white matter FA in the corpus callosum ( Schmithorst et al., 2008 ). Specifically, there were sex differences in the splenium of the corpus callosum, with FA being greater in females than in males. Findings also indicated greater white matter FA in bilateral frontal regions, right arcuate fasciculus, and in left parietal and occipito-parietal regions ( Figure 1 ) and greater MD in the corticospinal tract bilaterally and in the right frontal lobe in males than females. Furthermore, there were significant sex by age interactions suggesting that white matter FA in the right arcuate fasciculus, right frontal and right occipito-temporal-parietal tended to increase with age in females. Conversely, in males, FA decreased with age in the right arcuate fasciculus and there were no significant relationships between age and white matter FA in the right frontal and right occipito-temporal-parietal regions. Furthermore, compared to males, females had a faster decline of MD in white matter with age in bilateral frontal regions, the right arcuate fasciulus, and right occipito-parietal white matter. An ROI-based study also found sex differences in apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) in white matter ( Bonekamp et al., 2007 ). ADC represents properties of diffusion occurring within a particular voxel. Although the main goal of this study was to investigate intra-rater, inter-rater, and between-scan reproducibility of ADC and FA measurements, they reported sex differences in ADC but not FA. Findings indicated higher ADC in temporal white matter in males (3.8%) than females and higher ADC in the cingulum in females (1%) than males ( Bonekamp et al., 2007 ). None of the analyses in this study, however, showed a significant sex by age interactions in ADC or FA. Another ROI-based study examining the relationship between white matter microstructure and impulsive behavior and response inhibition in a group of adolescents (n = 21; age = 12.3 years old) reported significant sex differences in particular white matter tracts ( Silveri et al., 2006 ). ROI analyses focused on the genu of the corpus callosum yielding greater FA in the left anterior region of the genu in males than females and greater FA in the right anterior region and splenium of the genu in females than in males. However, there were no significant sex by age interactions. Interestingly, there were significant sex differences in the relationship between FA and performance on a response inhibition task, with greater FA in right anterior callosum for males and greater FA in the splenium for females being associated with better performance on the task across all subjects ( Silveri et al., 2006 ). 
 To our knowledge, there has been only one study that used DTI with a longitudinal design to examine white matter development in a large sample (n = 168) of children, adolescents, and adults ranging in age from 8 to 30 years old ( Tamnes et al., 2010 ). This recent study reported age-related changes in cortical thickness, white matter volume, and FA. However, sex differences was included as a covariate after preliminary analyses showed significantly larger white matter volume in males than females and because preliminary analyses did not yield significant sex differences or sex by age group interactions. Unfortunately, a covariate interaction term was not included in their model and as a result there was no examination of potential sex by age interactions. 
 Evidence from these studies suggests that the timing of white matter development is significantly different across the sexes and the fact that white matter volume peaks earlier in girls than in boys suggests that developmental changes in white matter volume might be influenced by puberty. DTI studies provide evidence that in addition to differences in white matter volume, there also appears to be differences in the timing of changes in microstructure. 
 
 
 5. Puberty-related influence on white matter development in adolescence 
 Investigating sex differences is one approach to begin to understand the influence of puberty on white matter development. A more direct approach is to include measures of pubertal maturation such as self-report, physical exams, or saliva or blood essays of reproductive hormones. In addition to such measures, researchers need to consider sex differences in puberty onset when recruiting their research participants. Here, we review findings from research studies that included one of the above approaches to examine associations between puberty and white matter development. 
 
 5.1 Volumetric studies 
 Peper and colleagues were one of the first to conduct a number of studies designed to specifically examine the influence of puberty on gray and white matter in adolescents. In a large VBM study (n = 104) of monozygotic (n = 24) and dizygotic (n = 29) 9-year-old twin-pairs,  Peper et al. (2008)  examined the relationship between levels of luteinizing hormone (LH), which is considered as one of the first endocrinological markers of puberty in both boys and girls, and gray and white matter structure ( Peper et al., 2008 ). They also measured secondary sexual characteristics of puberty using a Tanner-staging questionnaire. Results showed a significant correlation between higher levels of LH and the proportion of overall white matter volume. Higher levels of LH were also correlated with higher regional white matter density in the left cingulum, the middle temporal gyrus bilaterally, superior frontal gyrus, and the splenium of the corpus callosum ( Figure 2 ). Because the study included twins, the authors were able to document that associations between LH and white matter density may have a common genetic origin ( Peper et al., 2008 ). 
 In a subsequent study,  Peper et al. (2009b)  investigated the extent to which global and regional gray and white matter volumes may be heritable across puberty ( Peper et al., 2009b ). This study included a total of 210 healthy 9-year-old children, including 45 monozygotic and 62 dizygotic twin pairs. In this study, only secondary sexual characteristics were measured using a Tanner-staging questionnaire. Because of the young age of the participants in this study (i.e., 9-year-old children), the authors created a Tanner status measure that captured both adrenal and gonadal maturation. Findings indicated that regional white matter densities of the bilateral fronto-occipital fasciculus, bilateral superior longitudinal fasciculus, the genu of the corpus callosum, and left cingulum were highly heritable. However, there were no significant associations between global white matter volume or regional white matter density and puberty-onset. 
 In another study,  Peper and colleagues (2009a)  examined the influence of sex steroids (i.e., testosterone and estradiol) on global and regional gray and white matter volumes in a sample of 78 children between 10.0 and 14.9 years old (37 boys and 41 girls) ( Peper et al., 2009a ). Testosterone was collected in saliva and estradiol in urine samples. Samples were collected on two consecutive days and averaged for analytical purposes. Results showed that, unlike findings for gray matter, there was no relationship between testosterone or estradiol levels and global white matter volume or regional white matter density in boys or girls ( Peper et al., 2009a ). 
 Other groups have also examined the influence of pubertal maturation on white matter development. For instance, Perrin and colleagues examined the influence of pubertal maturation on white matter volume and magnetization transfer ratio (MTR), which provides information regarding white matter integrity at the macromolecular level and is thought to serve as an indirect proxy of myelination ( Perrin et al., 2009 ). In this study, participants (n = 408, 204 males, 12–18 years old) were normally developing adolescents between mid- to late-puberty, which was determined using the Peterson Development Scale. The study involved examining the effects of age, sex, and pubertal maturation and their interaction on measures of white matter density and MTR using a whole-brain approach ( Perrin et al., 2009 ). Findings indicated that white matter density in frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes increased with pubertal maturation in boys only. MTR, however, was negatively related to pubertal maturation in parietal and occipital lobes in boys. Also, white matter density decreased as a function of pubertal maturation in boys in the region of the cortico-spinal tract. In another study including the same sample of adolescents,  Perrin et al. (2008)  examined the relationship between white matter density, MTR, and pubertal maturation, which was characterized using the Peterson Development Scale ( Perrin et al., 2008 ). They also examined the relationship between blood levels of testosterone and white matter volume and genotyped their participants for a functional polymorphism in the androgen receptor (AR) gene in order to examine the role of the AR receptor in moderating the relationship between testosterone and white matter. Findings from this study revealed a relationship between levels of testosterone and white matter growth in males but not in females. Furthermore, such a relationship in males appeared to be moderated by the presence of androgen receptors as this increase in white matter volume in males was greater in those with the shorter versions of the AR gene (i.e., fewer number of CAG-repeats in this gene). 
 Findings from these studies demonstrate associations between hormonal changes with puberty and white matter volume. Furthermore, it appears that such associations may be moderated by genetic predispositions. 
 
 
 5.2 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
 To our knowledge, only one study has examined the association between pubertal maturation and DTI-measures in a large sample of adolescents.  Asato et al. (2010)  used both whole-brain and ROI analyses to examine age-, sex-, and puberty-related changes in white matter microstructure in 114 children, adolescents, and adults ( Asato et al., 2010 ). In this study, white matter microstructure was characterized using a radial diffusivity index and pubertal maturation was assessed using the Tanner Maturation Scale, which is a picture-based self-assessment of changes in secondary sexual characteristics. Researchers generated composite scores reflecting breast development and pubic hair development (females) and genital and pubic hair development (males). Subjects were grouped according to the estimated Tanner stage score: pre/early pubertal (scores 1, 2), midpubertal (score 3, 4), and adult maturational/postpubertal (maximum score of 5). Findings from this study indicated that a number of white matter tracts (e.g., uncinate fasciculus, superior longitudinal fasciculus, anterior thalamic radiation, corpus callosum) did not fully mature until the postpubertal stage. The authors interpreted these findings as an indication that pubertal maturation was implicated in the development of these tracts ( Asato et al., 2010 ). It is important to note, however, that age and puberty were tightly coupled in this sample and as such, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of age from the effects of puberty on the development of these white matter tracts. When examining findings with regard to main effect of sex or sex by age interaction, results suggest that most white matter tracts reached maturation earlier in girls than boys, except for the right superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) that showed ongoing maturation into early adulthood. Such earlier maturation in girls could thus be interpreted in terms of puberty-related changes. Focusing analyses on a subset of subjects within a specific age-range in girls and boys separately and examining associations between pubertal maturation measurements and DTI indices would have helped elucidate further the influence of puberty on white matter development. 
 
 
 
 6. Summary 
 Studies that have examined associations between puberty and white matter development are limited. Nevertheless, findings from the studies reviewed here suggest that there may be unique pubertal influences on white matter development in adolescence. Volumetric longitudinal studies suggest sex differences in the age at which males and females reach peak white matter volumes, with males reaching white matter peak volumes later than females but at a faster pace. There also appears to be sex differences in corpus callosum white matter development, with greater increase in corpus callosum white matter volume with age in males than females. Sex differences in FA in sub-regions of the corpus callosum were also documented, including sex-related differences in the relationship between FA and impulsive behavior in the right anterior callosum for males and in the splenium for females ( Silveri et al., 2006 ). Together, these findings indicate that sex may impact the timing of white matter development as well as the myelination and organization of specific white matter tracts. Indeed, DTI findings suggest that certain white matter tracts (i.e., splenium) appear to organize faster in females than males. Given that puberty typically begins earlier in females than males ( Styne & Grumbach, 2002 ), we argue that such differences in the timing of white matter development or changes in microstructure may possibly be associated with the onset of puberty. We must acknowledge, however, that other factors could also explain such sex by age interactions associated with white matter development (e.g., genes on sex chromosomes may be turned on or off by certain environmental factors that typically take place in adolescence). Including specific and appropriate measures of pubertal maturation combined with adequate research designs would help minimize such confounding effects. 
 Findings from studies that included direct assessment of pubertal maturation provide some exciting clues about the specific relations between puberty and white matter development. In particular, research from Peper and colleagues suggest that pubertal hormones may impact white matter development in prepubertal adolescents, before the appearance of any physical changes with puberty. For instance, they documented that early-secreted hormones such as LH influence white matter density of specific inter-hemispheric and association tracts in both males and females. Others demonstrated that influences of pubertal hormones on white matter development may be moderated by genetic predisposition. For instance, Perrin and colleagues reported that the influence of testosterone on white matter volume was greater in boys with shorter versions of the androgen receptor gene. Only one study, to our knowledge, reported associations between pubertal maturation and microstructure of specific white matter tracts in adolescence, suggesting that puberty may influence the maturational process of certain white matter tracts differently in boys and girls. 
 Despite the limited number of studies and variations in methodological procedures and dependent variables, findings suggest that pubertal hormones may influence the timing and organization of regional white matter development differently in boys and girls and that such influence may be moderated by genetic predisposition. It is important to note, however, that changes in white matter volume or FA associated with pubertal maturation could be related to a number of factors. For instance, such changes could be related to progressive age-related axonal myelination ( Benes, 1994 ;  Yakovlev & Lecours, 1967 ), or alternatively, to increasing axonal calibre ( Paus, 2010 ). Such controversies pertaining to the biological processes implicated in white matter maturation have been discussed by Paus and colleagues and require further study ( Paus, 2005 ,  2010 ). Another important issue to consider is the causal relationship between pubertal maturation and changes in white matter. Evidence from animal studies suggest that glial cells, which are responsible for the production of myelin, have the capacity to regulate the secretion of sex steroids (i.e., glial steroidogenesis) ( Garcia-Segura & Melcangi, 2006 ). Such potential reciprocal dynamic relationships between the secretion of pubertal hormones and white matter development attests to the complexity of elucidating the specific developmental mechanisms underlying the specific influence of puberty on white matter development ( Peper et al., 2011 ). Furthermore, although some studies used a longitudinal design, most of the studies used a cross-sectional design. Cross-sectional designs provide initial data regarding developmental changes but they present some limitations with regard to inferring developmental processes ( Kraemer et al., 2000 ). Thus, future studies including multiple measures of white matter microstructure (e.g., FA, RD, longitudinal diffusivity, MTR, tractography) as well as longitudinal designs are strongly recommended in order to better understand the nature of the effect of pubertal hormones on white matter development. Until such studies are undertaken, it will be challenging to determine to what extent hormonal changes during puberty and adolescence are causally involved in these white matter maturational processes. Finally, another issue to consider is the methods used to assess pubertal maturation. The above studies used the following strategies: a) sampling subjects within a limited age-range (e.g., 9-year olds), b) including similar ratio of male and female participants; and c) including hormonal measures, self-report questionnaires, or physical examinations to document pubertal maturation. Although most of these studies used these strategies in one form or another, some failed to control for the fact that girls typically mature sexually 1–2 years earlier than boys and included boys and girls within the same age range (12–18 years old, 8–28 years old) (e.g.,  Perrin et al., 2009 ,  Asato et al., 2010 ). Moreover, some did control for age by recruiting subjects within a narrow age range (e.g.,  Peper et al., 2009b ) but there were age differences between boys and girls yielding the possibility that the males in the samples of the above studies were in earlier stages of pubertal development compared to their female counterparts. An attempt was made to address this issue by examining associations between sex and brain structure within each sex separately ( Peper et al., 2009b ). These issues are particularly relevant also in light of recent animal work indicating that males and female brains respond differently to changes in steroid hormones, suggesting that complex interactions between sex and pubertal hormones also need to be taken into consideration ( Galea, 2008 ). Despite some of these methodological issues, the above findings can provide promising clues about the specific influence of pubertal maturation on white matter development. Such clues are important to elucidate neurodevelopmental trajectories associated with increased risk for psychopathology. 
 
 
 7. Puberty-related changes in white matter development and implications for affective disorders 
 There is mounting evidence suggesting that adolescence is a sensitive period for the onset of behavioral and emotional health problems ( Dahl & Spear, 2004 ;  Steinberg et al., 2006 ). In particular, adolescence represents the period with the greatest increase in risk for the development of affective disorders, especially in girls ( Angold et al., 1995 ;  Angold et al., 1998 ;  Angold & Worthman, 1993 ). Recently, there has been an emerging literature documenting alterations in white matter microstructure in individuals diagnosed with affective disorders, including major depression and bipolar disorder ( Kafantaris et al., 2009 ;  Sexton et al., 2009 ;  Versace et al., 2008 ;  Zhu et al., 2011 ). Such alterations in white matter have also been reported in youth at high familial risk for these affective disorders ( Hajek et al., 2005 ;  Huang et al., 2011 ;  Versace et al., 2010 ). 
 Structural as well as functional neuroimaging studies suggest that corticolimbic systems are implicated in the pathogenesis of affective disorders, especially ventromedial-amygdala and frontal-thalamic-striatal systems ( Mayberg, 2001 ;  Phillips et al., 2008 ;  Price & Drevets, 2010 ;  Savitz & Drevets, 2009 ). Neuroimaging studies indicate that these neural systems are also involved in the processing and regulation of emotions ( Phillips et al., 2008 ), which undergo important developmental changes in adolescence ( Ernst et al., 2006 ;  Monk et al., 2003 ;  Steinberg, 2005 ). Therefore, puberty-specific influences on white matter development in adolescence may influence connections between neural regions implicated in emotion processing and regulation thereby potentially impacting the functioning of these neural systems. Given evidence that puberty onset is occurring at a younger age in industrialized countries ( Euling et al., 2008 ), it is possible that puberty-related changes in white matter microstructure may influence both the structure and function of neural systems of emotion processing and regulation and that such developmental changes may render particularly vulnerable youth (i.e., genetic predisposition, early-life stressors) at increased risk for affective disorders. For example, a recent DTI study showed lower FA in the cingulum bundle, the splenium of the corpus callosum, and the uncinate fasciculus in healthy adolescents at high familial risk for unipolar depression compared to healthy controls ( Huang et al., 2011 ). Evidence reviewed here suggests that the splenium of the corpus callosum, organizes faster in girls than in boys ( Silveri et al., 2006 ). Based on these, although somewhat limited, findings it would be plausible to hypothesize that puberty-related changes in the splenium of the corpus callosum, for example, may represent a potential vulnerability marker for future onset of affective disorders in high-risk youth. The uncinate fasciculus is another white matter tract that appears to be relevant to the risk for affective disorders. It is a large fiber track connecting three key regions involved in emotion regulation (i.e., amygdala, lateral and medial prefrontal cortex) ( Highley et al., 2002 ).  Asato et al. (2010) , reviewed here, indicate that it is one of the white matter tracts that reaches maturation earlier in girls than boys. Moreover, several studies have documented abnormalities in the microstructure of the uncinate fasciculus in individuals diagnosed with an affective disorder ( Cullen et al., 2010 ;  Versace et al., 2008 ;  Wang et al., 2009 ) and more recently, in youth at high familial risk for affective disorders ( Huang et al., 2011 ) ( Figure 3 ). 
 Whether puberty-mediated alterations in the development of these and other white matter tracts may contribute to the development of affective disorders in adolescence remains to be investigated. Such hypotheses would need to be tested using longitudinal studies with larger samples of at-risk youth combined with genetic information ( Raznahan et al., 2010 ) and accurate measurement of pubertal maturation to determine whether puberty-related changes in these white matter tracts indeed represent neurodevelopmental markers of risk for affective disorders. Nevertheless, these examples illustrate the need for a more in-depth understanding of the developmental mechanisms underlying changes in white matter development ( Paus et al., 2008 ) – an endeavor that may require multi-level approaches and inter-disciplinary collaborations. 
 
 
 8. Conclusions and future directions 
 In this review, we presented a critical review of research findings indicating associations between pubertal maturation and white matter development. We showed that some studies reporting sex differences in white matter development with age may reflect possible changes associated with pubertal maturation. Very few studies have investigated puberty-specific influences on white matter development in adolescence. These emerging findings suggest that pubertal hormones influence specific regions of white matter and that such influences may be associated with certain genetic predispositions. These findings are relevant in light of recent findings reporting altered development of white matter implicated in emotion processing and regulation in individuals diagnosed with affective disorders as well as youth at high familial risk for these disorders. Much more research is needed to elucidate further the developmental mechanisms underlying white matter changes in adolescence and how such changes influence the functioning of complex neural systems that govern regulation of emotion and behavior. 
 Advances in neuroimaging techniques offer valuable tools that have yet to be adopted by researchers focusing on adolescent brain development. For instance, recent advances in the field of diffusion imaging offer the possibility of being able to perform high-definition fiber tracking (HDFT) ( Fernandez-Miranda et al., 2010 ;  Verstynen et al., 2011 ). HDFT provides higher resolution of white matter fascicles and the visualization of complex crossing fibers, which is currently impossible with standard DTI techniques ( Alexander & Barker, 2005 ). Such high resolution techniques have the potential to better track developmental changes in white matter in adolescence and address issues regarding timing of changes in white matter microstructure. However, the current HDFT data acquisition protocols last approximately 40 minutes, which would be challenging for many children and adolescents to complete. Perhaps future developments in HDFT methodology will enhance the feasibility of this technique with young people. Other research avenues include the development of image acquisition techniques that serve to document specific changes in myelin ( Deoni et al., 2011 ;  Deoni et al., 2008 ). Although DTI measures offer some metric about white matter microstructure, changes in these measures may not be specific to myelin content alteration ( Beaulieu, 2002 ;  Paus, 2010 ). Deoni and colleagues developed a novel MRI technique called multicomponent driven equilibrium single pulse observation of T1 and T2 (mcDESPOT)( Deoni et al., 2008 ), which they describe as a new time-efficient multicomponent relaxation (MCR) analysis. This novel technique, which has recently been used in infants ( Deoni et al., 2011 ), provides a more sensitive and specific examination of white matter maturation. This technique therefore has the potential to document myelin changes in the adolescent brain and how such changes may be influenced specifically by pubertal maturation. 
 The paucity of research studies documenting specific puberty-related influences on white matter development attests to the fact that this is an area of research that is still emerging. Incorporating methodological procedures from the field of developmental psychology and neuroendocrinology along with innovative neuroimaging techniques and data analytical procedures from the fields of physics and neuroscience represents a promising research avenue in advancing our knowledge about adolescent brain development and the identification of potential neurodevelopmental markers of risk in vulnerable youth. 
 
 
 Research highlights 
 
 
 
 
 - 
 A description of puberty and importance of methods used to assess pubertal maturation. 
 
 
 - 
 A review of studies focusing on sex differences and white matter development. 
 
 
 - 
 A review of studies focusing on puberty and white matter development. 
 
 
 - 
 Discussion of implications for onset of affective disorders in adolescence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 Cecile D. Ladouceur is supported by a Blowitz-Ridgeway Young Investigator Award from NARSAD and a grant from the National Institutes of Mental Health (K01 MH083001). Jiska S. Peper is supported by an Innovational Research Grant (VENI 451-10-007) from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). Eveline A. Crone is supported by an VIDI-grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) and a Starting Grant ("Ideas program") from the European Research Counsil (ERC). 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Alexander 
 DC 
 
 
 Barker 
 GJ 
 
 
 Optimal imaging parameters for fiber-orientation estimation in diffusion MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 27 
 357 
 367 
 15921931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 LS 
 
 
 Gorski 
 RA 
 
 
 Sexual dimorphism of the human anterior commissure [abstract] 
 The Anatomical Record 
 1986 
 214 
 3A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 LS 
 
 
 Gorski 
 RA 
 
 
 Sex differences in the human massa intermedia [abstract] 
 Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 
 1987 
 13 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 LS 
 
 
 Gorski 
 RA 
 
 
 Sex difference in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis of the human brain 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1990 
 302 
 697 
 706 
 1707064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angold 
 A 
 
 
 Costello 
 EJ 
 
 
 Erkanli 
 A 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Pubertal changes in hormone levels and depression in girls 
 Psychological Medicine 
 1995 
 29 
 1043 
 1053 
 10576297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angold 
 A 
 
 
 Costello 
 EJ 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Puberty and depression: the roles of age, pubertal status and pubertal timing 
 Psychological Medicine 
 1998 
 28 
 51 
 61 
 9483683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angold 
 A 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Puberty onset of gender differences in rates of depression: a developmental, epidemiologic and neuroendocrine perspective 
 Journal of Affective Disorders 
 1993 
 29 
 145 
 158 
 8300975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asato 
 MR 
 
 
 Terwilliger 
 R 
 
 
 Woo 
 J 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 White matter development in adolescence: a DTI study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 2122 
 2131 
 20051363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Voxel-based morphometry - the methods 
 NeuroImage 
 2000 
 11 
 805 
 821 
 10860804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baldaçara 
 L 
 
 
 Borgio 
 JG 
 
 
 Lacerda 
 AL 
 
 
 Jackowski 
 AP 
 
 
 Cerebellum and psychiatric disorders 
 Revista brasileira de psiquiatria 
 2008 
 30 
 281 
 289 
 18833430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barnea-Goraly 
 N 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Eckert 
 M 
 
 
 Tamm 
 L 
 
 
 Bammer 
 R 
 
 
 Karchemskiy 
 A 
 
 
 
 White matter development during childhood and adolescence: a cross-sectional diffusion tensor imaging study 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 12 
 1848 
 1854 
 15758200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basser 
 PJ 
 
 
 Jones 
 DK 
 
 
 Diffusion-tensor MRI: Theory, experimental design and data analysis - A technical review 
 NMR in Biomedicine 
 2002 
 15 
 456 
 467 
 12489095 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaulieu 
 C 
 
 
 The basis of anisotropic water diffusion in the nervous system: a technical review 
 NMR Biomedicine 
 2002 
 15 
 435 
 455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benes 
 FM 
 
 
 
 
 Dawson 
 GF 
 
 
 K 
 W 
 
 
 Development of the corticolimbic system 
 Human Behavior and the Developing Brain 
 1994 
 New York 
 The Guilford Press 
 176 
 206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benes 
 FM 
 
 
 Turtle 
 M 
 
 
 Khan 
 Y 
 
 
 Farol 
 P 
 
 
 Myelination of a key relay zone in the hippocampal formation occurs in the human brain during childhood 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 1994 
 51 
 477 
 484 
 8192550 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 The role of puberty in the developing adolescent brain 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2010 
 31 
 926 
 933 
 20496383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonekamp 
 D 
 
 
 Nagae 
 LM 
 
 
 Degaonkar 
 M 
 
 
 Matson 
 M 
 
 
 Abdall 
 WM 
 
 
 Barker 
 PB 
 
 
 
 Diffusion tensor imaging in children and adolescents: Reproducibility, hemispheric, and age-related differences 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 34 
 733 
 742 
 17092743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Duhoux 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MM 
 
 
 Adolescence: What do transmission, transition, and translation have to do with it? 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 67 
 749 
 760 
 20826307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chowen 
 JA 
 
 
 Azcoitia 
 I 
 
 
 Cardona-Gomez 
 GP 
 
 
 Garcia-Segura 
 LM 
 
 
 Sex steroids and the brain: lessons from animal studies 
 Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology & Metabolism 
 2000 
 13 
 1045 
 1066 
 11085182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Correia 
 S 
 
 
 Lee 
 SY 
 
 
 Voorn 
 T 
 
 
 Tate 
 DF 
 
 
 Paul 
 RH 
 
 
 Zhang 
 S 
 
 
 
 Quantitative tractography metrics of white matter integrity in diffusion-tensor MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 15 
 568 
 581 
 18617421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cullen 
 KR 
 
 
 Klimes-Dougan 
 B 
 
 
 Muetzel 
 R 
 
 
 Mueller 
 BA 
 
 
 Camchon 
 J 
 
 
 Houri 
 A 
 
 
 
 Altered white matter microstructure in adolescents with major depression: a preliminary study 
 Journal of the American Academy Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 2010 
 49 
 173 
 183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cunningham 
 RL 
 
 
 Claiborne 
 BJ 
 
 
 McGinnis 
 MY 
 
 
 Pubertal exposure to anabolic androgenic steroids increases spine densities on neurons in the limbic system of rats 
 Neuroscience 
 2007 
 150 
 1288 
 1301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cutler 
 GB 
 
 
 Schiebinger 
 RJ 
 
 
 Albertson 
 BD 
 
 
 Cassorla 
 FG 
 
 
 Chrousos 
 GP 
 
 
 Comite 
 F 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grumbach 
 MM 
 
 
 Sizonenko 
 PC 
 
 
 Aubert 
 ML 
 
 
 Adrenarche (human and animals) 
 Control of the onset of puberty 
 1990 
 Baltimore 
 Williams & Wilkins 
 506 
 533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 Adolescent Brain Development: Vulnerabilities and Opportunities 
 2004 
 Vol. 1021 
 New York 
 The New York Academy of Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Bellis 
 MD 
 
 
 Keshavan 
 MS 
 
 
 Beers 
 SR 
 
 
 Hall 
 J 
 
 
 Frustaci 
 K 
 
 
 Masalehdan 
 A 
 
 
 
 Sex differences in brain maturation during childhood and adolescence 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 552 
 557 
 11375916 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Courten-Myers 
 GM 
 
 
 The human cerebral cortex: Gender differences in structure and function 
 Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology 
 1999 
 58 
 217 
 226 
 10197813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delemarre-van de Waal 
 HA 
 
 
 Regulation of puberty 
 Best Practice & Research Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 
 2002 
 16 
 1 
 12 
 11987894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delemarre-van de Wall 
 HA 
 
 
 Wennick 
 JM 
 
 
 Odink 
 RJ 
 
 
 Gonadotrophin and growth hormone secretion throughout puberty 
 Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica 
 1991 
 Suppl 372 
 26 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demir 
 A 
 
 
 Voutilainen 
 R 
 
 
 Juul 
 A 
 
 
 Dunkel 
 L 
 
 
 Alfthan 
 H 
 
 
 Skakkebaek 
 NE 
 
 
 
 Increase in the first morning voided urinary luteinizing hormone levels precedes the physical onset of puberty 
 Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 
 1996 
 81 
 2963 
 2967 
 8768859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deoni 
 SC 
 
 
 Mercure 
 E 
 
 
 Blasi 
 A 
 
 
 Gasston 
 D 
 
 
 Thomson 
 A 
 
 
 Johnson 
 M 
 
 
 
 Mapping infant brain myelination with magnetic resonance imaging 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 784 
 791 
 21228187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deoni 
 SC 
 
 
 Rutt 
 BK 
 
 
 Arun 
 T 
 
 
 Pierpaoli 
 C 
 
 
 Jones 
 DK 
 
 
 Gleaning multicomponent T1 and T2 information from steady-state imaging data 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 2008 
 60 
 1372 
 1387 
 19025904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dorn 
 LD 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Woodward 
 HR 
 
 
 Biro 
 F 
 
 
 Defining boundaries of early adolescence: A user's guide to assessing pubertal status and pubertal timing in research with adolescents 
 Applied Developmental Science 
 2006 
 10 
 30 
 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Hardin 
 M 
 
 
 Triadic model of the neurobiology of motivated behavior in adolescence 
 Psychological Medicine 
 2006 
 36 
 299 
 312 
 16472412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Euling 
 SY 
 
 
 Herman-Giddens 
 ME 
 
 
 Lee 
 PA 
 
 
 Selevan 
 SG 
 
 
 Juul 
 A 
 
 
 Sorensen 
 AG 
 
 
 
 Examination of US puberty-timing data from 1940 to 1994 for secular trends: Panel findings 
 Pediatrics 
 2008 
 121 
 Suppl. 3 
 S172 
 S191 
 18245511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fernandez-Miranda 
 JC 
 
 
 Engh 
 JA 
 
 
 Pathak 
 SK 
 
 
 Madhok 
 R 
 
 
 Boada 
 FE 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 
 High-definition fiber tracking guidance for intraparenchymal endoscopic port surgery 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2010 
 113 
 990 
 999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Pubertal development and behavior: hormonal activation of social and motivational tendencies 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2010 
 72 
 66 
 72 
 19942334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galaburda 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 GD 
 
 
 Sherman 
 GF 
 
 
 Individual variability in cortical organization: its relationship to brain laterality and implications to function 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1990 
 28 
 529 
 546 
 2203994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galea 
 LA 
 
 
 Gonadal hormone modulation of neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of adult male and female rodents 
 Brain Research Reviews 
 2008 
 57 
 332 
 341 
 17669502 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Adolescent development of the reward system 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2011 
 4 
 1 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garcia-Segura 
 LM 
 
 
 Melcangi 
 RC 
 
 
 Steroids and glial cell function 
 Glia 
 2006 
 54 
 485 
 498 
 16906540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Blumenthal 
 J 
 
 
 Jeffries 
 NO 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 
 Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI study 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 1999 
 2 
 10 
 861 
 863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Rajapakse 
 JC 
 
 
 Vaituzis 
 AC 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 Sexual dimorphism of the developing human brain 
 Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 
 1997 
 21 
 1185 
 1201 
 9460086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Clasen 
 LS 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 D 
 
 
 Wallace 
 GL 
 
 
 Ordaz 
 S 
 
 
 
 Puberty-related influences on brain development 
 Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 
 2006 
 254–255 
 154 
 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Snell 
 JW 
 
 
 Lange 
 N 
 
 
 Rajapakse 
 JC 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Kozuch 
 PL 
 
 
 
 Quantative magnetic resonance imaging of human brain development: ages 4–18 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1996 
 6 
 551 
 560 
 8670681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giorgio 
 A 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Douaud 
 G 
 
 
 James 
 AC 
 
 
 James 
 S 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 
 Changes in white matter microstructure during adolescence 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 39 
 1 
 52 
 61 
 17919933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grumbach 
 MM 
 
 
 Styne 
 DM 
 
 
 
 
 Larsen 
 PR 
 
 
 Kronenberg 
 HM 
 
 
 Melmed 
 S 
 
 
 Polonsky 
 KS 
 
 
 Puberty: Ontogeny, neuroendocrinology, physiology, and disorders 
 Williams Textbook of Endocrinology 
 2003 
 Tenth Ed 
 New York 
 Elsevier 
 1115 
 1286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hajek 
 T 
 
 
 Carrey 
 N 
 
 
 Alda 
 M 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical abnormalities as risk factors for bipolar disorder 
 Bipolar Disorders 
 2005 
 7 
 5 
 393 
 403 
 16176432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hasan 
 KM 
 
 
 Diffusion tensor eigenvalues or both mean diffusivity and fractional anisotropy are required in quantitative clinical diffusion tensor MR reports: fractional anisotropy alone is not sufficient 
 Radiology 
 2006 
 239 
 611 
 612 
 16641362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highley 
 JR 
 
 
 Esiri 
 MM 
 
 
 McDonald 
 B 
 
 
 Roberts 
 HC 
 
 
 Walker 
 MA 
 
 
 Crow 
 TJ 
 
 
 The size and fiber composition of the anterior commissure with respect to gender and schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 1999 
 45 
 1120 
 1127 
 10331103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highley 
 JR 
 
 
 Walker 
 MA 
 
 
 Esiri 
 MM 
 
 
 Crow 
 TJ 
 
 
 Harrison 
 PJ 
 
 
 Asymmetry of the uncinate fasciculus: a post-mortem study of normal subjects and patients with schizophrenia 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2002 
 12 
 1218 
 1224 
 12379610 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huang 
 H 
 
 
 Fan 
 X 
 
 
 Williamson 
 DE 
 
 
 Rao 
 U 
 
 
 White matter changes in healthy adolescents at familial risk for unipolar depression: a diffusion tensor imaging study 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2011 
 36 
 684 
 691 
 21085111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ikeda 
 Y 
 
 
 Nagai 
 A 
 
 
 Differential expression of the estrogen receptor alpha and beta during postnatal development of the rat cerebellum 
 Brain Research 
 2006 
 1083 
 39 
 49 
 16542644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jernigan 
 TL 
 
 
 Tallal 
 P 
 
 
 Late childhood changes in brain morphology observable with MRI 
 Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 
 1990 
 32 
 379 
 385 
 2354751 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kafantaris 
 V 
 
 
 Kingsley 
 P 
 
 
 Ardekani 
 B 
 
 
 Saito 
 E 
 
 
 Lencz 
 T 
 
 
 Lim 
 K 
 
 
 
 Lower orbital frontal white matter integrity in adolescents with bipolar I disorder 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 2009 
 48 
 1 
 79 
 86 
 19050654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kraemer 
 HC 
 
 
 Yesavage 
 JA 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JL 
 
 
 Kupfer 
 DA 
 
 
 How can we learn about developmental processes from cross-sectional studies, or can we? 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 2000 
 157 
 163 
 171 
 10671382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Brain development in children and adolescents: insights from anatomical magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2006 
 30 
 6 
 718 
 729 
 16887188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Sex differences in the adolescent brain 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2010 
 72 
 46 
 55 
 19913969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Gogtay 
 N 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 DK 
 
 
 Wells 
 EM 
 
 
 Wallace 
 GL 
 
 
 Clasen 
 LS 
 
 
 
 Sexual dimorphism of brain development trajectories during childhood and adolescence 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 1065 
 1073 
 17513132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Padmanabhan 
 A 
 
 
 O'Hearn 
 KM 
 
 
 What has fMRI told us about the development of cognitive control through adolescence? 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2011 
 72 
 101 
 113 
 19765880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marshall 
 WA 
 
 
 Tanner 
 JM 
 
 
 Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls 
 Archives of Disease in Childhood 
 1969 
 44 
 291 
 303 
 5785179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marshall 
 WA 
 
 
 Tanner 
 JM 
 
 
 Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys 
 Archives of Disease in Childhood 
 1970 
 45 
 13 
 23 
 5440182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 Lichter 
 DGC 
 
 
 L 
 J 
 
 
 Depression and Frontal-Subcortical Circuits: Focus on Prefrontal-Limbic Interactions 
 Frontal-Subcortical Circuits in Psychiatric and Neurological Disorders 
 2001 
 New York 
 The Guilford Press 
 177 
 206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McEwen 
 BS 
 
 
 
 
 Greep 
 R 
 
 
 Gonadal steroid influences on brain development and sexual differentiation 
 Reproductive physiology IV 
 1983 
 Baltimore 
 University Park 
 99 
 145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McEwen 
 BS 
 
 
 Alves 
 SE 
 
 
 Estrogen actions in the central nervous system 
 Endocrine Reviews 
 1999 
 20 
 279 
 307 
 10368772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 
 Adolescent immaturity in attention-related brain engagement to emotional facial expressions 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 20 
 420 
 428 
 14527602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 NM 
 
 
 Udry 
 JR 
 
 
 Validation of a self-administered instrument to assess stage of adolescent development 
 Journal of Youth and Adolescence 
 1980 
 9 
 271 
 280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 DGM 
 
 
 DeCarli 
 C 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Daly 
 E 
 
 
 Mentis 
 MJ 
 
 
 Pietrini 
 P 
 
 
 
 Sex differences in human brain morphometry and metabolism: an in vivo quantitative magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography study on the effect of aging 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 1996 
 53 
 585 
 594 
 8660125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niogi 
 SN 
 
 
 Mukherjee 
 P 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Diffusion tensor imaging segmentation of white matter structures using a reproducible objective quantification scheme (ROQS) 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 35 
 166 
 174 
 17208014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nopoulos 
 R 
 
 
 Flaum 
 M 
 
 
 O'Leary 
 D 
 
 
 Andreasen 
 NC 
 
 
 Sexual dimorphism in the human brain: evaluation of tissue volume, tissue composition and surface anatomy using magnetic resonance imaging 
 Psychiatry Research 
 2000 
 98 
 1 
 13 
 10708922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Parent 
 AS 
 
 
 Teilmann 
 G 
 
 
 Juul 
 A 
 
 
 Skakkebaek 
 NE 
 
 
 Toppari 
 J 
 
 
 Bourguignon 
 JP 
 
 
 The timing of normal puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: Variations around the world, secular trends, and changes after migration 
 Endocrine Reviews 
 2003 
 24 
 668 
 693 
 14570750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Parker 
 LN 
 
 
 Adrenarche 
 Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of America 
 1991 
 20 
 71 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development during adolescence 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 2 
 60 
 68 
 15668098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Growth of white matter in the adolescent brain: myelin or axon? 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2010 
 72 
 26 
 35 
 19595493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Keshavan 
 M 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during adolescence 
 Nature Neuroscience Reviews 
 2008 
 9 
 947 
 957 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Otaky 
 N 
 
 
 Caramanos 
 Z 
 
 
 Macdonald 
 D 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 D'Avirrro 
 D 
 
 
 
 In vivo morphometry of the intrasulcal gray matter in the human cingulate, paracingulate, and superior-rostral sulci: hemispheric asymmetries, gender differences and probability maps 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1996 
 376 
 664 
 673 
 8978477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peper 
 JS 
 
 
 Brouwer 
 RM 
 
 
 Schnack 
 HG 
 
 
 van Baal 
 GC 
 
 
 van Leeuwen 
 M 
 
 
 van den Berg 
 SM 
 
 
 
 Sex steroids and brain structure in pubertal boys and girls 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 2009a 
 34 
 332 
 342 
 18980810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peper 
 JS 
 
 
 Brouwer 
 RM 
 
 
 Schnack 
 HG 
 
 
 van Baal 
 GC 
 
 
 van Leeuwen 
 M 
 
 
 Van den Berg 
 SM 
 
 
 
 Cerebral white matter in early puberty is associated with luteinizing hormone concentrations 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 2008 
 33 
 909 
 915 
 18640784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peper 
 JS 
 
 
 Pol 
 HEH 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Van Honk 
 J 
 
 
 Sex steroids and brain structure in pubertal boys and girls: a mini-review of neuroimaging studies 
 Neuroscience 
 2011 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.02.014 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peper 
 JS 
 
 
 Schnack 
 HG 
 
 
 Brouwer 
 RM 
 
 
 van Baal 
 GC 
 
 
 Pjetri 
 E 
 
 
 Szekely 
 E 
 
 
 
 Heritability of regional and global brain structure at the onset of puberty: a magnetic resonance imaging study in 9-year-old twin pairs 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009b 
 30 
 2184 
 2196 
 19294640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perrin 
 JS 
 
 
 Herve 
 PY 
 
 
 Leonard 
 G 
 
 
 Perron 
 M 
 
 
 Pike 
 GB 
 
 
 Pitiot 
 A 
 
 
 
 Growth of white matter in the adolescent brain: role of testosterone and androgen receptor 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 38 
 9519 
 9524 
 18799683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perrin 
 JS 
 
 
 Leonard 
 G 
 
 
 Perron 
 M 
 
 
 Pike 
 GB 
 
 
 Pitiot 
 A 
 
 
 Richer 
 L 
 
 
 
 Sex differences in the growth of white matter during adolescence 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 45 
 1055 
 1066 
 19349224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 AC 
 
 
 Crockett 
 L 
 
 
 Richards 
 M 
 
 
 Boxer 
 A 
 
 
 A self-report of pubertal status: Reliability, validity, and initial norms 
 Journal of Youth and Adolescence 
 1988 
 17 
 117 
 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Mathalon 
 DH 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 Rawles 
 JM 
 
 
 Zipursky 
 RB 
 
 
 Lim 
 KO 
 
 
 A quantitative magnetic resonance imaging study of changes in brain morphology from infancy to late adulthood 
 Archives of Neurology 
 1994 
 51 
 874 
 887 
 8080387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 A neural model of voluntary and automatic emotion regulation:implications for understanding the pathophysiology and neurodevelopment of bipolar disorder 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 2008 
 13 
 833 
 857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prevention 
 CfDCa 
 
 
 Surveillance for violent deaths - National violent death and reporting system, 16 States, 2006 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries 
 2009 
 58 
 SS-1 
 < http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/ss/ss5801.pdf >. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Neurocircuitry of mood disorders 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2010 
 35 
 192 
 216 
 19693001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Beer 
 JS 
 
 
 Prefrontal involvement in the regulation of emotion: convergence of rat and human studies 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2006 
 16 
 723 
 727 
 17084617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 J 
 
 
 van Reekum 
 R 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 H 
 
 
 The role of the cerebellum in cognition and behavior 
 The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 
 2000 
 12 
 193 
 198 
 11001597 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raznahan 
 A 
 
 
 Lee 
 Y 
 
 
 Stidd 
 R 
 
 
 Long 
 R 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 D 
 
 
 Clasen 
 L 
 
 
 
 Longitudinally mapping the influence of sex and androgen signaling on the dynamics of human cortical maturation in adolescence 
 Proceedings of the National Academic of Sciences USA 
 2010 
 107 
 16988 
 16993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiter 
 RO 
 
 
 Rosenfeld 
 RG 
 
 
 
 
 Larsen 
 PR 
 
 
 Kronenberg 
 HM 
 
 
 Melmed 
 S 
 
 
 Polonsky 
 KS 
 
 
 Normal and aberrant growth 
 Williams Textbook of Endocrinology 
 Tenth Ed 
 2003 
 New York 
 Elsevier 
 1003 
 1114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Romeo 
 RD 
 
 
 Puberty: a period of both organizational and activational effects of steroid hormones on neurobehavioral development 
 Journal of Neuroendocrinology 
 2003 
 15 
 1185 
 1192 
 14636181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sarkey 
 S 
 
 
 Azcoitia 
 I 
 
 
 Garcia-Segura 
 LM 
 
 
 Garcia-Ovejero 
 D 
 
 
 DonCarlos 
 LL 
 
 
 Classical androgen receptors in non-classical sites in the brain 
 Hormones and Behavior 
 2008 
 53 
 753 
 764 
 18402960 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Savitz 
 J 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Bipolar and major depressive disorder: Neuroimaging the developmental-degenerative divide 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2009 
 33 
 699 
 771 
 19428491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 Dardzinski 
 BJ 
 
 
 Developmental differences in white matter architecture between boys and girls 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2008 
 29 
 696 
 710 
 17598163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Yuan 
 W 
 
 
 White matter development during adolescence as shown by diffusion MRI 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2010 
 72 
 16 
 25 
 19628324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulz 
 KM 
 
 
 Molenda-Figueira 
 H 
 
 
 Sisk 
 C 
 
 
 Back to the future: the organizational-activational hypothesis adapted to puberty and adolescence 
 Hormones and Behavior 
 2009 
 55 
 597 
 604 
 19446076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulz 
 KM 
 
 
 Sisk 
 CL 
 
 
 Pubertal hormones, the adolescent brain, and the maturation of social behaviors: lessons from the Syrian hamster 
 Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 
 2006 
 245–255 
 120 
 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schutter 
 DJLG 
 
 
 Van Honk 
 EJ 
 
 
 The cerebellum in emotion regulation: a repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Cerebellum 
 2009 
 8 
 28 
 34 
 18855096 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sexton 
 CE 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Ebmeier 
 KP 
 
 
 A systematic review of diffusion tensor imaging studies in affective disorders 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2009 
 66 
 814 
 823 
 19615671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shin 
 YW 
 
 
 Kim 
 DJ 
 
 
 Hyon 
 T 
 
 
 Park 
 HJ 
 
 
 Moon 
 WJ 
 
 
 Chung 
 EC 
 
 
 
 Sex differences in the human corpus callosum: diffusion tensor imaging study 
 Neuroreport 
 2005 
 16 
 795 
 798 
 15891572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shirtcliff 
 EA 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Pollak 
 SD 
 
 
 Pubertal development: Correspondence between hormonal and physical development 
 Child Development 
 2009 
 80 
 327 
 337 
 19466995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silveri 
 MM 
 
 
 Rohan 
 ML 
 
 
 Pimentel 
 PJ 
 
 
 Gruber 
 SA 
 
 
 Rosso 
 IM 
 
 
 Yurgelun-Todd 
 DA 
 
 
 Sex differences in the relationship between white matter microstructure and impulsivity in adolescents 
 Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 2006 
 24 
 833 
 841 
 16916700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simerly 
 RB 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Muramatsu 
 M 
 
 
 Swanson 
 LW 
 
 
 Distribution of androgen and estrogen receptor mRNA-containing cells in the rat brain: an  in situ  hybridation study 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1990 
 294 
 76 
 95 
 2324335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sisk 
 CL 
 
 
 Foster 
 DL 
 
 
 The neural basis of puberty and adolescence 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2004 
 7 
 1040 
 1047 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sowell 
 ER 
 
 
 Petersen 
 BS 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Welcome 
 SE 
 
 
 Henkenius 
 AL 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Mapping cortical change across the human life span 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2003 
 6 
 309 
 315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 The behavioral neuroscience of adolescence 
 2010 
 First Ed. ed 
 New York 
 WW Norton & Company Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Cognitive and affective development in adolescence 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 2 
 69 
 74 
 15668099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Keating 
 D 
 
 
 Kupfer 
 D 
 
 
 Masten 
 A 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 
 
 Cicchetti 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 D 
 
 
 Psychopathology in adolescence: Integrating affective neuroscience with the study of context 
 Developmental Psychopathology Vol 2: Developmental Neuroscience 
 2006 
 New York 
 Wiley 
 710 
 740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoodley 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schmahmann 
 JD 
 
 
 Evidence for topographic organization in the cerebellum of motor control versus cognitive and affective processing 
 Cortex 
 2010 
 46 
 831 
 884 
 20152963 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Styne 
 DM 
 
 
 Grumbach 
 MM 
 
 
 
 
 Pfaff 
 A 
 
 
 Arnold 
 A 
 
 
 Etgen 
 S 
 
 
 Fahrbach 
 S 
 
 
 Rubin 
 R 
 
 
 Puberty in boys and girls 
 Hormones, Brain, and Behavior 
 2002 
 Vol. 4 
 San Francisco 
 Academic Press 
 661 
 716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamnes 
 CK 
 
 
 Østby 
 Y 
 
 
 Fjell 
 AM 
 
 
 Westlye 
 LT 
 
 
 Due-Tønnessen 
 P 
 
 
 Walhovd 
 KB 
 
 
 Brain maturation in adolescence and young adulthood: Regional age-related changes in cortical thickness and white matter volume and microstructure 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 534 
 548 
 19520764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanner 
 JM 
 
 
 Growth at adolescence 
 1962 
 2nd ed 
 Oxford, England 
 Blackwell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tiemeier 
 H 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 DK 
 
 
 Tran 
 L 
 
 
 Pierson 
 R 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Cerebellum development during childhood and adolescence: A longitudinal morphometric MRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 49 
 63 
 70 
 19683586 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Almeida 
 JR 
 
 
 Hassel 
 S 
 
 
 Walsh 
 ND 
 
 
 Novelli 
 M 
 
 
 Klein 
 CR 
 
 
 
 Elevated left and reduced right orbitomedial prefrontal fractional anisotropy in adults with bipolar disorder revealed by tract-based spatial statistics 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 2008 
 65 
 9 
 1041 
 1052 
 18762590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Romero 
 S 
 
 
 Birmaher 
 B 
 
 
 Axelson 
 DA 
 
 
 Kupfer 
 DJ 
 
 
 
 Altered development of white matter in youth at high familial risk for bipolar disorder: A diffusion tensor imaging study 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 2010 
 49 
 1249 
 1259 
 21093774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verstynen 
 T 
 
 
 Jarbo 
 K 
 
 
 Pathak 
 S 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 In vivo mapping of microstructural somatotopies in the human corticospinal pathways 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2011 
 105 
 336 
 346 
 21068263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 F 
 
 
 Kalmar 
 JH 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Jackowski 
 M 
 
 
 Chepenik 
 LG 
 
 
 Edmiston 
 EE 
 
 
 
 Functional and structural connectivity between the perigenual anterior cingulate and amygdala in bipolar disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2009 
 66 
 516 
 521 
 19427632 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Witelson 
 SF 
 
 
 Hand and sex differences in the isthmus and the genu of the human corpus callosum: a postmortem morphological study 
 Brain 
 1989 
 112 
 799 
 835 
 2731030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Witelson 
 SF 
 
 
 Nowakowski 
 RS 
 
 
 Left out axons make men right: a hypothesis for the origin of handedness and functional asymmetry 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1991 
 29 
 327 
 333 
 1857504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yakovlev 
 PI 
 
 
 Lecours 
 A 
 
 
 
 
 Minkowski 
 A 
 
 
 The myelogenetic cycles of regional maturation of the brain 
 Regional development of the brain in early life; a symposium organized by the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (established under the joint auspices of UNESCO & WHO) and by the Délégation à la recherche scientifique et technique 
 1967 
 Oxford 
 Blackwell 
 3 
 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yates 
 MA 
 
 
 Juraska 
 JM 
 
 
 Pubertal ovarian hormone exposure reduces the number of myelinated axons in the splenium of the rat corpus callosum 
 Experimental Neurology 
 2008 
 209 
 284 
 287 
 17963756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Aboitiz 
 F 
 
 
 Clarke 
 J 
 
 
 Sexual dimorphism in interhemispheric relations: anatomical-behavioral convergence 
 Biological Research 
 1995 
 28 
 27 
 43 
 8728818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 X 
 
 
 Wang 
 X 
 
 
 Xiao 
 J 
 
 
 Zhong 
 M 
 
 
 Liao 
 J 
 
 
 Yao 
 S 
 
 
 Altered white matter integrity in first-episode, treatment-naive young adults with major depressive disorder: a tract-based spatial statistics study 
 Brain Research 
 2011 
 19 
 223 
 229 
 21047498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Regions with a significant sex–age interaction on FA (blue = boys > girls, yellow-red = girls > boys) in a cohort of 105 children ages 5–18 years. Slice location (L-R; Talairach coordinate system) given at bottom of each frame. (Reprinted with permission from Human Brain Mapping, 29, Vincent J. Schmithorst,Scott K. Holland,Bernard J. Dardzinski, Developmental differences in white matter architecture between boys and girls, 696–710, Copyright (2008), with permission from John Wiley & Sons.) 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) and changes in white matter density in 9-year-old children. Specifically, the images on the left (i) depicts positive phenotypic associations between LH level and regional white matter density in 104 9-year-old twins. (A) Left cingulum, (B) bilateral middle temporal gyrus, (C) splenium of the corpus callosum. Displayed are z-values. The critical z- value was 3.39 (corrected for multiple comparisons according to the false discovery rate, a = .05). The scatterplot on the right (ii) depicts a phenotypic association between LH level and white matter density in the left anterior cingulum. Depicted are LH levels versus white matter densities in the left anterior cingulum (Talairach x, y and z coordinates −13, 23 and 36). The phenotypic correlation coefficient is 0.44 (95% CI = 0.26—0.58). The LH-values are log-transformed and ranged between −2.25 and −.78, corresponding to LH values ranging between 0.056 and 0.167 U/l (divided by creatinine-level). The actual raw uncorrected LH values range between 0.1 and 1.1 U/l. (Reprinted with permission from Psychoneuroendocrinology, 133 (7), Jiska S. Peper, Rachel M. Brouwer, Hugo G. Schnack, G. Caroline M. van Baal, Marieke van Leeuwen, Stéphanie M. van den Berg, Henriëtte A. Delemarre-Van de Waal, Andrew L. Janke, D. Louis Collins, Alan C. Evans, Dorret I. Boomsma, et al., Cerebral white matter in early puberty is associated with luteinizing hormone concentrations, 909–915, Copyright (2008), with permission from Elsevier.) 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 FA reductions in healthy adolescents at high familial risk for unipolar depression compared to healthy controls. Specifically, the significant clusters obtained from voxel-wise comparisons between control and high-risk groups. Green color indicates white matter skeletons, and red color shows clusters with significant FA reduction in the high-risk group ( p <0.001). Underlying gray scale images are the averaged FA maps, depicting different tracts. The left, middle, and right columns of each panel show the images of axial, coronal, and sagittal views, respectively. White arrows indicate clusters of the specified white matter tracts in the left cerebral hemisphere if multiple clusters are shown in the image. FA, fractional anisotropy; CG-L, left cingulate, SLF-L, left superior longitudinal fasciculus; SCC, splenium of the corpus callosum; UNC-IFO-L, left uncinate-inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus. (Reprinted with permission from Neuropsychopharmacology, Hao Huang, Xin Fan, Douglas E Williamson and Uma Rao, 36, White Matter Changes in Healthy Adolescents at Familial Risk for Unipolar Depression: A Diffusion Tensor Imaging Study, 684–691, Copyright (2011), with permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Peer-reviewed published articles that focus on associations between puberty and white matter development in adolescence. 
 
 
 
 
 Author, Journal 
 Age at scan 
 Sample (female/male) 
 Pubertal Assessment 
 Hormone Measures 
 Type of study (volumetric/DTI) 
 Analysis 
 WM Regions Measured 
 Puberty Effects? Yes/No 
 Sex Differ- ences? Yes/No 
 Main findings 
 
 
 
 
 Peper et al. (2008)  Psychoneuroendocrino logy 
 9 years 
 twins: monozygotic (11 females, 13 males); dizygotic (9 female, 12 male, 8 opposite sex twins) 
 Tanner stages: physical observation using questionnaire ( Marshall & Tanner, 1969 ) 
 luteinizing hormone (LH) from saliva samples 
 volumetric 
 VBM 
 Total cerebral WM 
 Yes 
 No 
 Higher levels of LH associated with overall WM volume and regional WM volume including higher WM density in part of L cingulum, middle tempral gyrus bilaterally, R superior frontal gyrus, splenium of the corpus callosum - both sexes 
 
 
 Peper et al. (2009) Human Brain Mapping - a 
 9 years 
 twins: monozygotic (23 females, 22 males); dizygotic (21 female, 22 male, 19 opposite sex twins) 
 Tanner stages: physical observation using questionnaire ( Marshall & Tanner, 1969 ); created "Tanner status" of 0 or 1 to describe changes in Stages 1 and 2 present in current sample. 
 none 
 volumetric 
 VBM 
 Total cerebral WM 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Exploratory findings:  onset of secondary sexual characteristics of puberty associated with increase in occipital WM density. 
 
 
 Peper et al. (2009) Psychoneuroendocrino logy - b 
 10–14.9 years 
 n = 78, 41 females, 37 males 
 Tanner stages: physical observation using questionnaire ( Marshall & Tanner, 1969 ); created "Tanner status" of 0 or 1 to describe changes in Stages 1 and 2 present in current sample. 
 testosterone from saliva samples and estradiol from urinary samples 
 volumetric 
 VBM 
 Total cerebral WM 
 No 
 Yes 
 No associations between hormonal measures and WM - both sexes.  Note girls were older than boys and more advanced in their stages of pubertal maturation . 
 
 
 Perrin et al. (2009)  NeuroImage 
 12–18 years 
 n=408; 204 females, 204 males 
 Self-report using the Puberty Development Scale (PDS) (only stages 3, 4, 5 were included in analyses due to few subjects in stages 1 and 2) 
 none 
 volumetric 
 volume and magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) 
 Total cerebral WM 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 a) pubertal maturation associated with greater WM volume in frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes in boys only; b) pubertal maturation negatively predicted WM MTR in parietal and occipital lobes in boys only; c) voxel-wise analyses suggested a pubertal stage-related decrease in WM density in putative cortico-spinal tract in boys only.  Note girls more advanced in pubertal maturation than boys in this sample . 
 
 
 Perrin et al. (2008)  Journal of Neuroscience 
 12–18 years 
 n=408; 204 females, 204 males 
 Self-report using the Puberty Development Scale (PDS) 
 testosterone from blood samples 
 volumetric 
 volume and magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) 
 Total cerebral WM 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 a) sharper increase in WM volume in boys than girls; b) association between testosterone and increase in WM volume greater in boys with shorter androgene receptor (AR) gene, suggesting a moderating effect of AR genotype on the relationship between testosterone and WM volume. 
 
 
 Asato et al. (2010)  Cerebral Cortex 
 8–28 years 
 n=114; 63 females, 51 males 
 Tanner Maturational Scale self-report questionnaire (drawings); groups: pre/early pubertal group (score 1, 2), midpubertal (score 3, 4), postpubertal (score 5) 
 none 
 DTI: FA, RD 
 Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS): FA, RD 
 Whole-brain and ROI 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 [Voxel-wise ROI analyses yielded 19 separate RD clusters that showed significant association with age. For each of these 19 RD clusters, separate group comparisons were performed based on age group, puberty group and sex.] Puberty main effect: only the occipital portion of the left inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus/inferior longitudinal fasciculus (IFOF/ILF) showed maturity during the midpubertal. The other clusters (SLF, UF, CST, IC, CR, ATR, and CC) continued to show immaturity. Sex by age group interaction(left IC and right ATR): a) collapsing across groups, females showed an earlier maturation than males, b) for females, all clusters showed maturity by adolescence except for the one cluster in right frontal SLF that matured later, c) for males, all clusters showed ongoing maturation into young adulthood, except for right IFOF/ILF and parietal SLF that showed no differences across age groups.  Note: The methodological design did not allow to parse out effects specific to age vs. puberty . 
 
 
 
 
 Sex Differences 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd et al. (1999) 
 
 4–22 years 
 n=145; 56 females, 89 males; longitudinal study, n=233 scans 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 volumetric 
 combination of analytical techniques including classification of tissues based on voxel intensity and non-linear registration of template brain for which the tissues were manually defined. 
 Total cerebral WM 
 N/A 
 Yes 
 a) WM volume increased linearly with age; b) the WM volume linear increase with age was greater in males than females. 
 
 
 Lenroot et al. (2007)  NeuroImage 
 13.5–21 years 
 n=367; 158 females, 209 males; longitudinal study, n=829 scans 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 volumetric 
 automated technique developed at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) 
 Total cerebral WM 
 N/A 
 Yes 
 a) total WM volume increased with age in both males and females; b) after covarying for total brain volume, the shape, but not the height, of the WM trajectory in frontal lobe was different between males and females; the height, but not the shape of the WM trajectory was different between males and females, suggesting that males continued to have larger WM volumes in childhood and adolescence; c) WM trajectories for temporal lobes, parietal lobes, and caudate were not different between males and females; d) the mid-sagittal area of the corpus callosum was larger in females than in males. 
 
 
 Tiemeier et al. (2010)  NeuroImage 
 5–24 years 
 n=50; 25 females, 25 males; longitudinal study, n=183 scans 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 volumetric 
 parcellation of cerebellum 
 Total and regional cerebellar volumes; longitudinal assessment 
 N/A 
 Yes 
 Overall cerebellar volume larger in males than females, after correction of total brain volume. Sex difference in cerebellar volume decreased with age approaching proportionate differences associated with brain volume in adulthood. Later peak cerebellar volume in males than females. 
 
 
 DeBellis et al. (2001)  Cerebral Cortex 
 6–17 years 
 n=118; 57 females, 61 males 
 Tanner staging; method to determine Tanner staging unknown 
 N/A 
 volumetric 
 VBM 
 Total cerebral WM 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Sex by age interaction:  Males had a 45.1% increase in total WM volume and 58.5% increase in corpus callosum area. Females had 17.1 and 27.4% increases, respectively. Sex by Tanner stage interaction was also significant for WM volume and corpus callosum area.  Main effect of sex:  no significant sex differences in WM volumes and corpus callosum areas, after controlling for cerebral volumes (males>females). 
 
 
 Giorgio et al. (2008)  NeuroImage 
 13.5–42 years; adolescents (13.5–21 years); adults (23–42 years) 
 n=62; 42 adolescents (20 females) and 20 adults (9 females) 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 DTI: FA 
 Tract-Based Spatial Statistics; voxelwise and tractography 
 whole-brain 
 N/A 
 No 
 N/A 
 
 
 Schmithorst et al. (2008)  Human Brain Mapping 
 5–18 years 
 n=106; 54 females, 52 males 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 DTI 
 SPM5 whole-brain and ROI: FA and MD 
 Total cerebral WM 
 N/A 
 Yes 
 FA : Sex by age interaction : a) females had a positive correlation with age and males had a negative correlation with in right arcuate fasciculus, b) females had significant positive correlation with age, but not males, in right frontal and right occipito-temporo-parietal WM.  Main effect of sex : a) greater FA in females than males in splenium of the corpus callosum, b) greater FA in males than females in frontal WM areas bilaterally, right arcuate fasciculus, left parietal and occipito-parietal WM.  MD: Sex by age interaction  : a) females had a negative correlation with age in frontal lobes bilaterally, in right arcuate fasciculus, and occipito-parietal areas, b) males had a significant negative correlation in right hemispheres, and no correlation in frontal lobe.  Main effect of sex  : a) greater MD in males than females in corticospinal tracts bilaterally and right frontal lobe, b) greater MD in females than males in right arcuate fasciculus, right occipito-parietal WM, most superior aspect of the corticospinal tract in right hemisphere. 
 
 
 Bonekamp et al. (2007)  Neuroimage 
 mean age = 13.7±3.5 years (age range 5.5– 19.1 years) 
 n=40; 18 females 
 N/A 
 none 
 DTI: ADC, FA 
 
 ROIs: temporal, frontal, anterior limb of the internal capsule, posterior limb of the internal capsule, genu, splenium, body of the corpus callosum, anterior white matter, temporo-occipital, superior longitudinal fasciculus, superior corona radiata, superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, cingulum, centrum semiovale 
 
 
 Higher ADC in temporal white matter in males (3.8%) than females and higher ADC in the cingulum in females (1%) than males; no significant sex by age interactions. 
 
 
 Silveri et al. (2006) . Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 mean age = 12.3±2.9 
 n=21; 12 females, 9 males 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 DTI: FA 
 In-house Interactive Data Language- based functional MRI [fMRI Analysis Tool]: FA and trace 
 ROIs: genu and splenium of the corpus callosum, left and right anterior regions of the forward- projecting arms of the WM adjacent to the anterior cingulate cortex 
 N/A 
 Yes 
 FA: Sex by region interaction : a) greater FA in males than females in left anterior region of the genu of the corpus callosum, b) greater FA in right anterior region and splenium in females than in males,  Trace: Sex by region interaction : not significant. No significant sex by age interaction. 
 
 
 Tamnes et al. (2010)  Cerebral Cortex 
 8–30 years 
 n=168; 87 females, 81 males 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 volumetric; DTI: FA, MD, RD, DA 
 automated cortical parcellation, regional WM volume; DTI : Freesurfer 
 Total cerebral WM 
 N/A 
 No 
 Only found sex differences in total WM volume and therefore regressed out effects of sex on all analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes:  DTI: diffusion tensor imaging, WM: white matter; VBM: voxel-based morphometry; L; left; R: right; FA: fractional anisotropy; MD: mean diffusivity; RD: radial diffusivity; ROI: region-of-interest; ADC: apparent diffusion coeffecients; SLF: superior longitudinal fasciculus; UF: uncinate fasciculus; CST: corticospinal tract; IC: internal capsule; CR: corona radiata; ATR: anterior thalamic radiation; CC:corpus callosum. 
 
 
 
 
