
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 22285904 
 3309153 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.01.017 
 NIHMS351817 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Broca’s area and Sentence Comprehension: A Relationship Parasitic on Dependency, Displacement or Predictability? 
 
 
 
 
 Santi 
 Andrea 
 
 1 
 2 
 * 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Yosef 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Department of Linguistics, McGill University 
 2 Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences 
 
 * To whom correspondence should be addressed: Andrea Santi, Dept. of Linguistics, McGill University, 1085 Dr. Penfield, Montréal, PQ H3A 1A7, Canada, Phone: (514) 398-8912, Fax: (514) 398-7088,  andrea.santi@mail.mcgill.ca 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2012 
 
 
 21 
 1 
 2012 
 
 
 4 
 2012 
 
 
 1 
 4 
 2013 
 
 50 
 5 
 821 
 832 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The current rapid event-related fMRI study used  optional parasitic gap  constructions, such as [Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] after reviewing [ p-gap --/it]?, to test 3 potential roles for Broca’s area in sentence processing. These 3 functional options are: I. any intra-sentential  Dependency  relation activates Broca’s area. II. this region specifically processes syntactic  Displacement  or movement. III. Broca’s area handles any dependency relation, as long as it is  predictable  at an early stage of processing. Broca’s area was only activated by the contrast that tested  predictability  within BA 45, as determined by its overlap with cytoarchitectonic probability maps. These results imply that an alternative or modified functional account of Broca’s area, from those presently available, is required. Constraints on either a displacement account to movements that are not parasitic or a Working Memory one to  predicted  dependencies that cross verbal arguments or noun phrases would achieve the necessary consistency. Further, the results from the minimal contrasts investigating  displacement  and  dependency  have implications to potential language regions outside of Broca’s area. The minimal contrast investigating  displacement  activated the left anterior Middle Temporal Gyrus, which has more recently been claimed to play a role in syntactic operations. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 Syntax 
 Parasitic Gap 
 Working Memory 
 Predictability 
 
 
 
 
 1 Introduction 
 This paper addresses several central issues regarding the human sentence processing mechanisms, and their neural underpinnings. It explores the nature of mechanisms that compute filler-gap dependencies in connection with Broca’s area and potentially other language regions. It does so by an fMRI investigation of parasitic-gap constructions. We report an attempt to distinguish between 3 possible roles of this brain region in sentence processing: I. a Working Memory (WM) approach, which contends that any intra-sentential  Dependency  relation activates Broca’s area. II. a syntax specific approach, according to which this region is involved in the processing of syntactic  Displacement  or movement. III. a  Predictability  approach, which holds that Broca’s area handles any dependency relation, as long as it is syntactically (not statistically) predictable at an early stage of processing. The study therefore touches on critical questions in psycho- and neuro-linguistics. 
 
 1.1 Background 
 Neurolinguistic accounts of sentence comprehension have long been a source of debate. The current picture identifies Broca’s area as critical for the comprehension of sentences in which an argument is displaced, or moved (1), as Broca’s aphasic patients with focal lesions in and around Broca’s area (i.e., Brodmann’s Areas 44, 45, insula, and surrounding white matter) perform at chance levels on comprehension tests of these, but not on sentences that do not contain displaced constituents (2) (e.g., Ansell & Flowers, 1982;  Caplan & Futter, 1986 ; Caramazza & Zurif, 1976; Drai & Grodzinsky, 2006a;  Grodzinsky, 1989 ; Hickok & Avrutin, 1995; Shapiro & Levine, 1990; Sherman & Schweickert, 1989):
 
1. a. [ filler Which teacher] did the student push [ gap --]?                 Chance 
   b. [ filler  The teacher] was pushed [ gap --] by the student              Chance 
   c. [ filler  The teacher] that the student pushed [ gap --] was strong     Chance 
2. a. Which student pushed the teacher?                                 Above chance 1 
   b. The student pushed the teacher                                    Above chance 
   c. The teacher who pushed the student was strong                     Above chance 
 
 
 Note that we focus on A’-dependencies 2 . In psycholinguistic terms, these are filler-gap dependencies in which the filler is identified as such early on. We steer clear from more complicated cases, as they appear to have little direct bearing on the question that concerns is. 
 Related real-time studies of filler-gap relations in aphasia, mostly carried out through Cross Modal Lexical Priming (e.g.,  Shapiro, Gordon, & Killackey, 1993 ; Swinney & Zurif, 1995; Zurif, Swinney, Prather, Solomon, & Bushell, 1993) have likewise documented highly selective deficits that pertain to displacement. 
 While the distinction between (1) and (2) is expressible in syntactic terms, it can also be viewed as a deficit to processing mechanisms of various sorts. Indeed, accounts of the receptive deficit in Broca’s aphasia range from those postulating a specific movement-related deficit, such as the Trace-Deletion Hypothesis (TDH) and related views (e.g.,  Friedmann, 2008 ;  Friedmann & Shapiro, 2003 ;  Grillo, 2009 ;  Grodzinsky, 1984 ,  2000 ;  Mauner, Fromkin, & Cornell, 1993 ), to accounts based on the ease of processing canonically sequenced sentences, and the difficulty of processing deviations from such sequences (e.g.,  Caplan & Futter, 1986 ;  Hagiwara, 1993 ), to WM accounts (e.g.,  Caplan & Waters, 1999 ), and timing-based accounts, according to which the selective sentence-reception deficit in Broca’s aphasia stems from overall slowed processing (e.g.,  Avrutin, 2006 ;  Zurif, 2003 ). Importantly, it has been shown that despite considerable individual variability, structural generalizations can be maintained when appropriate statistical methods are used (cf. Drai & Grodzinsky, 2006a, b,  passim ). In addition, finer distinctions may lead to revisions of these generalization (see Discussion page 33). 
 While accounts of the processing deficit have been relatively precise, anatomical precision has been lacking. Focal brain lesions (mostly subsequent to stroke in this case), being accidents of nature, do not always align with anatomical borders. The advent of neuroimaging techniques has shed new light on this matter, as it provides new angles on the relevant processes, as well as greater anatomical precision. In many of the fMRI studies of sentence processing (especially the more recent ones, e.g.,  Santi & Grodzinsky 2007a , b ,  2010 ,  Makuuchi et al., 2009 , as well as the present one), Broca’s area and its parts are localized through the cytoarchitectonic probability maps that have come out of the Jülich brain mapping project (cf.  Amunts et a., 1999 ,  passim ), which allows localization in Brodmann areas (and some of their newly discovered subparts, cf. Amunts et al., 2009) while taking individual variation into account. This method is widely recognized as the best anatomical localization tool in existence (cf.  Eickhoff et al., 2007 ). 
 fMRI studies currently show that healthy participants indeed demonstrate greater activation within Broca’s area for sentences with displacement than sentences without ( Ben-Shachar, Hendler, Kahn, Ben-Bashat, & Grodzinsky, 2003 ;  Ben-Shachar, Palti, & Grodzinsky, 2004 ; Caplan et al., 2002;  Friederici, Fiebach, Schlesewsky, Bornkessel, & Von Cramon, 2006 ;  Grodzinsky, 2000 ;  Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, & Thulborn, 1996 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007a , b ,  2010 ;  Stromswold, Caplan, Alpert, & Rauch, 1996 ). For example, experiments in German have demonstrated that activation in Broca’s area (identified through visual inspection of the MR images in this case) is incrementally intensified as the number of displacements in a sentence is increased ( Friederici, Fiebach, Schlesewsky, Bornkessel, & Von Cramon, 2006 ):
 
3. a. Heute hat der Opa dem Jungen  den Lutscher geschenkt
      Today has the grandpa the boy  the candy   given
   b. Heute hat [ filler1  dem Jungen] der Opa [ gap1 --] den Lutscher geschenkt
   c. Heute  hat  [ filler1  dem Jungen] [ filler2  den Lutscher] der Opa [ gap1 --] [ gap2 --] geschenkt
 
 
 Sentences without displacement (3a) induced a weaker signal in Broca’s area than (3b) which contains 1 displacement, and which in turn was lower in intensity than (3c) which contains 2 displacements, indicating that degree of displacement is related to signal intensity in Broca’s area. Thus the results that pertain to displacement are relatively stable across experiments, laboratories, and languages, and still, the particular process(es) that Broca’s area supports remain a matter of debate. Similar to the aphasia literature, views of the role of this area in the neuroimaging literature range from specific syntactic displacement operations (in line with the TDH), to WM, and Syntactic Complexity ( Caplan & Waters, 1999 ;  Friederici et al., 2006 ;  Grodzinsky, 1984 ,  2000 ;  Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, & Thulborn, 1996 ;  Stromswold, Caplan, Alpert, & Rauch, 1996 ). 
 Broca’s area seems to play a crucial role in the processing of intra-sentential dependency relations: when this brain regions is lesioned, chance comprehension of these relations is documented in aphasia (1); in health, such relations activate it, relative to control conditions (3b–c). Below, we focus on different properties of intrasentential dependencies. In particular, the contrasts in (1)–(3) may not be easily distinguishable along 3 dimensions, which we detail from general to more specific:
 Dependency : The presence or absence of 2 or more non-locally linked positions (positions in a sentence that contain information (e.g., phonological, thematic) about the  same  argument), whose parsing requires WM Displacement : The presence or absence of a filler-gap dependency Predictability : The ability of the parser to identify a dependency relation at an early stage of processing based on syntactic factors. In the movement relations in (1), the critical identifier is a constituent in an A’ position. 
 
 Dependency  regards any intra-sentential nonlocal (ie, non adjacent) linking (e.g., between a gap and its filler, or an anaphor and its antecedent),  Displacement  relates to leftward syntactic movement, and by  Predictability  we mean a  Dependency  in which the antecedent can be identified as such long before the dependent element is encountered. All  Displacements  are  Dependencies  ( Table 1i, ii ); some, but not all  Displacements  are  Predictable  ( Table 1i ); finally, some ( Table 1iii ), but not all ( Table 1iv )  Dependencies  that are not  Displacements  are  Predictable . In this study, we attempt to distinguish between these, using sentence types that have never been tested in fMRI. These terms are not novel, as one –  displacement  - has featured extensively in linguistic and neurolinguistic theories and the other two –  predictable, dependency  – have featured extensively in psycholinguistic theories of syntactic complexity. The use of these terms in psycholinguistic theories of syntactic complexity is described below. 
 Notice that we focus on A’ dependencies. The reason we do so is that we want to contrast displacement, predictability and dependency. These three factors can only be minimally contrasted in A’ dependencies. Whether or not the conclusions extend to other types of dependencies remains to be resolved by future work. 
 
 
 1.2 Predictability in Psycholinguistic Theories 
 Unlike in the field of psycholinguistics ( Gibson, 1998 ;  Hale, 2001 ;  Levy, 2008 ), “predictability” has not played a major role in neurolinguistic investigations. Of particular interest, here, are those psycholinguistic theories that have related the difficulty of object over subject extraction (in relative clauses) to predictability. These theories are of two types: “Surprisal” and “Memory Resource”. “Surprisal” type theories assume object-extracted relatives are more difficult because they are less common (predictable). The parser, thus, expects the extraction to be from subject position and upon encountering an overt subject needs to make a revision. “Memory Resource” theories, such as the Syntactic Prediction Locality Theory (SPLT; ( Gibson, 1998 )) attribute the greater difficulty to holding the extracted constituent in a store until its predicted extraction site is located (ie, storage cost). More generally, the prediction of “surprisal” type theories is the less predictable the dependency (displacement) the greater the difficulty, whereas for the SPLT the longer the prediction is maintained (where length is measured in discourse referents) the greater is the difficulty. Although we will not be able to directly test these two theories, the version of predictability we describe above is in line with the SPLT, as previous fMRI studies have shown an effect of distance over the predicted dependency in Broca’s area ( Makuuchi, Bahlmann, Anwander, & Friederici, 2009 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ). 
 
 
 1.3 Dependency and Psycholinguistic Theories 
 Additionally Memory Resource theories such as the SPLT predict difficulty effects for dependencies irrespective of predictability. According to the SPLT an additional source of complexity for object extraction over subject extraction in relative clauses emerges from the greater integration cost postverbally where the head of the relative needs to be integrated at its gap. Integration is higher here than at the subject gap, as there are multiple discourse referents along the path of the dependency. Given work by  Gordon et al. (2001)  the number of intervening discourse referents may not be sufficient to account for the difficulty effects. Rather the similarity, in terms of NP type (referential, pronoun, or proper name), between the extracted NP (the object) and the NP intervening (the subject) the dependency needs to be taken into consideration. Thus, according to these Memory Resource theories, a dependency (without predictability) is sufficient to generate difficulty effects as long as there are similar nouns/discourse referents positioned within the dependency. 
 
 
 1.4 Displacement and Psycholinguistic Theories 
 Psycholinguistic theories of complexity diverge from the neurolinguistic ones in that none of the latter allocates a special role to displacement. The psycholinguistic complexity dimensions do not distinguish displacement dependencies from other predictable dependencies, such as subject-verb agreement dependencies. 
 
 
 1.5 Psycholinguistic Theories and Brain Location 
 While none of these theories predict brain location, it is of interest to understand which, if any, of these psycholinguistic complexity dimensions Broca’s area operates on. 
 In previous work, we tried to tease apart  Displacement  and  Dependency  neurologically, as others have argued that as a filler (i.e., a leftward-displaced argument) is separated from its gap (i.e., a thematic position) over a distance, the establishment of the dependency requires WM, which activates Broca’s area in fMRI ( Cooke et al., 2001 ;  Fiebach, Schlesewsky, Lohmann, von Cramon, & Friederici, 2005 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ;  Smith & Jonides, 1999 ). The more distant the dependent elements, the more WM resources their linking should recruit. 
 Broca’s aphasic patients, who are deficient in analyzing  Displacement  in receptive language, nonetheless retain considerable ability in handling a  Dependency  that crosses a discourse referent, such as reflexive binding ( Grodzinsky, Wexler, Chien, Marakovitz, & Solomon, 1993 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007a ). 
 Against this background, we designed a parametric experiment that measured Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) response in healthy people in fMRI, while contrasting a filler-gap relation with an antecedent-reflexive relation. We parameterized the distance between a displaced element and its gap (4), and compared the resulting growth in signal intensity in various brain regions to the effects of parameterized distance between a reflexive and its antecedent (5). In both cases distance was parameterized by number of intervening NPs (consistent with both ( Gibson, 1998 ;  Gordon et al., 2001 ). When we measured the BOLD response, Brodmann Area 45 responded as follows: there was a linear relation between the degree of activation in it, and the number of NPs that intervened between a gap and its filler; conversely, there was no such result for reflexive-antecedent relations. No other brain area showed this pattern ( Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ):
 
4. a. The mailman and the mother of Jim love the woman [ filler  who]  Kate  burnt [ gap --]
   b. The mother of Jim loves the woman [ filler  who]  the mailman  and  Kate  burnt [ gap --]
   c. Kate loves the woman [ filler  who]  the mailman  and  the mother  of  Jim  burnt [ gap --]
5. a. The sister of Kim assumes that Anne loves the mailman i  who burnt himself i 
   b. The sister of Kim assumes that the mailman i  who loves  Anne  burnt himself i 
   c. Anne assumes that the mailman i  who loves  the sister  of  Kim  burnt himself i 
 
 
 While Broca’s area appears to have demonstrated selectivity for  Displacement , Not that this response patterns characterized a single cluster throughout the brain. Note also that localization was done not by visual inspection, but quantitatively: this cluster was co-registered with  Amunts et al.’s (1999)  probability map of Broca’s area, and its determination as belonging in Brodmann’s Area 45 is as precise as current technology enables. 
 Note also that the sentence types that modulated a linear effect in it are also related to  Predictability : in all of them, leftward deviation from canonicity is observed, as the displaced constituent not only resides outside the clause to which it belongs (in an A’-position), but also precedes it. Arguably, a leftward displaced constituent, identified as such early on in the string, might affect the analytic process: the parser, upon reaching the constituent following the relative pronoun  who , recognizes that the constituent  the woman  in (4) cannot be the subject of the clause that immediately follows.  The woman  must therefore be a displaced filler. This makes the existence of a gap predictable.  Displacement  and  Predictability  go hand in hand in these cases. 
 Moreover, this coupling is not true for reflexives (6a): they satisfy  Dependency , but as they are always A-bound, they satisfy neither  Displacement  nor  Predictability . Indeed, a free lexical NP can replace the reflexive (6b), making this dependency unpredictable at the antecedent:
 
6. a. The waitress pinched herself
   b. The waitress pinched Mary
 
 
 Finally, we note that in the past, there have been 2 experiments with Hebrew speaking Broca’s aphasics that compared the comprehension of Hebrew relative clauses with predictable gaps to comprehension of relative clauses with resumptive pronouns. These are relatively rare, A’-bound pronouns, and they are relevant here because as pronouns, they represent a  Dependency ; being A’-bound they are  Predictable ; and most analyses do not view them as maintaining a  Displacement  relation with their antecedent ( Chomsky, 1977 ;  Doron, 1982 ;  Sharvit, 1999 ;  Shlonsky, 1992 ):
 
7. a. ra’iti ‘et ha-’ish i  she-ha-‘isha daxafa ‘ oto i 
     saw-I ACC the-man i  that-the woman pushed  him i 
      I saw the man i  whom the woman pushed  him i 

   b. ra’iti ‘et ha-’ish i  she- she-ha-‘isha daxafa [ GAP --] i 
       saw-I ACC the-man i  that-the woman pushed [ GAP --] i 
       I saw the man i  whom the woman pushed [ GAP --] i 
 
 
 While (7a–b) contrast in  Displacement  (as only the latter is displaced), they are on a par with respect to  Predictability , as both pronoun and gap are A’-bound, and so the existence of a  Dependency  can be identified early on. The patients failed with both gaps and their resumptive pronoun counterparts, when all else was kept constant ( Friedmann, 2008 ;  Grodzinsky, 1984 ). They were above chance, though, on relevant controls. This provides preliminary evidence that displacement alone cannot account for the results. 
 Given the complexity of the picture, we sought a contrast between  Displacement ,  Dependency , and  Predictability  to further understand the role of Broca’s area in sentence comprehension. For that, we used a novel design. The predictions made by the two neurolinguistic theories being tested in the current study are presented in  Table 2 . 
 
 
 1.6 The present experiment 
 To tease apart the 3 factors in relation to Broca’s area we had three main contrasts. First we will provide a brief summary of the contrasts and analyses and then we will provide some detail about the structural facts of the sentences and contrasts used. We tested  Displacement  by comparing the fMRI signal for (+ Dependent , + Displaced, −Predictable ) parasitic gaps in PP adjuncts ( Table 3a ), with A’-bound pronouns ( Table 3b ) that freely vary in the same syntactic environment (+ Dependent ,  −Displaced, −Predictable ). Next, we tested  Dependency  by keeping  Predictability  and  Displacement  constant by contrasting the parasitic gap and optional A’-bound pronoun ( Table 3a, b ) to a PP adjunct without any dependency ( Table 3c, d ); and finally, we tested  Predictability  through contrasting a wh-object question ( Table 3c ) with a wh-subject question ( Table 3d ). 
 We fortified our results by complementing the minimal contrasts with a robust, conservative analytic technique called Conjunction Analysis, to which our experimental setup lends itself. Next, we discuss the sentence types we used, and their properties before discussing the contrasts and the conjunctions they entered into. 
 We start with the central sentence type – one having an unpredictable displacement, namely (+ Dependent , + Displaced, −Predictable ). Sentences with a parasitic gap in a PP adjunct satisfy this requirement (8):
 
8.    [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] after reviewing [ p-gap --]?
 
 
 The first gap in (8) is a regular, object-gap. The second gap, however, is special, and is known as a “parasitic gap” because its grammatical existence depends on the first ( Engdahl, 1983 ;  Nissenbaum, 2000 ;  Ross, 1967 ;  Taraldsen, 1981 ). If the first “matrix” gap is filled, the sentence becomes ungrammatical (9); yet the matrix gap is not dependent on the parasitic one (10). In the class of structures we discuss here, the parasitic gap always follows the “real” gap. The requirement that each filler must be associated with a gap is thus satisfied at the “real” gap, and the parasitic one, that appears in an untensed adverbial adjunct PP, is optional, as this adjunct may be gapless and contain an overt object (10a), an intransitive verb (10b), or it can be dropped altogether (10c):
 
9.     *[ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit the exam [PP after reviewing [ p-gap --] ]?
10.    a. [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] [PP after reviewing the literature]?
       b. [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] [PP after jogging]?
       c. [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --]? 3 
 
 
 Importantly, the parasitic gap in (8) is on a par with the regular gap found with syntactic movement in relative clauses ( Nissenbaum, 2000 ) 4 . This structure thus satisfies the  Displacement  property, but not  Predictability  because the syntax does not require it (ie, it provides multiple options). Psycholinguistic studies confirm that the parser does not go looking for a gap in post-verbal adjuncts that host optional parasitic gaps, as it does earlier for the real gap ( Wagers & Phillips, 2009 ). This has been shown through demonstrating durational differences in reading times following a real gap between plausible and implausible fillers, but no such difference at the point of an optional parasitic gap within the adjunct. The converse finding that the parser does go looking for a gap in optional  subject  parasitic gap environments ( Phillips, 2006 ) is also fully compatible with our construal of Predictability. At a subject parasitic gap the need to find a gap for the filler is not yet satisfied by a real gap ( Wagers & Phillips, 2009 ). Thus, the parser is looking to satisfy the predictability of a gap. This finding of course further enriches our understanding of the parser in island environments and incremental structure building, but critically does not contradict our definition of Predictability with respect to optional object parasitic gaps. 
 This structural configuration, moreover, lends itself to another desirable contrast: the parasitic gap in (8) is not only A’-bound and unpredictable, but also  optional  in another respect: it freely varies with a (relatively rare) A’-bound, unstressed pronoun (11), to produce a sentence with (almost) the same meaning 5  ( Engdahl, 1983 ):
 
11.    a. [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] after reviewing it?
 
 
 In (11), the pronoun inside the PP adjunct stands in an  Unpredictable Dependency  relation with its A’-antecedent, and it is not  Displaced . In this respect, this pronoun is reminiscent of the Hebrew resumptive pronoun with the exception of predictability (since its A’ antecedent is satisfied at the real gap), as it is an (+ Dependent ,  −Displaced, −Predictable ), A’-bound pronoun. Thus the contrast between (11) and (8) provides a (unpredictable) Displacement contrast where dependency and predictable displacements are controlled. 
 The sentences in (8), (10)–(11) lend themselves to a test of  Dependency . This is done through a comparison between the (+ Dependent  with respect to the adjunct) parasitic gap (8) and pronoun (11) and the similar structure (10b) that is ( −Dependent ) with respect to the adjunct. 
 Finally, we included a control contrast, so that the neural substrates of the two contrasts just discussed can be compared on the same data set to the object-movement vs. no movement effect in Broca’s area. This contrast has previously modulated Broca’s area in both health and disease ( Ben-Shachar et al., 2003 ;  Ben-Shachar, Palti, & Grodzinsky, 2004 ;  Bornkessel, Zysset, Friederici, Von Cramon, & Schlesewsky, 2005 ;  Caplan, Alpert, & Waters, 1999 ;  Caplan, Alpert, Waters, & Olivieri, 2000 ;  Friedmann, 2008 ;  Friedmann & Gvion, 2003 ;  Grewe et al., 2005 ;  Grodzinsky, 1989 ,  2000 ;  Just et al., 1996 ;  Stromswold et al., 1996 ). Its presence would help to create a baseline against which our new exploration can be studied. To obtain a minimal contrast for it, we used subject and object wh-questions, with an adjunct, but with no dependency in the latter. We expected the contrast in (12)–(13) to activate Broca’s area, in line with past results:
 
12.    [ filler  Which paper] did the tired student submit [ gap --] after jogging?
13.    Which tired student submitted a paper after jogging
 
 
 Further, this is the only contrast that compares a sentence with  +Predictability  to  -Predictability . Thus, it allows for the ability to test the effect of  Predictability . Although the contrast also tests  Displacement  and  Dependency , their effects are tested in the previous two contrasts. 
 In sum, we tried to further understand the role of Broca’s area in filler gap dependency comprehension, through an fMRI study of all 3 dimensions -  Displacement ,  Dependency , and  Predictability . Examples of the 4 sentence types are presented in  Table 3 . 
 
 
 1.7 The analytic idea – Contrasts and Conjunctions 
 We studied parasitic gaps in fMRI for the first time. Yet, what makes this study special is not just the technology and the constructions we studied, but also, the basic approach. That is, in addition to standard comparisons between conditions, we used an analytic technique called Conjunction analysis in order to quantify brain responses to  psycholinguistic generalizations , which complement the minimal contrasts by providing a more conservative analysis that tests their robustness. 
 Our analysis proceeded in 2 stages: first, we set up minimal pairs of conditions that formed statistical contrasts. The result was an array of voxel clusters, marking contiguous chunks of brain voxels for which the difference in signal intensity between members of a minimal pair was statistically significant. Second, we took these clusters – the results of the contrasts between our minimal pairs – and arranged them according to each of our 3 dimensions –  Displacement ,  Dependency  and  Predictability.  As  Table 4  shows, each dimension clusters different contrasts. The  Displacement  conjunction identifies regions sensitive to an unpredictable displacement. Given the unpredictable displacement (PAR) depends on a predictable displacement, the contrast factors out the effect of a predictable displacement by subtracting (PRO, WhO, or WhS) across 3 contrasts. The Dependency conjunction identifies effects of a dependency in the adjunct (PAR, PRO) by subtracting out the effect of each of these the dependency in the main clause (WhO, WhS) across two contrasts. The Predictability contrast takes cases of a predictable displacement (WhO, PAR, PRO) and subtracts from each of them the case of no displacement (WhS). A corresponding conjunction would quantify this psycholinguistic generalization by marking those brain voxels for which a significant difference was found for all the contrasts being conjoined. A conjunction, then, essentially identifies the cross-contrast intersection. We carried out conjunction analyses for all 3 dimensions. Next, we provide the details of our contrasts and analyses. 
 
 
 1.8 Main Contrasts 
 The minimal  Displacement  contrast [PAR–PRO] between (8 and 11), is between an A’-bound gap with a (relatively rare) A’-bound pronoun, where all else (meaning, number of dependencies, distance/storage requirements and other variables) is equal. A [PRO–WHO] comparison, between a sentence with an unpredictable pronominal dependency in its PP adjunct, and another that has no dependency in its PP adjunct (10b) along with the parasitic gaps, provides a test of  Dependency . Finally, there is a control comparison [WHO–WHS], aimed to replicate past work, and to provide a test of  Predictability . 
 Additional contrasts were computed to provide further support to the conclusions drawn from the results of the main contrasts. These additional contrasts, (PRO-WHS) and (PAR-WHS), along with those already discussed, entered into three conjunction analyses ( Nichols, Brett, Andersson, Wager, & Poline, 2005 ). 
 
 
 1.9 Conjunction Analyses 
 The contrasts (PAR-WHS) and (PAR-WHO) are similar to (PAR-PRO) in that they contrast a condition with two displacements to a condition with one or no displacement, thus investigating a  displacement effect . The logic of this conjunction analysis assumes that Broca’s area linearly responds to number of displacements. Evidence that Broca’s area is sensitive to number of displacements rather than only activating for a single displacement has previously been provided ( Friederici et al., 2006 ). Though from that study it is unclear, whether it is due to dependency, displacement, or predictability. 
 Additional contrasts were computed to investigate the effect of an unpredicted dependency. The contrasts, (PAR-WHS) and (PRO-WHS) are similar to (PAR-WHO) and (PRO-WHO), in that they differ with respect to whether or not there is a dependency extending into the adjunct. Thus, a conjunction analysis was computed with the following contrasts (PAR-WHO), (PAR-WHS), (PRO-WHO), and (PRO-WHS) to test for a  dependency effect . 
 The additional contrasts, (PAR-WHS) and (PRO-WHS), are similar to the contrast (WHO-WHS) in that they contrast a condition with an object displacement to a condition with no displacement, thus, providing a standard control that does not distinguish between dependency, displacement or prediction, but is unique in its test of prediction. Thus, these three contrasts were entered into a third conjunction analysis to test for a  predictability effect . 
 
 
 
 2 Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Fourteen students in Linguistics at McGill University volunteered. One of the participants was excluded from the analysis due to low behavioral scores. All participants were native English speakers, right-handed and had normal hearing (9 females;  X̅ age =23.68yrs). Participants gave informed consent in accordance with the ethics committee of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) and in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983. 
 
 
 2.2 Stimuli 
 There were four conditions (Parasitic (PAR), Pronoun (PRO), Wh-Object (WHO), and Wh-Subject (WHS); see examples in  Table 3  and Appendix A for complete list). A general description of each of these syntactic conditions was already provided in the Introduction. Consistent with the examples provided in the Introduction, the object argument was most frequently inanimate, given the difficulty of constructing parasitic gap constructions with animate objects. This presents a conservative bias on our part, given that performance differences between object and subject extraction is greater when the two arguments are animate than when the subject is animate and the object is inanimate ( Traxler, Williams, Blozis, & Morris, 2005 ). 
 There were 30 sentences per condition repeated in each of the 2 runs, for a total of 120 unique sentences, and 240 trials. Over the entire experiment, sentences contained between 13 and 17 syllables, but minimal pairs between conditions differed by at most 2 syllables. On average the sentences were 3600 ms long. Each trial lasted 6000 ms, with approximately the first 2000 ms being occupied by silence and the following 4000ms occupied by the sentence. The slight variability in the duration of the sentences caused for slight variability in the duration of silence at the beginning of the trial, which was 2000ms at a minimum. 
 
 
 2.3 Task 
 In order to be assured that the participants were attending and understanding the sentences, they were given a comprehension task. Randomly, on one-third of the trials, participants were asked a comprehension question. The decision to have comprehension questions on one-third rather than all of the trials was based on maximizing the number of experimental trials while minimizing the duration the subject would be in the scanner. Given that the stimulus sequence was random, the subject could not predict when there would be a comprehension question forcing them to constantly attend. 
 On trials with a task, participants would hear the word “question” 500ms after the offset of the experimental stimulus to prompt them to the upcoming comprehension question. Further, the comprehension questions were recorded by a male speaker, whereas the experimental sentences were recorded by a female speaker. This distinction in the sex of the speaker was used to distinguish experimental sentences from comprehension questions. The experimental instructions provided to the participants included a description of these features of the comprehension trial to prepare them. The subject was required to press one of two buttons on a response box to indicate whether their response was “yes” or “no”. 
 The comprehension question asked either about the matrix clause or the information contained within the adjunct but not both. The comprehension questions requiring a false response altered any of the following: the adjective on the subject, the subject noun, the verb (in the matrix or the adjunct), or the object noun. There were equal numbers of true and false comprehension questions. An example stimulus sentence and comprehension question is presented in (14) and (15), respectively.
 
     14. Which paper did the tired student submit _ after reviewing _?
     15. Did a lazy student submit a paper? [Correct Response: NO]
 
 
 
 
 2.4 Procedure 
 One to two days prior to MRI scanning the subject came into the lab and they were provided with task instructions and given a short practice session. This practice session provided an opportunity to address any questions or concerns participants may have about the task, or otherwise, prior to them being inside the imaging machine. On the day of MRI scanning the subject was positioned on the bed of the MRI machine. An air-vacuum pillow was used to minimize head movement. Stimuli were presented through high quality pneumatic-based Headphones (Silent Scan 3100 System, Avotec Inc.) that attenuated surrounding noise by ~30dB. A high-resolution anatomical scan was first acquired, followed by a short practice run of 12 sentences. The practice run provided an opportunity to confirm that the volume was adequate and that all equipment was properly connected, in addition to giving the subject a chance to warm up to the task. The subject then performed the task across two runs of stimuli. Stimuli were presented in a rapid event related design. The inter stimulus interval (ie, silence) was minimally 1 TR, but was further jittered by multiples of the TR (ie, 0–5 additional volumes of silence could follow). The number of additional null volumes used to jitter stimulus onset was approximately equivalent to the number of volumes per experimental condition (60). Both the order of conditions and amount of jitter per trial was optimized by the Linux program Optseq ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/optseq/ ). Presentation order of the two runs was counterbalanced across participants. 
 
 
 2.5 fMRI Parameters 
 Image acquisition was performed with a 1.5T Siemens Vision imager at the MNI in Montréal, Canada. A localizer was performed followed by whole-brain T1-weighted imaging for anatomical localization (256×256 matrix; 160–176 continuous 1.00mm sagittal slices). Each functional volume was acquired with a 64 × 64 matrix size and a total volume acquisition time of 2000 ms. Each imaging run produced 582 acquisitions of the brain volume (TE = 50ms; TR = 2000 ms; FA = 40°; FOV = 320×320 mm; 20, 5mm thick slices). 
 
 
 2.6 Behavioural Data Analysis 
 The behavioral percent correct comprehension data were averaged by condition across runs for each subject and was then submitted to a one-way within-subject ANOVA with the factor Syntax (PAR, PRO, WHO, WHS) in SPSS. 
 
 
 2.7 fMRI Data Analyses 
 Statistical analyses were performed with Brainvoyager QX v1.7 software ( www.brainvoyager.com 
 Goebel, Esposito, & Formisano, 2006 ). The data were slice-scan time corrected (sinc interpolation), motion corrected, and processed to filter out linear trends. The first two volumes of silence (in a sequence of 7) in each run were excluded from the analysis. The functional data was coregistered to the anatomical data through a two step process. An initial alignment was performed based on position information contained in the header of the functional and anatomical files, followed by a fine-tuning alignment based on intensity correlation between the functional (inverted intensities values were used) and anatomical data in order to compensate for any head motion between the acquisition of the anatomical and the functional. In many cases where the fine-tuning alignment did not produce a perfect alignment, minor manual adjustments were made. The individual functional and anatomical data was transformed into talairach space and the talairached functional data were smoothed with a Gaussian spatial filter (FWHM=8mm). 
 
 
 2.8 Deconvolution Analysis 
 Statistical analyses were based on the General Linear Model (GLM). Given that a rapid event-related design was used, the hemodynamic response function (HRF) of one condition overlapped with that of others. The signal was deconvolved over 10 time points from stimulus onset (ie, 10 predictors per condition) for each of the four experimental conditions and the comprehension condition. It should be noted that increasing the number of predictors to 15 or 20 did not affect the pattern of results, indicating their robustness. Stimulus onset was taken as the beginning of the 4000ms following the first 2000ms of silence in a trial, with the onset of the 4000ms containing a variable amount of silence given sentence length varied. The comprehension condition included the two volumes following the experimental sentence, which included the 500ms silent interval as well as the comprehension question. The experimental sentence was not included in the comprehension condition and the comprehension condition was not divided up according to the experimental condition to which it was associated. The comprehension condition did not enter into any contrast as it was used to enforce participants to attend to the experimental stimuli and was used to exclude participants from the analysis. 
 The deconvolution analysis produced beta-weights for the series of volumes (ie, 10 for a TR=2sec) post stimulus onset over which the signal is deconvolved, unlike the regular convolved GLM which produces one beta-weight for how well the data fit a standard HRF. The deconvolution analysis provides an advantage over the regular convolution analysis, as it allows for a flexible HRF. This is an advantage, as different brain regions may demonstrate different hemodynamic response parameters. For example, more recent studies (with the use of slow event related designs) have demonstrated that the HRF in temporal cortex has a shorter latency to peak from stimulus onset than that of the frontal cortex ( Belin, Zatorre, Hoge, Evans, & Pike, 1999 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2006 ;  Friederici et al., 2006 ). Given the flexibility of the HRF in the deconvolution analysis, it does not present a bias, as the standard HRF may if it is more prototypical of some cortical areas than others. 
 
 
 2.9 Contrasts 
 The main minimal pairs that formed statistical contrasts were (PAR-PRO), (WHO-WHS), (PAR-WHO) and (PRO-WHO). For all contrasts, the beta-weights for scans 2–6 (corresponding to 4–12sec post sentence onset), which corresponds to the approximate timing of the peak in the HRF, were entered into the contrast. Group maps (Random Effects) were corrected for serial correlations. Additional contrasts were computed to provide further support to the conclusions drawn from the results of the main contrasts. These additional contrasts, (PRO-WHS) and (PAR-WHS), along with those already discussed, entered into three conjunction analyses ( Nichols et al., 2005 ). 
 
 
 2.10 Conjunction Analyses 
 All conjunction analyses were first thresholded at a voxel-wise level of p < .05 and then corrected for multiple comparisons (p < .05). In Brainvoyager there are two different methods for running a conjunction analysis, we used the method that demonstrates an intersection of all 3 maps at p<.05. Thus, for every cluster each of the contrasts activate every voxel of that cluster at p<.05. Given that, a voxel-wise p-value of .05 is quite stringent when considering that this value needs to be reached in all three individual contrast maps at any particular voxel to appear in the resulting conjunction map. This results in a .000125 (.05*.05*.05) probability that a voxel is active simply due to chance in the conjunction map. The correction for multiple comparisons was based on a cluster size thresholding analysis ( Forman et al., 1995 ). The cluster size correction is determined by two factors: (1) the map’s spatial smoothness and (2) Monte Carlo simulation for estimating cluster-level false-positive rates. The simulation provides the minimum cluster size associated with a cluster-level false-positive rate of 5%. Given that each map has a different number of clusters and sizes the cluster size for correction will differ across the maps. Further, if there are too many false positives, a value will not be reported. 
 The  displacement effect  and  prediction effect  conjunction contrasts had a cluster criterion size of 840mm 3  and 803mm 3 . The  dependency effect  conjunction contrast did not produce any clusters for a multiple comparison correction. 
 
 
 2.11 Cytoarchitectonic Probability Calculations 
 For activation clusters that appeared within Broca’s area, the probability that these clusters were within BA 44 and/or 45 was calculated using the probability maps of  Amunts et al. (1999 ;  http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/cytoarchitectonics/ ). The probability calculations required a 5-step process: (1) Extract talairach coordinates for all voxels within a cluster (2) Convert the coordinates to MNI coordinates using the matlab script tal2mni ( http://imaging.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/imaging/MniTalairach ) as the  Amunts map (1999)  was in the MNI coordinate system and ours were in  Talairach and Tournoux (1988) , (3) Convert the MNI world coordinates to voxel coordinates of the MINC files (with respect to the probability maps of BA44 and BA45 that are within MNI space), (4) Extract probability values from the voxels within the probability maps, and (5) average all values within a cluster to obtain the final number. Since the values represent the number of subjects with overlapping cytoarchitectonic areas at any particular voxel, the average value was divided by the number of brains used in generating the cytoarchtectonic maps (ie, 10) and multiplied by 100% 6 . 
 
 
 
 3 Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Results 
 The participants comprehended the sentences, as they were 92–96% accurate, depending on the condition. There was no significant main effect of sentence type ( F (3,36)=2.63,  p =.07) (see  Figure 1 ). 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI Results 
 We first focus on the results from the conjunction analyses since they are based on rigorous linguistic generalizations and then look at minimal pairs to further understand the individual contributions. 
 The conjunction analysis used to isolate the  predictability effect  resulted in a cluster of activation within the left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG; see  Table5 ). The activation included 1220 mm 3  (see  Table 5 ; see  Figure 2 ). The probability that the voxels are within BA 45 is relatively high at 23%. For a discussion of  Amunts et al.’s (1999)  probability maps and why a percentage of 23% is high see  Santi and Grodzinsky (2007b) . 
 The minimal pairs that contributed to the  Predictability  conjunction analysis were individually investigated at a higher voxel-wise threshold (p<.01) and corrected for multiple comparisons (p<.05). The [who-whs] contrast resulted in the greatest volume of activation with two clusters measuring 2063 and 2585 mm 3  in volume. The contrast that resulted in the second largest cluster was [pro-whs] with a 2845 mm 3  volume. The [par-whs] contrast had the smallest volume of activation of 485 mm 3  (see  Figure 3 ). 
 The conjunction analysis investigating a  displacement  effect did not result in any clusters of activation. Similarly, the conjunction analysis used to investigate the effect of  dependency  did not result in any clusters of activation. 
 A summary of the results from the minimal contrasts is provided in  Table 6 . Consistent with the conjunction analysis, the only minimal contrast that activated Broca’s area was the one investigating a  predictability effect . The minimal contrasts for  predictability  and  dependency  demonstrated effects at a voxel-wise p<.01 and corrected for cluster size (p<.05), whereas the  displacement  effect only appeared at a voxel-wise p<.05 when corrected for cluster size (p<.05). However, lowering the voxel-wise threshold to p<.05 for the  dependency  contrast did not change the pattern of results. Interestingly the novel parasitic gap condition ( displacement  effect) activated the left anterior Middle Temporal Gyrus (see  Figure 4 ). 
 
 
 
 4 Discussion 
 
 4.1 Summary of the design and results 
 This study compared sentences with multiple dependency relations. The novel use of parasitic gaps and their pronoun alternatives enabled us to simultaneously look for the brain signature of three effects potentially associated with processing filler-gap dependencies: (1)  displacement , (2)  dependency  and (3)  predictability . The  displacement  effect was assessed by a conjunction of contrasts that increased the number of gaps across two sentences from one to two, while maintaining all else constant (including the number of dependencies and dependency distance).  Dependency  was investigated through a conjunction of contrasts between sentences with two dependencies to sentences with one. Lastly,  predictability  was investigated by manipulating the type of wh-question (object or subject). This rich design enabled the use of conjunction analyses that pertained to broad generalizations (all carried out on the same data set), in addition to subsequent tests of individual contrasts. By investigating how these factors relate to one another, we were able to break down the filler-gap relation into finer neurological component parts. 
 The central finding, a  predictability  cluster of activation in Brodmann’s Area 45, is in keeping with earlier results from both aphasia and neuroimaging with healthy subjects ( Ben-Shachar et al., 2003 ;  Ben-Shachar et al., 2004 ;  Bornkessel et al., 2005 ;  Caplan et al., 1999 ;  Caplan et al., 2000 ;  Fiebach et al., 2005 ;  Friedmann & Shapiro, 2003 ;  Grewe et al., 2005 ;  Grodzinsky, 1989 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007a ,  2007b ). The absence of activation in Broca’s area by the two additional novel minimal pairs and their conjunctions,  dependency  and  displacement , runs counter to any current functional theory of this region in sentence comprehension. However, it is consistent with  Gibson’s (1998)  storage component of syntactic complexity. We now discuss the neurolinguistic theories, and consider possible modifications. 
 
 
 4.2 Implications of Absent Dependency and Displacement Effect 
 The absence of a  dependency  effect in Broca’s area speaks against accounts that attribute the role of linking non-adjacent positions in a sequence to this region. The  dependency  conjunction included contrasts with dependencies that cross an overt subject in the matrix clause, or a covert one in an adjunct PP. The WM and syntactic complexity accounts predict a  dependency  effect, and its absence suggest that some modifications to their formulations may prove fruitful. 
 Next, consider related accounts, that consider dependency to be an insufficient condition to account for the object-subject movement contrast in Broca’s area, but rather focus on properties of crossing. In English, movement from object (but not subject) position crosses an argument (ie., intervener). The claim is that the existence of an intervener of similar type to the head of the dependency (ie., NP or argument) is the source of the contrast in Broca’s area. These accounts are based on results from contrasts between a dependency that crosses one intervener, and a dependency in which no interveners are crossed ( Friedmann, 2008 ;  Gordon et al., 2001 ;  Grillo, 2008 ,  2009 ;  Grodzinsky & Amunts, 2006 ). Yet, these accounts do not appeal to incremental intervention (i.e., when the number of interveners changes from 1 to 2 to 3). As the current test compares a movement dependency across two interveners to a dependency across one, it is difficult to formulate the prediction that these accounts would make for the  dependency  contrast. Later, we will propose an amendment to the WM and intervener-based accounts that might cover the current findings. 
 Finally, consider the movement-related account of the function of Broca’s area (Trace-Deletion Hypothesis, ( Grodzinsky, 1995 ,  2000 ). The absence of a  displacement effect  likewise calls for its refinement, at a minimum. Initially designed to cover all traces, the TDH later restricted the role of Broca’s area to the processing of traces of phrasal movement, as verb movement proved intact in Broca’s aphasia ( Grodzinsky, 1995 ,  2000 ). Our present results seem to suggest further restriction of the scope of this account, to the effect that only  predictable  traces are processed in Broca’s area. Is such a restriction justified? To ponder this question, we discuss predictable and unpredictable traces. 
 Predictable traces are, essentially, those linked to overt antecedents on their left, outside the basic clausal boundaries – antecedents in A’-positions (mostly marked in a manner that identifies this position, e.g., by a wh-word, or focus stress). This setup allows for early realization that an NP encountered in this position is displaced (a filler), which should provide a hearer an early warning that she should be storing that NP in memory and go hunting for a gap. Our results only suggest that filler-gap relations of this sort are processed in Broca’s area. 
 But what about other filler-gap relations, in particular those generated through A-movement? Unlike A’-moved antecedents, A-moved NPs (typically subjects of passive and Raising constructions) cannot be immediately identified as displaced antecedents in left-to-right scanning, which makes their traces unpredictable. If Broca’s area only supports the analysis of  predictable  dependencies, then an active/passive contrast should not result in fMRI activation of this region, nor should Broca’s aphasic patients be impaired in comprehension of passive. 
 Little fMRI evidence that bears on this issue is available: an fMRI study of passives ( Yokoyama et al., 2007 ) found activation within the left frontal operculum (in close vicinity to Broca’s area). Notably, this study was carried out in Japanese, a language in which the status of passive is under debate ( Hoshi, 1994 ). No reliable evidence from other languages –whether from passive or from other sources of “unpredictable” movement – is available. 7 
 We might seek additional clues in the comprehension performance of Broca’s aphasic patients – an early data source for the TDH. The picture is complex: while comprehension of passive is no doubt compromised ( Goodglass, Barton, & Kaplan, 1968 ); whether or not it presents a pattern of impairment and sparing that is exactly the same as the pattern for predictable movement is still under discussion (for a comprehensive review and a quantitative analysis see ( Drai & Grodzinsky, 2006 ). At this point, though, the following descriptive statements can be made with considerable certainty: in both predictable and unpredictable movement constructions, patients perform around chance, and significantly lower than their baseline ( X̅ passive =0.63;  X̅ active =0.83;  X̅ object-relative  =0.57;  X̅ subject-relative =0.84, see ( Drai & Grodzinsky, 2006 ), for distribution curves). However, the variances in performance differ ( passive =0.21; σ active =0.13; σ object-relative =0.12; σ subject-relative =0.09):  passive  is almost twice that of all other conditions, and  X̅ passive  >  X̅ object-relative . Broca’s area (or the surrounding cortex), then, is undoubtedly involved in the analysis of passive, but the manner of its involvement may be different from A’-movement. The nature of this difference remains to be characterized. Hopefully, future fMRI studies will help resolve this important issue. 
 
 
 4.3 Two Possibilities 
 We find ourselves in a dilemma: we can either (a) account for our results by restricting the role of Broca’s area in movement to the processing of relations pertaining to  predictable  traces, or (b) maintain that it has a broader role in movement. Either possibility fails to capture all the data: A restricted role would exclude the results from passive that pertain to unpredictable A-movement; while a broader role would fail to exclude the unpredictable traces in the current experiment, namely those found in PP adjuncts. Further, both possibilities fail to explain the gradation in performance from the best performance on no movement, to worse performance on A movement to the worst performance on A’ movement that is hinted at by current aphasia results. It seems the most prudent approach is to pursue additional research that directly compares relative signal intensity between A and A’ movement on the same data set to more conclusively understand their relation before expecting current theories to account for this suspected gradation. 
 Further, if the region is more broadly engaged in movement, then we should wonder why in the current study we did not see activation from the contrast that tested  displacement.  It could well be that the absence of a  displacement effect  for an unpredictable A’-movement, in the current study, may be a mere artifact of contrasting a sentence with two displacements to a sentence with one displacement:  a second displacement  may have less of an effect than an initial one, because sensitivity to local demands (as reflected by activation levels) diminishes as processing of a sentence progresses, thereby hampering the statistical detectability of a contrast that pertains to a second gap in a sentence. This seems less likely, given that Broca’s area has been shown to be sensitive to multiple +Predictable displacements ( Friederici et al., 2006 ). While there are multiple possible interpretations of the  Friederici et al (2006)  study, it nonetheless demonstrates that neural activity does not saturate after one instance of a syntactic operation. 
 
 
 4.4 Integrating the Accounts 
 An alternative to the accounts we considered is a hybrid of those from the Introduction: Broca’s area hosts a syntactically constrained WM. This WM would be constrained to syntactic dependencies that involve displacements with a distance metric measured according to the number of intervening verbal arguments. Given results from the current study and earlier studies on reflexive binding dependencies ( Grodzinsky et al., 1993 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ), it appears that the presence of a dependency is not a sufficient condition for activating Broca’s area, but rather a  predictable  displacement is required. This conclusion is very similar to  Gibson’s (1998)  storage dimension with the exception that we propose to calculate distance in a distinct way. Although there are many ways one can construe distance (e.g., number of syllables, words, phrases, clauses etc), we and others ( Friedmann, 2008 ;  Gordon et al., 2001 ;  Grillo, 2009 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ) have similarly argued that a critical property of the object vs subject contrast in Broca’s area is the NP intervener, as they are of the same category as fillers ( Frazier, Clifton, & Randall, 1983 ). We have further argued that complexity increases with increasing number of these intervening NPs ( Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ). In the current study the object wh-question has an NP/argument intervening between the filler and the gap, whereas the subject wh-question clearly does not, which is consistent with this account. The cases in which NPs and verbal arguments that are made up of complex NPS are distinguishable require further study in establishing the appropriate distance metric (NPs or verbal argument) 8 . Thus, it seems likely that the contrast between object and subject wh-questions is related to a specialized form of syntactic WM for  predicted  dependencies with NP/argument interveners. Though here we have primarily focused on predicted displacements, it would be interesting to test further implications of such an account, such as predictable relations between a triadic predicate and its arguments. 
 There is some indication that this account may generalize to other predictable dependencies than displacement. Studies that modulate the distance of subject-verb agreement have found Broca’s area sensitive to this distance (in NPs) as well ( Makuuchi et al., 2009 ;  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2010 ). However, the situation is complicated by the fact that there is some indirect evidence that A’ dependencies rely to some degree on distinct anatomy within Broca’s area than A dependencies ( Santi & Grodzinsky, 2010 ). A direct test of these two dependencies is still required. 
 
 
 4.5 Other brain regions 
 In addition to the main result within Broca’s area across the conjunction analyses, the minimal contrasts demonstrated clusters of activation. The minimal contrast investigating  displacement  activated the left anterior temporal lobe, which is consistent with previous studies that has found this area activated by syntax ( Humphries, Love, Swinney, & Hickok, 2005 ;  Noppeney & Price, 2004 ;  Rogalsky & Hickok, 2009 ;  Stowe et al., 1999 ). The  predictability  minimal contrast also activated a very similar region, although the activation spread more superiorly. One of the minimal contrasts [pro-who] investigating the  dependency  effect activated the left ventral precentral gyrus, which has been activated by a variety of additional neuroimaging experiments of sentence comprehension that put a load on WM ( Ben-Shachar et al., 2004 ;  Fiebach et al., 2005 ;  Friederici, Meyer, & von Cramon, 2000 ). The minimal contrast of  predictability  [who-whs] activated a variety of additional regions from Broca’s area, including the left STG, left vPCS, right PHG, and right temporal regions. Many of these regions have been previously activated by displacement ( Ben-Shachar et al., 2003 ;  Ben-Shachar et al., 2004 ;  Fiebach et al., 2005 ;  Just et al., 1996 ) and the others have been activated by dependency distance (right PHG; ( Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007b ). 
 The results from the minimal contrasts demonstrate that the absence of activation in Broca’s area in the more conservative conjunction analyses, other than for  Predictability , was not due to a weak effect that simply got washed out. Each of the minimal contrasts generated activation clusters, but none were located in Broca’s area. The distinction between the novel contrasts ( Dependency ,  Displacement ) and the  Predictability  contrast in Broca’s area provides a novel angle in uncovering the functional role of this region. Important insight into the particular aspects of sentence processing that this region is sensitive to is critical to advancing our understanding of the linguistic selectivity of this region and ultimately the computations undertaken. Critically, the results from this study, in addition to others, have shown that the critical sentence comprehension process in Broca’s area, if tied to WM storage, is not general. This process demonstrates specificity to predicted displacements with a distance metric respecting the number of intervening verbal arguments or NPs. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 For simplicity of presentation, we suppress the representation of vacuous movement from subject position. This suppression will have no consequences in the present context. 
 
 
 2 
 Roughly speaking, A’-positions (or “non-argument” positions) are distinct from A(rgument)-positions in that NPs in them cannot be assigned a thematic role directly. NPs in A’-positions receive thematic roles indirectly, via a link with a position, to which a thematic role is directly assigned. Normally, if an NP is in an A’-position (i.e., it is a “filler” in psychological talk), it is linked to an empty position (a “gap”), which is the direct recipient of the relevant thematic role. This role is then transmitted to the filler NP. 
 
 
 3 
 Note that adjunct parasitic gaps are not licensed by A-movement. Cf. the contrast between  which paper did you file  [ gap --]  [before reading  [ gap --] ]?  To * The man was pushed  [ gap --]  [before killing  [ gap --]. 
 
 
 4 
 For reasons related to making the stimuli pragmatically equivalent across conditions, this contrast also contains a transitive vs. intransitive verb distinction. Based on aphasia ( Shapiro, Gordon, & Killackey, 1993 ) and neuroimaging ( Ben-Shachar, Hendler, Kahn, Ben-Bashat, & Grodzinsky, 2003 ) results, however, there is no reason to expect an effect of a transitive vs. intransitive verb in Broca’s area, which is our main interest. 
 
 
 5 
 The meanings of (8) and (11) are identical. Yet these structural configurations allow for surprising meaning differences, as ( Doron, 1982 ) and ( Sharvit, 1999 ) point out. Thus the sentences below exhibit a meaning difference:
 
(i)  [ filler  Which woman] did every tired student invite [ gap --] after meeting [ p-gap --]?
(ii) [ filler  Which woman] did every tired student invite [ gap --] after meeting her?
 
In analogy to Doron’s and Sharvit’s sentences, (i) is ambiguous between a single- and multiple-individual readings – there could be one or more women associates with all the tired students; however (ii) only allows for a single-individual reading – only one woman is associated with all the tired students. 
 
 
 6 
 Alternative methods for calculating probability values from these maps exist ( Eickhoff et al., 2007 ). The basis for the current method was to integrate both information about the size of the cluster and the distribution of probability values in one calculation. 
 
 
 7 
 Other studies also activated Broca’s region, but we are not sure about how indicative their results are: two studies featured uneven contrasts, that compared passive stimuli to Raising constructions, to other passive stimuli in which lexical changes were made, and to active sentences ( Dapretto & Bookheimer, 1999 ;  Grodzinsky, Shapiro, & Swinney, 2000 ;  Wartenburger, Heekeren, Burchert, De Bleser, & Villringer, 2003 )( Dapretto & Bookheimer, 1999 ;  Wartenburger, Heekeren, Burchert, De Bleser, & Villringer, 2003 ); a third is briefly reported without sufficient details to make further comment ( Grodzinsky et al., 2000 )( Caplan, 2000 ). 
 
 
 8 
 The distinction between complex verbal arguments and NPs is captured by the following sentence “The brother of John kicked Mary”. The complex NP “The brother of John” is the subject (ie, one argument of the verb), and is composed of two NPs (the brother and John). 
 
 
 5 
 The lines representing the two dependencies in  Table 2  are for exposition purposes and do not represent a commitment to any particular analysis. Specifically, we are not committed to an explicit relationship between the wh-phrase and the parasitic gap. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by NIH (grant #000494), SSHRC (standard grant #410-2009-0431), and Canada Research Chairs Canada Research Chairs, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council. The authors would like to thank Jon Nissenbaum, Isabelle Deschamps, and Katie Clark for their thoughtful comments and assistance during stimuli construction. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Börgel 
 U 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Uylings 
 HBM 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Broca's region revisited: Cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1999 
 412 
 2 
 319 
 341 
 10441759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avrutin 
 S 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Weak syntax 
 Broca's Region 
 2006 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 49 
 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belin 
 P 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 R 
 
 
 Hoge 
 R 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Pike 
 B 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI of the auditory cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 10 
 4 
 417 
 429 
 10493900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Ben-Bashat 
 D 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 The neural reality of syntactic transformations: Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Psychological Science 
 2003 
 14 
 5 
 433 
 440 
 12930473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Palti 
 D 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Neural correlates of syntactic movement: Converging evidence from two fMRI experiments 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 21 
 4 
 1320 
 1336 
 15050558 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 I 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Friederici 
 A 
 
 
 Von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Who did what to whom? The neural basis of argument hierarchies during language comprehension 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 26 
 1 
 221 
 233 
 15862222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Alpert 
 N 
 
 
 Waters 
 G 
 
 
 PET studies of syntactic processing with auditory sentence presentation 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 9 
 3 
 343 
 351 
 10075904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Alpert 
 N 
 
 
 Waters 
 G 
 
 
 Olivieri 
 A 
 
 
 Activation of Broca's area by syntactic processing under conditions of concurrent articulation 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2000 
 9 
 2 
 65 
 71 
 10680763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Futter 
 C 
 
 
 Assignment of thematic roles to nouns in sentence comprehension by an agrammatic patient 
 Brain and Language 
 1986 
 27 
 1 
 117 
 134 
 3947937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Waters 
 GS 
 
 
 Verbal working memory and sentence comprehension 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 1999 
 22 
 1 
 77 
 126 
 11301522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chomsky 
 N 
 
 
 
 
 Culicover 
 P 
 
 
 Wasow 
 T 
 
 
 Akmajian 
 A 
 
 
 On wh-movement 
 Formal Syntax 
 1977 
 New York 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooke 
 A 
 
 
 Zurif 
 EB 
 
 
 DeVita 
 C 
 
 
 Alsop 
 D 
 
 
 Koenig 
 P 
 
 
 Detre 
 J 
 
 
 
 Neural basis for sentence comprehension: Grammatical and short-term memory components 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2001 
 15 
 2 
 80 
 94 
 11835600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Form and content: Dissociating syntax and semantics in sentence comprehension 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 24 
 2 
 427 
 432 
 10571235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Anton 
 J-L 
 
 
 Campagne 
 A 
 
 
 Ciuciu 
 P 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 G 
 
 
 
 Functional segregation of cortical language areas by sentence repetition 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2006 
 27 
 5 
 360 
 371 
 16565949 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doron 
 E 
 
 
 On the syntax and semantics of resumptive pronouns 
 Texas Linguistics Forum 
 1982 
 19 
 1 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drai 
 D 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 A new empirical angle on the variability debate: Quantitative neurosyntactic analyses of a large data set from Broca’s Aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 2006 
 96 
 2 
 117 
 128 
 16115671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Grosbras 
 M 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 
 Assignment of functional activations to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas revisited 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 511 
 521 
 17499520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engdahl 
 E 
 
 
 Parasitic gaps 
 Linguistics and Philosophy 
 1983 
 Dordrecht, Holland and Boston, USA 
 D. Reidel 
 35 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Revisiting the role of Broca's area in sentence processing: Syntactic integration versus syntactic working memory 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 24 
 2 
 79 
 91 
 15455462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 1995 
 33 
 5 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frazier 
 L 
 
 
 Clifton 
 C 
 
 
 Randall 
 J 
 
 
 Filling gaps: Decision principles and structure in sentence comprehension 
 Cognition 
 1983 
 13 
 2 
 187 
 222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 ID 
 
 
 Von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Processing linguistic complexity and grammaticality in the left frontal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2006 
 16 
 12 
 1709 
 1717 
 16400163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Meyer 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Auditory language comprehension: an event-related fMRI study on the processing of syntactic and lexical information 
 Brain and Language 
 2000 
 74 
 2 
 289 
 300 
 10950920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friedmann 
 N 
 
 
 Traceless relatives: Agrammatic comprehension of relative clauses with resumptive pronouns 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2008 
 21 
 2 
 138 
 149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friedmann 
 N 
 
 
 Gvion 
 A 
 
 
 Sentence comprehension and working memory limitation in aphasia: A dissociation between semantic-syntactic and phonological reactivation 
 Brain and Language 
 2003 
 86 
 1 
 23 
 39 
 12821413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friedmann 
 N 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 LP 
 
 
 Agrammatic comprehension of simple active sentences with moved constituents: Hewbrew OSV and OVS structures 
 Journal of Speech language and Hearing Research 
 2003 
 46 
 2 
 288 
 297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies 
 Cognition 
 1998 
 68 
 1 
 1 
 76 
 9775516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 Analysis of functional image analysis contest (FIAC) data with Brainvoyager QX: From single-subject to cortically aligned group general linear model analysis and self-organizing group independent component analysis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2006 
 27 
 5 
 392 
 401 
 16596654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goodglass 
 H 
 
 
 Barton 
 MI 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 EF 
 
 
 Sensory modality and object-naming in aphasia 
 Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 
 1968 
 11 
 3 
 488 
 496 
 5722476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gordon 
 PC 
 
 
 Hendrick 
 R 
 
 
 Johnson 
 M 
 
 
 Memory interference during language processing 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 
 2001 
 27 
 6 
 1 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grewe 
 T 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 I 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Wiese 
 R 
 
 
 Von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 The emergence of the unmarked: A new perspective on the language-specific function of Broca's Area 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 26 
 3 
 178 
 190 
 15929098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grillo 
 N 
 
 
 Generalized Minimality: Syntactic Underspecification in Broca's Aphasia 
 2008 
 Utrecht 
 Utrecht University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grillo 
 N 
 
 
 Generalized minimality: Feature impoverishment and comprehension deficits in agrammatism 
 Lingua 
 2009 
 119 
 1426 
 1443 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Language deficits and linguistic theory 
 1984 
 Boston 
 Brandeis University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Agrammatic Comprehension of relative clauses 
 Brain and Language 
 1989 
 37 
 3 
 480 
 499 
 2478254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 A Restrictive theory of agrammatic comprehension 
 Brain and Language 
 1995 
 50 
 1 
 27 
 51 
 7552229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 The neurology of syntax: language use without Broca's area 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 2000 
 23 
 1 
 1 
 21 
 11303337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Broca's Region 
 2006 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 L 
 
 
 Swinney 
 D 
 
 
 Language and the Brain: Representation and Processing 
 2000 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Wexler 
 K 
 
 
 Chien 
 YC 
 
 
 Marakovitz 
 S 
 
 
 Solomon 
 J 
 
 
 The breakdown of binding relations 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 3 
 396 
 422 
 8269332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagiwara 
 H 
 
 
 The breakdown of Japanese passives and theta-role assignment principle in Broca's aphasics 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 3 
 318 
 339 
 8269329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hale 
 J 
 
 
 A probabilistic earley parser as a psycholinguistic model 
 2001 
 Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Language Technologies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoshi 
 H 
 
 
 Theta-role assignment, passivization, and excorporation 
 Journal of East Asian Linguistics 
 1994 
 3 
 147 
 178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Love 
 T 
 
 
 Swinney 
 D 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Response of anterior temporal cortex to syntactic and prosodic manipulations during sentence processing 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 26 
 2 
 128 
 138 
 15895428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Brain activation modulated by sentence comprehension 
 Science 
 1996 
 274 
 5284 
 114 
 116 
 8810246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 Expectation-based syntactic comprehension 
 Cognition 
 2008 
 106 
 1126 
 1177 
 17662975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Makuuchi 
 M 
 
 
 Bahlmann 
 A 
 
 
 Anwander 
 A 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Segregating the core computational faculty of human language from working memory 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2009 
 106 
 8362 
 8367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mauner 
 G 
 
 
 Fromkin 
 VA 
 
 
 Cornell 
 TL 
 
 
 Comprehension and acceptability judgments in agrammatism: Disruptions in the syntax of referential dependency 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 3 
 304 
 370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 J-B 
 
 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 3 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nissenbaum 
 J 
 
 
 Investigations of covert phrase movement 
 2000 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MITWPL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 An fMRI study of syntactic adaptation 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2004 
 16 
 4 
 702 
 713 
 15165357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 The real-time status of island phenomena 
 Language 
 2006 
 82 
 4 
 795 
 8223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogalsky 
 C 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Selective attention to semantic and syntactic features modulates sentence processing networks in anterior temporal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 786 
 796 
 18669589 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ross 
 JR 
 
 
 Constraints on variables in syntax 
 1967 
 MIT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santi 
 A 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Taxing Working Memory with Syntax: Bi-hemispheric Modulations 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2007a 
 28 
 11 
 1089 
 1097 
 17133392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santi 
 A 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Working memory and syntax interact in Broca's area 
 Neuroimage 
 2007b 
 37 
 1 
 8 
 17 
 17560794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santi 
 A 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 fMRI adaptation dissociates syntactic complexity dimensions 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 51 
 1285 
 1293 
 20338244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 LP 
 
 
 Gordon 
 B 
 
 
 Killackey 
 J 
 
 
 Verb-argument structure processing in complex sentences in Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 3 
 423 
 447 
 8269333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sharvit 
 Y 
 
 
 resumptive pronouns in relative clauses 
 Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 
 1999 
 17 
 3 
 587 
 612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shlonsky 
 U 
 
 
 Resumptive pronouns as a last resort 
 Linguistic Inquiry 
 1992 
 23 
 3 
 443 
 468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Storage and executive processes in the frontal lobes 
 Science 
 1999 
 283 
 5408 
 1657 
 1661 
 10073923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stowe 
 LA 
 
 
 Paans 
 AMJ 
 
 
 Wijers 
 AA 
 
 
 Zwarts 
 F 
 
 
 Mulder 
 G 
 
 
 Vaalburg 
 W 
 
 
 Sentence comprehension and word repetition: A positron emission tomography investigation 
 Psychophysiology 
 1999 
 36 
 786 
 801 
 10554592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stromswold 
 K 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Alpert 
 N 
 
 
 Rauch 
 S 
 
 
 Localization of syntactic comprehension by positron emission tomography 
 Brain and Language 
 1996 
 52 
 3 
 452 
 473 
 8653390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 New York 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taraldsen 
 T 
 
 
 The theoretical implications of a class of marked extraction 
 1981 
 Pisa 
 Scuola Normale Superiore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Traxler 
 MJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 RS 
 
 
 Blozis 
 SA 
 
 
 Morris 
 RK 
 
 
 Working memory, animacy, and verb class in the processing of relative clauses 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2005 
 53 
 2 
 204 
 224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagers 
 MW 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Multiple dependencies and the role of the grammar in real-time comprehension 
 Journal of Linguistics 
 2009 
 45 
 395 
 433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wartenburger 
 I 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Burchert 
 F 
 
 
 De Bleser 
 R 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Grammaticality judgments on sentences with and without movement of phrasal constituents - an event-related fMRI study 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2003 
 16 
 301 
 314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yokoyama 
 S 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 J 
 
 
 Iwata 
 K 
 
 
 Ikuta 
 N 
 
 
 Haji 
 T 
 
 
 Usui 
 N 
 
 
 
 Is Broca's area involved in the processing of passive sentences? An event-related fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 989 
 996 
 17030047 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zurif 
 E 
 
 
 The neuroanatomical organization of some features of sentence comprehension: Studies of real-time syntactic and semantic composition 
 Psychologica 
 2003 
 32 
 13 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Mean percent errors +s.e.m. across all four conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Activation of the Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus by the conjunction of contrasts that investigated a  predictability effect . Maps are thresholded at p<.05 (voxel-wise) and above a cluster of criterion size such that p<.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons). The activation is overlaid on an average of all 13 participants’ anatomical scans. The deconvolution plots present deconvolution coefficients over 10 scans from stimulus onset. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Activation of the Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus by the individual contrasts that contributed to the  predictability effect  conjunction map. Maps are thresholded at p<.01 (voxel-wise) and above a cluster of criterion size such that p<.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons). The activation is overlaid on an average of all 13 participants’ anatomical scans. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Activation of the anterior Left Middle Temporal Gyrus by the minimal contrast for the  Displacement effect  (par-pro). Maps are thresholded at p<.05 (voxel-wise) and above a cluster of criterion size such that p<.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons). The activation is overlaid on an average of all 13 participants’ anatomical scans. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Types of Dependencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 +Predictable 
 −Predictable 
 
 
 
 
 +Displacement 
 i. Which paper did the student submit [---] 
 ii. Which paper did the student submit after reviewing [---] 
 
 
 −Displacement 
 iii. The papers that you wrote are/*is on the table 
 iv. The boy who likes Mary pinched himself 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Functional accounts of Broca’s area and their predictions regarding activation in Broca’s area for the three types of contrasts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 FUNCTIONAL ACCOUNT OF BROCA’S AREA 
 
 
 
 
 TDH 
 WM 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast 
 
 
 Displacement 
 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
 
 Dependency 
 
 No 
 Yes 
 
 
 
 Predictability 
 
 No 
 Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Example sentences from the four conditions 1 . 
 
 
 
 
 Condition 
 Example Sentence 
 
 
 
 
 a. Parasitic Gap  PAR 
 
 
 
 
 
 b. Pronoun  PRO 
 
 
 
 
 
 c. Wh-Obj. Question  WHO 
 
 
 
 
 
 d. Wh-Subj. Question  WHS 
 Which tired student submitted a paper after jogging? 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Conjunction of contrasts used in statistical analyses. Par, Parasitic; Pro, Pronoun; WhO, Wh-Object; WhS, Wh-Subject. 
 
 
 
 
 Type of Conjunction 
 Contrasts 
 
 
 
 
 i. Displacement 
 [Par – Pro] & [Par – WhO] & [Par – WhS] 
 
 
 ii. Dependency 
 [Par – WhO] & [Par – WhS] & [Pro – WhO] & [Pro – WhS] 
 
 
 iii. Predictability 
 [Par – WhS] & [WhO – WhS] & [Pro – WhS] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 fMRI results from the conjunction of Random Effects analysis, corrected for serial correlations. BA, Brodmann area. 
 
 
 
 
 Predictability Conjunction [(WHO-WHS), (PAR-WHS), (PRO-WHS)] 
 
 
 
 
 Landmark 
 Hemisphere 
 Talairach coordinates (x, y, z) 
 BA 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −46, 38, 6 
 45 
 1220 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Minimal Contrasts 
 
 
 
 
 Landmark 
 Hemisphere 
 Talairach coordinates (x, y, z) 
 BA 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 who-whs 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 Right 
 38, −1, −15 
 21 
 446 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 Right 
 24, 48, 18 
 10 
 1125 
 
 
 
 Basal Ganglia 
 
 Right 
 25, 0, 6 
 -- 
 344 
 
 
 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 
 Right 
 21, −18, −13 
 36 
 399 
 
 
 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 
 Right 
 11, 26, −6 
 32 
 1184 
 
 
 
 Basal Ganglia 
 
 Left 
 −23, 0, 8 
 -- 
 264 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −32, 34, −9 
 45 
 2064 
 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −41, 44, 15 
 45 
 2585 
 
 
 
 Ventral Precentral Sulcus 
 
 Left 
 −49, 3, 37 
 6/8 
 424 
 
 
 
 Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 
 Left 
 −51, −2, −12 
 22 
 225 
 
 
 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −55, 8, 0 
 22 
 555 
 
 
 
 Par-Pro 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −51, −12, −11 
 21/22 
 1666 
 
 
 
 Pro-who 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 Right 
 29, 33, 3 
 10 
 354 
 
 
 
 Ventral Precentral Sulcus 
 
 Left 
 −40, 0, 39 
 6/8 
 1315 
 
 
 
 Supramarginal Gyrus 
 
 Left 
 −43, −42, 34 
 40 
 203 
 
 
 
 
 
