
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8910747 
 20835 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 
 0898-929X 
 1530-8898 
 
 
 22332805 
 4491634 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00206 
 NIHMS660954 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Processing of Emotional Distraction is both Automatic and Modulated by Attention: Evidence from an Event-Related fMRI Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 Shafer 
 A.T. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Matveychuk 
 D. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Penney 
 T. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 O’Hare 
 A.J. 
 
 4 
 6 
 
 
 
 Stokes 
 J. 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F. 
 
 1 
 2 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 
 
 1 Centre for Neuroscience, University of Alberta, Edmonton (AB), Canada 
 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton (AB), Canada 
 3 Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham (NC), USA 
 4 Psychology Department, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA 
 5 Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA 
 6 Beckman Institute for Advanced Science & Technology, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (IL), USA 
 
 Corresponding Author: Florin Dolcos, PhD , Psychology Department, Neuroscience Program and, The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 405 North Mathews Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA,  Phone:  (217) 244-4120,  fdolcos@illinois.edu ,  Web: http://dolcoslab.beckman.illinois.edu/ 
 
 
 19 
 6 
 2015 
 
 
 14 
 2 
 2012 
 
 
 5 
 2012 
 
 
 06 
 7 
 2015 
 
 24 
 5 
 1233 
 1252 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Traditionally, emotional stimuli have been thought to be automatically processed via a bottom-up automatic “capture of attention” mechanism. Recently, this view has been challenged by evidence that emotion processing depends on the availability of attentional resources. Although these two views are not mutually exclusive, direct evidence reconciling them is lacking. One limitation of previous investigations supporting the traditional or competing views is that they have not systematically investigated the impact of emotional charge of task-irrelevant distraction in conjunction with manipulations of attentional demands. Using event-related fMRI, we investigated the nature of emotion-cognition interactions in a perceptual discrimination task with emotional distraction, by manipulating both the emotional charge of the distracting information and the demands of the main task. Findings suggest that emotion processing is both automatic and modulated by attention, but emotion and attention were only found to interact when finer assessments of emotional charge (comparison of most vs. least emotional conditions) were considered along with an effective manipulation of processing load (high vs. low). The study also identified brain regions reflecting the detrimental impact of emotional distraction on performance as well as regions involved in helping with such distraction. Activity in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (PFC) and ventrolateral PFC was linked to a detrimental impact of emotional distraction, whereas the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and lateral occiptal cortex were involved in helping with emotional distraction. These findings demonstrate that task-irrelevant emotion processing is subjective to both the emotional content of distraction and the level of attentional demand. 
 
 
 Affect 
 Emotional Automaticity 
 Processing Demand 
 Behavioral Impairment 
 Defensive Mechanisms 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Possibly because of their relevance for survival, emotional stimuli can affect how we perceive our environment. For instance, emotion can enhance detection by altering the contrast sensitivity required for non-emotional items to enter awareness ( Phelps, Ling, & Carrasco, 2006 ), and can increase or decrease visual estimates of the surrounding environment ( Schnall, Harber, Stefanucci, & Proffitt, 2008 ;  Stefanucci & Proffitt, 2009 ;  Stefanucci, Proffitt, Clore, & Parekh, 2008 ;  Stefanucci & Storbeck, 2009 ;  Teachman, Stefanucci, Clerkin, Cody, & Proffitt, 2008 ). Although it is generally accepted that emotional items can capture attention, whether their processing is automatic or depends on available attentional resources is a matter of current debate ( Pessoa, 2005 ;  Pessoa, McKenna, Gutierrez, & Ungerleider, 2002 ;  Vuilleumier, 2005 ;  Vuilleumier, Armony, Driver, & Dolan, 2001 ). A limitation of previous investigations is that they have not systematically assessed the impact of emotional charge of task-irrelevant distraction in conjunction with manipulations of the attentional demands of the main cognitive tasks. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the effects of attentional and emotional charge manipulations in a perceptual task on processing task-irrelevant emotional distraction, and to identify the neural circuitry underlying the impairing impact of emotional distraction on perceptual processing and the neural correlates of minimizing the impact of such distraction. Investigation of these issues in healthy participants has implications for understanding maladaptive emotion-cognition interactions occurring in affective disorders. 
 
 The Debate: The Traditional vs .Competing Views of Emotion and Attention 
 Currently, the emotion literature presents two main competing views on how emotion and selective attention interact with each other: a traditional view ( Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ) and a competing view ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ). The traditional view proposes that processing of emotional information, especially threatening ( Anderson, Christoff, Panitz, De Rosa, & Gabrieli, 2003 ), is given priority and hence it occurs automatically and is not limited by the availability of attentional resources ( Morris, Ohman, & Dolan, 1999 ). In contrast, the competing view ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ;  Pessoa, Padmala, & Morland, 2005 ), based on Desimone & Duncan’s (1995) biased competition model of selective attention, proposes that processing of emotional stimuli requires attentional resources. Thus, according to this view, emotional stimuli compete for neural representation with all stimuli, and hence suggest a top-down regulation of emotion processing. 
 Evidence supporting the largely accepted and intuitive view that emotional information is processed automatically shows that emotional stimuli can be detected and processed with increased efficacy, and that this privileged processing depends on the amygdala (AMY), a main brain structure associated with emotion processing. For instance, using visual search paradigms, a series of behavioral studies found rapid and accurate detection of schematically depicted threatening faces, presented in a display involving similar distractors. This effect is so-called “face in the crowd”, “snake in the grass”, or “pop-out” effect (e.g.,  Hansen & Hansen, 1988 ;  Ohman, Lundqvist, & Esteves, 2001 ). Also, evidence from AMY patients shows that intact AMY is needed to observe enhancement of attention by emotional stimuli, which eliminate “attentional blinks” during processing of rapidly succeeding stimuli ( Anderson & Phelps, 2001 ). Further supporting the traditional view and the role of the AMY, brain imaging evidence shows that facial stimuli with emotional expressions (e.g., expressing fear) can be processed even in the absence of awareness ( Whalen, Rauch et al., 1998 ). This and other evidence led to the generally accepted notion that processing of emotional information occurs automatically (i.e. efficiently), and does not depend on available attentional resources ( Hansen & Hansen, 1988 ;  LeDoux, 1996 ;  Moors & De Houwer, 2001 ;  Morris et al., 1996 ;  Morris et al., 1999 ;  Ohman, Flykt, & Esteves, 2001 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). It is important to note that only relatively recently has the operational definition of automaticity become a primary concern when investigating the automatic nature of cognitive processes. Previously, an exact definition of automaticity was muddled by its role in the cognitive process being investigated (e.g., perception, learning, emotion) and by its many separate but related constituting features (e.g., efficiency, intentionality, controllability, awareness). It is now recognized that the features of automaticity need to be separately examined in order to have a better understanding of the process under investigation (see  Moors & De Houwer, 2006  for a comprehensive review). Here we specifically focus on the efficiency (attentional demand) aspect of automaticity. 
 Strong brain imaging support for the traditional view comes from an influential fMRI study by Vuilleumier and colleagues ( Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). In this study, attention was manipulated by asking subjects to attend either to pairs of houses or faces, which were presented in a four-picture display around a fixation point. The pictures in the house-pairs were either identical or different, whereas the faces were either fearful or neutral, and the subjects were asked to attend either to houses or faces and to make same/different judgments. Supporting the view that emotion processing occurs automatically and independently of the attentional focus, fMRI results revealed increased AMY activity to the fearful faces regardless of whether they were attended or not. Also consistent with the traditional view, response times to houses were slower when fearful faces were displayed as distractors. 
 Although the exact mechanisms that allow for automatic processing of emotional information are not fully understood, extant evidence points to the existence of direct sub-cortical pathways that reach the AMY independently of the typical cortical connections subserving various sensorial modalities ( Vuilleumier, 2005 ). This is consistent with the evidence that emotional stimuli can also benefit from enhanced processing due to their ability to “capture attention” and re-allocate processing resources ( Adolphs, 2004 ;  Anderson & Phelps, 2001 ;  LeDoux, 2000 ;  Pourtois, Grandjean, Sander, & Vuilleumier, 2004 ;  Pourtois, Schwartz, Seghier, Lazeyras, & Vuilleumier, 2006 ;  Price, 2003 ;  Vuilleumier, Richardson, Armony, Driver, & Dolan, 2004 ). As a result of this “parallel processing” that allows for both automatic, non-conscious, pre-attentional processing and enhanced conscious processing boosted by the engagement of attentional mechanisms, emotional stimuli are processed with increased efficacy. 
 There are also open questions regarding the validity and generalizability of the traditional view. For instance, although animal studies provided direct evidence for the existence of the above mentioned sub-cortical route ( LeDoux, 2000 ), human lesion ( Anderson & Phelps, 2001 ) and neuroimaging ( Morris et al., 1999 ) research has provided only indirect evidence that such a pathway exists in humans. Also, even if the proposed sub-cortical route exists in humans, executive control attentional systems have shown top-down attention effects as early as the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus ( O"Connor, Fukui, Pinsk, & Kastner, 2002 ), suggesting that attention could still act on this suggested sub-cortical route. 
 Representative brain imaging evidence supporting the competing view comes from work by Pessoa et al. ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ), which challenged Vuilleumier et al.’s findings and hence triggered an interesting debate concerning the role of attention in early emotion processing (compare  Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). The main methodological criticism raised by Pessoa et al. ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ) was that previous studies failed to reveal evidence for modulation of emotion processing by attention because the tasks used were not demanding enough to reduce the availability of processing resources to be engaged by emotional information – hence, the findings supporting the automaticity of emotion processing. To address this limitation,  Pessoa et al. (2002)  devised a more difficult task, in which subjects had to fixate on centrally displayed faces (males or females, with fearful or neutral expressions) and either make a gender judgment or specify if two peripherally displayed bars were oriented in the same direction or not. Thus, similar to Vuilleumier et al.’s task, the attentional focus was alternating between stimuli with or without emotional content. As expected, in the gender judgment condition (attending faces), fearful faces evoked greater response in a network of regions associate with emotion processing, including the AMY. However, this differential activation was not present when subjects performed the more difficult peripheral (bar-orientation) task, and thus did not attend to faces. Also, there were no differences in response times related to the fearful expression of the face distractors. Based on these findings,  Pessoa et al. (2002)  concluded that emotional information is differentially processed only when there are sufficient attentional resources that are not exhausted by a demanding concurrent cognitive task. In other words, emotional stimuli can “capture attention” if there are enough attentional resources “to be captured” and not engaged by other tasks at hand. 
 One possible cause for the continuing debate between the traditional and competing views is the fact that emotional content and task demands were not systematically manipulated within the same study, and thus studies supporting the traditional view may be criticized for not using challenging enough tasks to deplete attentional resources ( Anderson et al., 2003 ; Luo et al., ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ), and the studies supporting the competing view can be criticized for not using powerful enough emotional stimuli to “capture” attention ( Mitchell et al., 2007 ;  Pessoa, 2005 ;  Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ; Pourtois, Spinelli, Seeck, & Vuilleumier, ;  Silvert et al., 2007 ). The automaticity or reliance on attention of task-irrelevant emotional processing cannot be fully understood unless the degree of emotional charge and the level of task demands are systematically manipulated within the same task. Hence, the main goal of the present investigation was to better understand the intricate nature of emotion-cognition interactions by manipulating both the emotional charge of distracting information and the demands of the main cognitive task. 
 It should be noted, however, that the traditional and the competing views concerning emotion processing are not necessarily mutually exclusive, as processing of emotional information can be both automatic and modulated by attention. Typically, the degree of attentional demand necessary to complete a task has been manipulated by varying the size of stimulus array, the stimulus attributes ( Lavie, 1995 ), and the difficulty in discriminating stimulus orientation ( Pessoa et al., 2005 ). However, another way of manipulating the difficulty of information processing is by varying the amount of time information is available to process ( Grill-Spector & Kanwisher, 2005 ). Studies employing the later manipulation point to differences in the processing of emotional stimuli as a function of their exposure duration, and show that different stages during the time course of emotion processing may vary in their susceptibility to modulations by attention ( Luo et al., 2010 ;  Rotshtein et al., 2010 ;  Smith, 2008 ), with automatic processing of emotional information occurring only during shorter presentation times ( White, 1995 ). This evidence highlights the complex relationship between emotion, attention and awareness, and suggests that the two seemingly opposing views concerning basic emotion processing may in fact not be mutually exclusive – i.e., depending on the circumstances emotional information can be processed automatically but can also benefit from engaging available attentional resources. However, to our knowledge, the effect of stimulus duration on task-irrelevant emotional distraction under varying degrees of perceptual load has not been previously investigated. Such an investigation can provide a possible understanding of the time course of emotion processing that could reconcile the two opposing views. 
 Elucidation of these matters depends on investigation of the neural correlates of emotion-cognition interactions in conditions where emotional and cognitive processing are in competition with each other. In addition to AMY, a number of other brain regions have been identified as being part of an emotion processing network, including lateral and medial prefrontal cortical (PFC) regions, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), as well as other brain regions susceptible to emotional modulation (e.g., perceptual areas, such as visual cortex) ( Adolphs, 2002 ;  Anders, Lotze, Erb, Grodd, & Birbaumer, 2004 ;  Anderson et al., 2003 ;  Dolcos, Iordan, & Dolcos, 2011 ;  Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2004 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ;  Fichtenholtz et al., 2004 ;  Grimm et al., 2006 ;  Kober et al., 2008 ;  Phan, Fitzgerald et al., 2004 ;  Phan, Taylor et al., 2004 ;  Phan, Wager, Taylor, & Liberzon, 2004 ;  Phillips, Drevets, Rauch, & Lane, 2003 ;  Sabatini et al., 2009 ;  Wang, McCarthy, Song, & Labar, 2005 ;  Yamasaki, LaBar, & McCarthy, 2002 ). In conditions of competing emotion-cognition interactions, the neural system involved in ‘hot’ emotional ( HotEmo ) processing interplays with a neural system involved in ‘cold’ executive ( ColdEx ) processing, which includes brain regions that are part of the so-called fronto-parietal attentional network, underlies the ability to stay focused on task-relevant information and is important for cognitive control ( Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008 ;  Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ;  Duncan & Owen, 2000 ;  Ochsner & Gross, 2005 ). 
 
 
 Dissociating Neural Responses Reflecting Detrimental Impact of vs. Reduced Emotional Distraction 
 Although previous investigations identified the role of  HotEmo  brain regions in various aspects of emotion processing and emotion-cognition interactions ( Dolcos et al., 2011 ), less is known about their involvement in the response to emotional distraction associated with the detrimental impact on behavioral performance versus those involved in minimizing the impact of such distraction on performance, especially when examining emotional distraction during lower-level perceptual tasks (but see  Dolcos, Kragel, Wang, & McCarthy, 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ) for emotional distraction and cognitive control in higher-level working memory tasks). In previous studies with emotional distraction ( Denkova et al., 2010 ;  Dolcos et al., 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ), the role of brain regions whose activity was differentially sensitive to the presence of emotional distraction was further elucidated by examining brain-behavior relationships reflected in co-variations of brain activity with task performance. These investigations showed that brain areas of the  HotEmo  system where activity co-varied negatively with task performance were associated with responses reflecting increased distraction ( Denkova et al., 2010 ), whereas areas of the  ColdEx  system where activity co-varied positively with task performance or decreased distractibility were associated with responses reflecting the engagement of cognitive control mechanisms to help cope with distracting emotions ( Denkova et al., 2010 ;  Dolcos et al., 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ). Therefore, the second main goal of the present investigation was to identify the neural correlates of emotion-cognition interactions in conditions where emotional information is presented as task-irrelevant distraction during a perception task, and to distinguish between their roles in responses reflecting the detrimental impact of vs. helping with emotional distraction. 
 The present study addressed these issues by using a perceptual orientation-discrimination task that allowed for the examination of the neural mechanisms that mediate the response to task-irrelevant emotional distraction. Brain activity was recorded using event-related fMRI while healthy participants performed this task that assessed the impact of emotional charge of distraction, perceptual load, stimulus duration, and their interactions on task performance. 
 Based on the two opposing views of how selective attention and emotion processing interact with each other, we made the following conditional predictions. First, regarding the behavioral effects, if the traditional view was correct, we predicted that automatic emotion processing would occur similarly, regardless of the amount of processing demands (high vs. low) required by the main task. On the other hand, if the non-traditional view was correct, we predicted that emotion processing would be modulated by the availability of processing resources – i.e., as processing demands of the main task increased, processing of task-irrelevant distraction (whether neutral or emotional) would decrease. However, if both views were correct, processing of emotional distraction would be both automatic and modulated by attention (i.e., behavioral data would show an effect of emotion regardless of the processing demand of the main task, but the effect of emotion would be larger when demand was low and more resources were available to process the task-irrelevant emotion). Second, regarding the neural correlates of these effects, if the traditional view was correct we predicted that processing of emotional distraction would be associated with activity in affective brain regions, and this activity would be present regardless of the processing demand of the main task. If the non-traditional view was correct, we predicted that processing of emotional distraction would be associated with greater activity in affective brain regions when processing demands of the main task were low. However, if both views were correct, we predicted that while overall processing of emotional distraction would be associated with similar brain activity regardless of the processing demands, certain affective regions would show an increase in activity when the processing demands of the main task was low. Finally, we also predicted a differential link with behavioral performance between regions associated with a detrimental impact of emotional distraction vs. reducing the impact of such distraction. Specifically, increased activity in regions of the  HotEmo  system linked to impaired performance would be associated with a negative impact of emotional distraction ( Denkova et al., 2010 ), whereas increased activity in regions of the  ColdEx  system linked to enhanced performance would reflect the engagement of defensive mechanisms to help reduce the impact of emotional distraction ( Dolcos et al., 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ). 
 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Subjects 
 Eighteen (seven males) healthy right-handed young adults (19 –33 years of age; average age = 23.44; SD = 4.13) recruited from the University of Alberta and Edmonton City area, participated in the study. Participants signed an informed consent prior to participating and were reimbursed for their participation. The experimental protocol was approved for ethical treatment of human participants by the Health Research Ethics Board at the University of Alberta. 
 
 
 Task and Stimuli 
 Participants performed a perceptual orientation-discrimination task with distraction, in which participants made decisions on the orientation of vertical and horizontal pictures with varying degrees of emotional content ( Figure 1 ). This task allowed the assessment of the impact of processing demand, emotional charge of distraction, and their interactions on the ability to make responses concerning the orientation (vertical vs. horizontal) of the rectangular pictures. Processing demand was manipulated by varying the ratio of the horizontal vs. vertical sides of the rectangles, which influenced the difficulty in deciding whether the pictures were clearly rectangles (with vertical or horizontal orientation) or closer to squares (with uncertain orientation). There were a total of 280 rectangular pictures, 50% horizontal and 50% vertical). The vertical to horizontal (V:H) ratios were varied using increments/decrements of 0.006 around 1 (perfect square); the size of the starting square was 280 × 280 pixels. This resulted in 60 different rectangles with vertical to horizontal ratios ranging from 0.801 to 1.249, with a total of 30 horizontal and 30 vertical shapes. Among these, the 15 that were closest to a square (0.905 – 0.993, horizontal ratios and 1.007 – 1.113, vertical ratios) were classified as more difficult (high perceptual load), and the remaining 15 that were clearly rectangular (0.801 – 0.898 horizontal ratios, and 1.121 – 1.249 vertical ratios) were classified as less difficult (low perceptual load). Analyses of pilot data and the present results showed that this manipulation worked, as our results are comparable with those reported by studies supporting the competing view, where the emotion response was attenuated or eliminated under conditions of high attentional load ( Pessoa et al., 2005 ). In addition, task demands were also manipulated by varying the presentation time of the stimuli (short = 250 ms vs. long = 1000 ms), which also influenced the difficulty of making the orientation decisions in the presence of concomitantly presented competing emotional information. 
 Distraction level was manipulated by varying the emotional content of the rectangular pictures, and involved three main categories of pictures: emotionally negative (40%), emotionally neutral (40%), and scrambled (20%). Negative pictures were selected to stay consistent with previous research examining the automaticity of emotion ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ;  Pessoa et al., 2005 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). The emotional and neutral pictures were selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS, ( Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008 ), based on their normative scores for arousal and valence, and were supplemented with in-house pictures used in previous studies ( Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ;  Yamasaki et al., 2002 ). Next, the normative arousal and valence and scores (measured on a 9-point Likert scale), were combined to create a composite score that reflects the overall emotional charge of each picture, using the following formula: 9 - valence score + arousal score. To investigate possible finer emotion-related dissociations, in addition to the basic separation between emotional and neutral categories based on their composite scores, both picture types were further divided into two within-category subgroups, using a median split separation. This resulted in four picture categories according to their emotional content (i.e., high emotional (HiEmo), low emotional (LoEmo), neutral (Neu), and absolute neutral (AbsNeu)), which allowed for finer comparisons of the emotion effects by contrasting the most dissimilar conditions (i.e., HiEmo vs. least emotional/AbsNeu). The mean arousal, valence, and composite scores, respectively, were as follows: 6.4 / 2.2 / 13.2, for HiEmo pictures; 5.4 / 3.3 / 11.1, for LoEmo pictures; 3.7 / 5.0 / 7.7 for Neu pictures; and 3.0 / 5.1 / 6.9 for AbsNeu pictures. Pairwise comparisons found each of the emotional charge groups to be statistically significant from the others. Finally, the scrambled pictures were digitally scrambled versions of randomly selected emotional and neutral pictures (half from resulting from emotional and half from neutral pictures). The scrambled pictures served as a no-distraction controls as they had the same average spatial frequency and luminance as the emotional and neutral meaningful pictures. All pictures were presented in color. At the end of the study, participants also rated the emotional charge of emotional and neutral pictures, using a (9-point Likert scale; 1 = Lowest, 9 = Highest). Participants were instructed to rate as Lowest in emotional charge, those pictures that conveyed little to no emotional information and resulted in the participants’ feeling completely relaxed or calm, neutral and/or dispassionate. On the other hand, participants were instructed to rate as Highest in emotional charge those pictures that had high emotional content and made them feel stimulated, excited, emotionally negative, and/or passionate (see  Supplemental Information for picture rating task and results ). 
 
 
 Experimental procedures 
 The 280 trials were divided into seven runs of 40 trials (8 HiEmo, 8 LoEmo, 8 Neu, 8 AbsNeu, and 8 scrambled). Two different run orders were randomly assigned to the 18 participants to control for order effects. To avoid induction of mood states, the trials within each block were pseudo-randomized so that no more than two trials of the same valence type were consecutively presented. As illustrated in  Figure 1 , each trial started with the presentation of a rectangular picture for 250 or 1000 ms and was followed by a fixation screen for 1750 or 1000 ms, respectively. The subject’s task was to indicate the orientation of the rectangular picture (i.e. vertical or horizontal) by pressing a button. Subjects were instructed to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible during the 2 second time window, beginning with the onset of the rectangular pictures. Immediately following this interval, a confidence screen was presented for 2 seconds, during which subjects rated the confidence of their orientation decision on a 3-point Likert scale (1 = lowest, 3 = highest). Confidence ratings were not considered in further analysis as performance was near ceiling for the low perceptual load condition. Each trial lasted 4 seconds [stimulus (2s) plus confidence rating (2s)], and was followed by a jittered fixation interval, drawn from an exponential distribution with a median of 6 seconds and a range from 4 to 12 seconds. Thus, the total trial length ranged from 8 to 16 seconds. 
 
 
 Imaging Protocol 
 MR scanning was conducted on a 1.5 T Siemens Sonata scanner. After the sagittal localizer and the 3D magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) anatomical series (FOV = 256 × 256 mm; TR = 1600 ms; TE = 3.82 ms; number of slices = 112; voxel size = 1 mm 3 ), series of functional volumes allowing for full-brain coverage were acquired axially, using an echoplanar sequence (FOV = 256 × 256 mm; TR = 2000 ms; TE = 40 ms; number of slices = 28; voxel size = 4 × 4 x 4 mm; FA = 90°). 
 
 
 Behavioral Data Analysis 
 Shape detection performance was measured as reaction time (RT) to making orientation discrimination decisions (vertical vs. horizontal) to the rectangular pictures. Repeated measures ANOVAs on RT and accuracy data were employed to assess the impact of emotional charge of distraction, perceptual load, stimulus duration, and their interactions on performance in the shape detection task. To compare the impact of rough vs. finer assessments of the emotional content, these analyses were performed on both the more comprehensive emotional categories (all emotional (All-Emo) vs. all neutral (All-Neu)) and on the most dissimilar emotional categories (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu). These analyses were performed on data from all 18 participants. Pairwise comparisons were Bonferroni corrected. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Analysis 
 Imaging data analyses were performed on 18 subjects, using SPM (Statistical Parametric Mapping) in conjunction with in-house custom Matlab scripts. Statistical analyses were preceded by the following pre-processing steps: quality assurance, TR alignment, motion correction, co-registration, normalization, and smoothing (8 mm 3  Kernel). For individual analyses, task related activity was identified by convolving a vector of the onset times of the stimuli with a synthetic hemodynamic response (HDR) and its temporal derivative. The general linear model, as implemented in SPM2, was used to model the effects of interests and other confounding effects (e.g., session effects and magnetic field drift). Group analyses were conducted using random-effects models to assess the effect of distractor content, perceptual load, and stimulus duration on emotion processing. Analyses focused on brain regions associated with both basic (e.g., AMY) and higher-level emotion processing (e.g., PFC). 
 The main goals of the present investigation were to investigate the traditional and non-traditional views concerning the interaction between emotion and selective attention, and to distinguish between the neural correlates of the response to the detrimental impact vs. reduction of emotional distraction, based on manipulating both the emotional charge of distracting information and the demands of the main cognitive task. To accomplish these goals, activity in brain regions specifically sensitive to the presence of emotional distraction, in conditions of manipulating perceptual load, stimulus duration, and their interactions on performance in the perceptual discrimination task was first investigated. Then, activity in these regions was tested for co-variations with RT data, to identify responses reflecting the detrimental impact of emotional distraction vs. the engagement of defensive mechanisms to help cope with distracting emotions. Increased activity to emotional distraction in emotion processing regions, coupled with positive co-variations with RT (slower responses), would be indicative of a detrimental impact of emotional distraction, possibly reflecting bottom-up effects. On the other hand, negative co-variations of activity in brain regions with RT (speeded responses), in response to emotional distraction, would probably reflect the engagement of top-down mechanisms, to cope with distraction. These analyses are described in detail below. 
 
 
 The Debate: The Traditional vs. Competing Views of Emotion and Attention 
 To investigate the traditional and non-traditional views of emotion and selective attention interactions when considering both emotional charge and attentional demand, we first assessed the effect of manipulating the degree of emotional charge on activation in emotion processing regions. To assess emotional distraction for a more comprehensive assessment, a t-map contrasting All-Emo vs. All-Neu items was computed. To assess emotional distraction for the finer assessment, a t-map was computed that contrasted only HiEmo vs. AbsNeu items. Next, overlapping and non-overlapping brain regions were identified between the two assessments. 
 To examine brain regions susceptible to emotion processing that were modulated by manipulations of perceptual load (Load) or stimulus duration (Dur) we employed subtraction analyses. First, to assess emotional distraction for low and high Load, and short and long Dur separately, t-maps contrasting HiEmo and AbsNeu pictures were computed for when the task was performed under low load (Lo-Load), high load (Hi-Load), short Dur, and long Dur. Thus identifying voxels where HiEmo pictures produced greater activity than AbsNeu pictures for each condition. Then, to identify areas of brain activity where the amount of emotional distraction was affected by Load, the individual t-map for emotional distraction when Load was low or high was subtracted from the individual t-map for emotional distraction when Load was high or low, [((HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load) - (HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load)) ∩ (HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load)] and [((HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load) - (HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load)) ∩ (HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load)]. 
 To identify areas of brain activity that were more susceptible to emotional modulation when Dur was short or long the individual t-map for emotional distraction when Dur was long or short was subtracted from the individual t-map for emotional distraction when Dur was short or long and, [((HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur) - (HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur)) ∩ (HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur)] and [((HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur) - (HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur)) ∩ (HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur)]. 
 
 
 Dissociating Neural Responses Reflecting Detrimental Impact of vs. Reduced Emotional Distraction 
 To identify areas of brain activity reflecting the detrimental impact of vs. reduced emotional distraction, we performed brain-behavior correlations between activity in regions showing the particular effects corresponding to the significant behavioral results (i.e. the main effect of emotion and the emotional content x stimulus duration interaction) and RT data. Based on previous investigations, we expected that increased activity in regions of the  HotEmo  system linked to impaired performance would be associated with a detrimental impact of emotional distraction ( Denkova et al., 2010 ), whereas increased activity in regions of the  ColdEx  system linked to enhanced performance would reflect the engagement of defensive mechanisms to help reduce the impact of emotional distraction ( Dolcos et al., 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ). 
 To identify main effects in more comprehensive comparisons (e.g., All-Emo vs. All-Neu), an intensity threshold of p < 0.001 uncorrected was used, for finer assessments of main effects (e.g., HiEmo vs. AbsNeu), a threshold of p < 0.005 uncorrected was used, and for analyses assessing interactions (e.g., emotion x perceptual load), a threshold of p < 0.05 was employed. It should be noted that for all fMRI analyses the results of the direct contrasts were reported only if they survived additional independent masking procedures, and hence the activations in the resulting conjunction maps survived multiple criteria. For example, although an interaction (e.g., emotion x stimulus duration) an independent threshold of p < 0.05 was used, this corresponding statistical map was inclusively masked by the statistical map identifying a main effect of emotion on the long duration condition that survived an independent threshold of p < 0.005. Hence, the joint probability of the resulting conjunction map was of p < 0.00025, which is the product of their independent probabilities (0.05 × 0.005) ( Fisher, 1950 ). Similarly, for correlation analyses involving double conjunctions, the joint threshold was also of p < 0.00025, resulting from the multiplication of the threshold for the correlation t-map (p < 0.05) with that of the main effect map used to inclusively mask it with (p < 0.005). Details about the joint thresholds are provided in the legend of each Figure and Table. An extent threshold of 5 contiguous voxels was used in all analyses. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral results 
 
 Reconciling the Debate: Emotion Effects are both Automatic and Modulated by Manipulations of Attention. Discrimination Performance 
 When the distractors were analyzed as broad valence categories without consideration of emotional charge (i.e., All-Emo vs. All-Neu vs. Scrambled), as has been more commonly done in the existing literature, emotional content was not found to interact with task manipulations of attention (see  Table 1  for a summary of mean reaction time and accuracy data). A main effect of Emotion and Load were found such that All-Emo distractors took longer to respond to compared to All-Neu distractors, and Hi-Load stimuli took longer to respond to compared to Lo-Load stimuli. These results confirm that emotional distractors were diverting resources from the main task and that rectangles with ratios closer to a square were harder to discriminate than those that were clearly rectangle. Importantly, this comprehensive assessment yielded no interaction effects between emotion and attentional demands (see  Supplemental Information section for statistical details ). These findings are consistent with the traditional view regarding emotion processing, as an impairing effects of emotional distraction was found regardless of the processing demands necessary to perform the main task. 
 Further investigation of behavioral data revealed that the emotional content of the distractors interacted with manipulations of processing demands only when a finer assessment of emotional charge was considered. To test the effects of emotional charge, a 3-way repeated measures ANOVA on RT data was performed using only the most dissimilar emotional conditions (i.e. HiEmo vs. AbsNeu) and levels of Load and Duration. This finer assessment revealed a marginally significant Emotion by Duration interaction [F(1,17) = 4.14, p = 0.058, η 2  = 0.2], which was qualified by main effects of Emotion (HiEmo > AbsNeu, F(1,17) = 11.35 , p = 0.004, η 2  = 0.4) and Load (Hi-load > Lo-load, F(1,17) = 31.9, p < 0.001, η 2  = 0.65), but not Duration. Post hoc analyses to elucidate this interaction revealed that it was driven by participants’ longer RT for HiEmo compared to AbsNeu pictures when stimulus duration was long and Load was low, F(1,17) = 5.83, p = 0.027, η 2  = 0.26 (see  Figure 2 ). These results confirm that the difference in magnitude in the emotional charge of the stimuli plays an important role in the effect of attention on emotion. Specifically, participants were more susceptible to emotional distraction when the difference in emotional content was the greatest (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu), there was more time for distraction (Long Dur), and the attentional resources were most available (Lo-Load). These findings are consistent with the competing view regarding emotion processing, and overall the behavioral results are consistent with both the traditional and the competing views. 
 
 
 
 fMRI results 
 
 Dissociating Neural Responses Reflecting Detrimental Impact of vs. Reduced Emotional Distraction Main Effect of Emotion 
 Overall, the behavioral results were consistent with both traditional and competing views and provide evidence that emotion processing is both automatic and modulated by manipulations of attention. This idea was also investigated in the analysis of brain imaging data. First, to assess the impact of emotional charge of distraction we examined the neural correlates for the main effect of Emotion using both the more comprehensive assessment (All-Emo vs. All-Neu) and the finer assessment (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu). Comparison of these assessments revealed that regions susceptible to modulation by emotion (e.g., AMY, insula, and medial/inferior frontal gyri, fusiform and lateral occipital areas) underwent a larger degree of modulation when the most dissimilar emotional distractor conditions were considered (see  Table 2 ). This was especially evident when investigating AMY activity where the strength of activation significantly decreased when using All-Emo vs. All-Neu distractors compared to when using only the extremes (see  Figure 3 ). These results emphasize the role that the overall level of emotional charge and the relative difference between emotional and neutral conditions play in producing response in both basic (AMY) and higher-level (PFC) emotion processing brain regions. 
 Importantly, these analyses also identified the neural correlates of responses reflecting the detrimental impact of emotional distraction, which parallels the main effect of Emotion observed behaviorally, supporting the traditional view. Given that overall emotional stimuli were associated with longer RT, increased activity in these regions may reflect longer processing time needed to make the orientation responses to these stimuli. Consistent with this idea, correlation analyses identified a significant positive co-variation between activity in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC, BA 8/9) and the RT (r = 0.52, p = 0.03; peak voxel Talairach coordinates: x = −5, y = 48, z = 34). This finding suggests that activity in this area of the dmPFC is directly related to preferentially processing emotional over neutral stimuli and the subsequent distracting effects of emotion. 
 
 
 Effect of Processing Load on Emotion Processing 
 Given the fact that there might not be a one-to-one relationship between brain activity and behavior, we investigated how the manipulation of Load affected activity in brain regions susceptible to modulation by emotion, even in the absence of significant interactions (e.g., Emotion x Load) in behavioral results. Such an analysis revealed brain regions that reflect enhanced processing of emotion (HiEmo > AbsNeu) when processing Load was low compared to high (Lo Load > Hi Load, See  Figure 4 ), and included the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), lateral occipital cortex (LOC), and subcortical areas (i.e., ventral striatum) (see  Table 3 ). Thus, while the behavioral data were not sensitive enough to detect changes in emotion processing as a function of Load, such changes were identified in the brain imaging data, as some areas susceptible to emotional modulation were more engaged when the processing demands of the main task were low and hence more resources were available for distraction. This finding provides support for the non-traditional, competing, view of emotion processing. 
 
 
 Effect of Stimulus Duration on Emotion Processing 
 To further investigate the areas linked to the impairment of performance under manipulation of processing resources, the brain regions linked to modulation of emotion processing by increases or decreases of stimulus duration were then investigated (Emotion x Duration interaction). As expected, this analysis identified a number of brain regions differentially susceptible to emotional modulation for longer vs. shorter processing times (see  Table 4 ). While certain emotion processing regions showed increases in emotion processing in response to both longer and shorter duration times (e.g., dmPFC, medial occipital cortex), other emotion processing regions (i.e., the dorsal ACC, vlPFC) were more susceptible to emotion under longer stimulus durations. As the pattern of activity in these latter regions paralleled the behavioral pattern, we further investigated whether their engagement was linked to a detrimental effect of emotional distraction or to reduced emotional distraction, by co-varying activity in these regions with RT data. 
 These analyses identified a positive co-variation between activity in the right vlPFC (BA 45) and RT (r = 0.65, p = 0.004; peak voxel Talairach coordinates: x = 51, y = 24, z = 7). While this correlation was primarily driven by stimulus duration [i.e. no significant relationship was present in the same area for low (r = 0.31, p = 0.22) or high (r = 0.25, p = 0.32) Load], there was stronger activation present in this area under low, t (17) = 2.56, p ≤ 0.05, compared to high Load, t (17) = 1.66, p > 0.05. This finding suggests that when more time is available for distraction, activity in the vlPFC is directly related to the distracting effects of task-irrelevant emotion on perceptual attention processing. Moreover, this region exhibited heightened sensitivity to emotional stimuli when attentional resources were not maximally engaged in a demanding task, and this was observed regardless of the effect of detrimental impact on behavioral performance (i.e., as was the case for Load). 
 On the other hand, a negative co-variation was identified in the dACC with the RT data (r = −0.57, p = 0.01). To determine if, as in the behavioral data, Lo-Load trials were driving this relationship we further examined the relationship between dACC activity and behavioral performance for Lo- and Hi-Load conditions. First areas of brain activity that corresponded with the interaction under Lo-Load were identified - activation in the dACC, LOC , and anterior insula (AI/vlPFC) was found to be strongest during such trials. Then, brain-behavior co-variations between these areas of activation and the RT data for these trials were assessed. These analyses revealed that activity in the dACC (See  Figure 5 ) and LOC was negatively correlated with the RT to HiEmo compared to AbsNeu distractors during Lo-Load and long duration trials (r = −0.52, p = 0.03 and r = −0.62, p = 0.01, respectively); importantly, this was not found for Hi-Load and long Duration trials (r = −0.29, p = 0.24 and r = 0.20, p = 0.43, respectively). These findings are consistent role of the ACC as a region sensitive to emotion-cognition integration and conflict resolution and with the role of the LOC (specifically BA 19) in object categorization. 
 Taken together, these findings provide behavioral and neuroimaging evidence supporting both the traditional and non-traditional views of the interaction between emotion and selective attention, and point to brain regions whose activity was linked to a detrimental effect of emotional distraction on cognitive performance and to brain regions that helped reduce the effects of such distraction on cognitive performance. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Using an experimental paradigm that manipulated both the emotional charge of distracting information and the demands of the main perceptual task, the present study yielded three main findings. First, consistent with both the traditional and the competing views, we found direct evidence that emotional information can be both processed automatically and susceptible to attentional modulations. However, emotional content and attentional load were only found to interact when finer assessments of emotional charge and processing demand were considered. Second, processing of emotional distraction was associated with increased activity in brain regions that are typically part of the emotion processing network (including AMY, lateral and medial PFC, and the occipital cortex), but activity in the dorsomedial PFC and ventrolaterall PFC was also associated with a detrimental impact of emotional distraction on cognitive performance. Third, we also found that activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and the lateral occipital cortex (LOC) was associated reduced emotional distraction. These findings will be discussed in turn below. 
 
 
 Reconciling the Debate 
 
 Emotion Effects are both Automatic and Modulated by Manipulations of Attention 
 Whether or not available attentional resources are needed for emotional information to be processed has been strongly debated in the recent emotion-cognition literature ( Anderson et al., 2003 ;  Erthal et al., 2005 ; Luo et al., ; Pessoa, ;  Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ; Pourtois et al., ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ;  Vuilleumier & Driver, 2007 ). Here, we provide evidence that emotional information can be both processed automatically and is susceptible to attentional modulations. Specifically, in support of the traditional view, emotional stimuli generally elicited longer response times, suggesting that the emotional information inherent in the negative pictures was being similarly processed, regardless of manipulations of attentional demand. On the other hand, in support of the competing view, the detrimental effect of emotional distraction on the orientation discrimination task was found to be largest when most attentional resources were available (i.e., trials with low perceptual load and longer presentation time). 
 A critical aspect of our experimental design that made these findings possible was the involvement of finer assessments of the impact of emotional charge and processing demand. Regarding the emotional charge, one possible argument as to why in some cases emotion does not seem to be processed automatically is that finer assessments of emotional charge have not been taken into consideration. Indeed, while a main effect of emotional content was found in both the broad (all emotional vs. all neutral) and extreme (high emotional vs. absolute neutral) distractor analyses, the effect of emotion was stronger when isolating the extreme emotion conditions, and this effect was reflected at both behavioral and brain imaging levels (i.e., longer RT for high emotional stimuli and greater activity in the emotion processing network, respectively). These finding suggests that to a degree, the emotional information inherent in the negative pictures was probably being automatically processed regardless of manipulations of attentional demand, which is supportive of the traditional view ( Vuilleumier, 2005 ). Regarding the manipulation of processing demand, the detrimental effect of emotional distraction on the perceptual task was found to be largest not only when the emotional distraction was the most powerful but also when most attentional resources were available (i.e., trials with low perceptual load and longer presentation time). This finding suggests that processing of emotional information was partially dependent upon the amount of attentional resources available for distraction, and is thus supportive of the non-traditional view ( Pessoa, 2005 ). The present findings also highlights the importance of task manipulations that consider both aspects that may influence performance in this task (emotional content and processing demand), as the debate over the automaticity of emotional processing is better informed here by examining various levels of the emotion and attention manipulations. 
 The neuroimaging data also presented evidence for both automatic and attention-regulated processing of emotional distraction. On the one hand, areas known to be involved in affective processing or to be sensitive to affective stimulation, including AMY, the lateral and medial PFC, insula, as well as perceptual areas (fusiform gyrus, LOC) showed greater activations to emotional compared to neutral distractors. Notably, activity in specific regions of this network was unaffected by manipulations of perceptual load and/or stimulus duration, which may reflect the automaticity of emotion processing and provide support for the traditional view of emotion-cognition interactions (Pourtois et al., 2010;  Vuilleumier, 2005 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). On the other hand, not all affective processing regions were found to have activations that were independent of manipulations of attention. Activations in specific regions (i.e. vlPFC, mPFC, LOC, and certain subcortical areas) were greater to highly emotional compared to absolute neutral trials during low perceptual load or long stimulus duration trials and were attenuated or no longer present when perceptual load was high or stimulus duration short. These changes in responsivity to emotional stimuli across manipulations of attention demonstrate that in some affective areas of the brain emotional processing is modulated by the amount of available attentional resources. These findings support the non-traditional, competing, view of emotion-cognition interactions that claims that emotional stimuli compete for processing resources with other stimuli ( Pessoa, 2005 ;  Pessoa, Kastner, & Ungerleider, 2002 ;  Pessoa et al., 2005 ). 
 The fact that the latter activations were observed in the absence of a significant emotion-perceptual load interaction in the behavioral data point to the complexity of the interactions between the  HotEmo  and  ColdEx  systems, which does not always allow for a direct one-to-one relationship between brain and behavior. Nevertheless, these activations are valuable to consider, as differences in processing at the brain level may not always be reflected in overt behavioral measures. At any rate, the present behavioral and brain imaging findings provide direct evidence that the two views concerning basic emotion processing are not mutually exclusive and that depending on the circumstances emotional information can be processed automatically but is also susceptible to modulations linked to the availability of attentional resources. 
 
 
 
 Dissociating Neural Responses Reflecting Detrimental Impact of vs. Reduced Emotional Distraction 
 
 Dorsomedial and Ventrolateral PFC Activity Linked to a Detrimental Impact of Emotional Distraction vs. Dorsal ACC and LOC Activity Linked to Reduced Emotional Distraction 
 Among the regions showing overall increased sensitivity to the presence of emotional distraction, the dorsomedial PFC (BA 8/9) was also directly associated with the orientation discrimination performance, as expressed in the RT data. Specifically, activity in this region was positively correlated with the time needed to make the orientation discrimination decision to emotional compared to neutral distraction – as the RT to emotional relative to neutral distraction increased, activity in the dorsomedial PFC also increased. While a consistent functional role for mPFC as a whole has yet to be clarified ( Etkin, Egner, & Kalisch, 2011 ), previous research with emotional distraction has found an increase in activation, or reduction in deactivation, in the mPFC ( Denkova et al., 2010 ;  Geday & Gjedde, 2009 ;  Geday, Kupers, & Gjedde, 2007 ;  Gjedde & Geday, 2009 ;  Liberzon et al., 2007 ;  Northoff et al., 2004 ), suggesting this area to be responsive to emotional interference. Moreover, the fact that the response of the mPFC to negative distraction was unchanged across levels of perceptual load and stimulus duration suggests that activity in this region may be linked to the ventral attentional network, which is an automatic, stimulus-driven, and bottom up system ( Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ;  Fox, Corbetta, Snyder, Vincent, & Raichle, 2006 ;  Kincade, Abrams, Astafiev, Shulman, & Corbetta, 2005 ;  Posner & Petersen, 1990 ). This interpretation is consistent with evidence that activity in a similar dorsomedial PFC region was specifically associated with processing of emotional arousal, rather than valence ( Dolcos et al., 2004 ), suggesting a role of this region in processing information with enhanced motivational relevance ( Goldin, McRae, Ramel, & Gross, 2008 ;  Gusnard, Akbudak, Shulman, & Raichle, 2001 ;  Holzel et al., 2007 ;  Lane, Fink, Chau, & Dolan, 1997 ;  Lane et al., 1998 ;  Northoff et al., 2000 ;  Phan et al., 2003 ;  Simpson, Snyder, Gusnard, & Raichle, 2001 ;  Taylor, Phan, Decker, & Liberzon, 2003 ), which may explain longer response times associated with the response to negative distraction. 
 In addition to the dorsomedial PFC, the ventrolaterall PFC was also directly associated with orientation discrimination performance as measured by latency to respond. Activity in this region was positively correlated with response time to emotional compared to neutral distraction under long stimulus exposure durations compared to short durations, suggesting that increased activity in this region is associated with enhanced detrimental impact of the emotional distraction. This finding is consistent with evidence that this region is involved in reflexive orienting to motivationally relevant stimuli in the environment ( Corbetta et al., 2008 ), and with evidence of its involvement in emotional perception, in general ( Dolcos et al., 2004 ;  Phan, Wager, Taylor, & Liberzon, 2002 ), and in the response to emotional distraction, in particular ( Anticevic, Repovs, & Barch, 2010 ;  Denkova et al., 2010 ;  Dolcos et al., 2011 ;  Dolcos et al., 2006 ;  Dolcos & McCarthy, 2006 ) 
 The present study also provided evidence concerning the neural correlates of mechanisms engaged to reduce emotional distraction. In addition to the network of brain regions consistent with the main effect of emotional distraction mentioned above, the present study also identified brain regions linked to emotion x perceptual load x stimulus duration interaction observed in the behavioral data. This analysis identified the brain areas involved when emotional distraction produced the strongest effect (i.e., activations to highly emotional-low perceptual load and long stimulus duration trials), which included the dorsal ACC, IFG, and LOC. Further analyses elucidating the contribution of these regions to the observed effect, to relate their activations to the actual behavioral performance revealed that activity in both the dorsal ACC and LOC was negatively correlated with RT, which is consistent with an engagement of these regions to minimize emotional distraction. 
 Given the evidence concerning the role of dorsal ACC in top-down control, the present findings are not surprising. The ACC is an area of cortex commonly associated with conflict monitoring ( Botvinick, Cohen, & Carter, 2004 ), and dorsal ACC is part of the dorso-parietal attention network ( Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000 ), associated with executive control ( Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ;  Duncan & Owen, 2000 ;  Ochsner & Gross, 2005 ). Additionally, dorsal ACC activity is systematically found in tasks with emotional and cognitive components ( Phan et al., 2002 ), as well as in tasks in which emotional processing is modulated by manipulations of attentional demand ( Mohanty et al., 2007 ;  Whalen, Bush et al., 1998 ). Finally, ACC activity has been consistently found in tasks where, similar to the present study, goal-irrelevant emotional information is spatially contiguous with the target, such as the emotional Stroop task ( Egner, Etkin, Gale, & Hirsch, 2008 ;  Etkin, Egner, Peraza, Kandel, & Hirsch, 2006 ;  Haas, Omura, Constable, & Canli, 2006 ) and the emotional flanker task (Kanske & Kotz, 2010;  Whalen, Bush et al., 1998 ). 
 In the context of the present task, due to the association with improved performance under conditions of high emotional distraction, the ACC and LOC response likely reflects the enhancement of task-relevant stimulus features (vertical / horizontal orientation), in order successfully cope with the presence of emotional distraction. This is consistent with evidence that LOC is an area of cortex commonly responsive to the perception and categorization of scenes and objects ( Grill-Spector et al., 1999 ;  Grill-Spector et al., 1998 ;  Malach et al., 1995 ;  Walther, Caddigan, Fei-Fei, & Beck, 2009 ), and hence it is reasonable to work jointly with ACC to help cope with emotional distraction when attentional resources are most susceptible to be “captured” by task-irrelevant emotional information. The idea that the ACC aids in coping with emotion is further supported by research demonstrating altered ACC reactivity to emotional stimuli in individuals high in trait anxiety ( Simmons et al., 2008 ), or with a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) ( Bremner et al., 2004 ;  Shin et al., 2001 ), generalized anxiety disorder ( Etkin, Prater, Hoeft, Menon, & Schatzberg, 2010 ), or major depressive disorder (MDD) ( Halari et al., 2009 ). 
 It should be noted that while the present results provide valuable insight to the interaction between negative stimuli and attention, a limitation of this study is that interpretation of results is limited to negative stimuli. Only negative picture were involved to stay consistent with previous research examining the automaticity of emotion ( Pessoa, McKenna et al., 2002 ;  Pessoa et al., 2005 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ), but given the evidence concerning valence-related differences in the impact of emotion on attention ( Anderson et al., 2003 ;  Beall & Herbert, 2008 ;  Schupp et al., 2004 ;  Shaw, Lien, Ruthruff, & Allen, 2011 ), examination of the impact of positive distraction would be valuable in understanding the role that valence plays in interacting with attention under various manipulations of perceptual load. Future studies should investigate whether the effects identified here also apply to positive distraction. 
 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 In sum, the present study provided direct evidence in support of both automatic and attention-dependent processing of task-irrelevant emotional information. As such, neither the traditional nor the non-traditional view of emotion-cognition interactions appears to fully account for the present results, which are instead consistent with both views. First, we found evidence that emotion processing occurs automatically, but is also influenced by the emotional charge of the stimuli used and by the amount of attentional resources available for processing. Second, we found evidence that while activity in the dorsomedial PFC and ventrolaterall PFC was linked to enhanced impact of emotional distraction, activity in the dorsal ACC and LOC aided in reducing such distraction. Better delineation of the complex relationships between emotion and cognition not only has theoretical value in a broader context, but also lends insight into understanding affective disorders in which these relationships are dysfunctional, and possibly into understanding the mechanisms involved in the susceptibility to these clinical conditions. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supplemental 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported by start-up funds to F. D. A. J. O. was supported by the NIMH National Research Service Award MH 19554, to the University of Illinois. F. D. was supported by a Young Investigator Award from the National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression and a CPRF Award from the Canadian Psychiatric Research Foundation. The authors wish to thank Peter Seres for assistance with data collection. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Neural systems for recognizing emotion 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2002 
 12 
 2 
 169 
 177 
 12015233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Emotional vision 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2004 
 7 
 11 
 1167 
 1168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anders 
 S 
 
 
 Lotze 
 M 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 Birbaumer 
 N 
 
 
 Brain activity underlying emotional valence and arousal: a response-related fMRI study 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2004 
 23 
 4 
 200 
 209 
 15449355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 A 
 
 
 Phelps 
 E 
 
 
 Lesions of the human amygdala impair enhanced perception of emotionally salient events 
 Nature 
 2001 
 411 
 6835 
 305 
 309 
 11357132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Panitz 
 D 
 
 
 De Rosa 
 E 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Neural correlates of the automatic processing of threat facial signals 
 J Neurosci 
 2003 
 23 
 13 
 5627 
 5633 
 12843265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Resisting emotional interference: brain regions facilitating working memory performance during negative distraction 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2010 
 10 
 2 
 159 
 173 
 20498341 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beall 
 P 
 
 
 Herbert 
 A 
 
 
 The face wins: Stronger automatic processing of affect in facial expressions than words in a modified Stroop task 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 2008 
 22 
 8 
 1613 
 1642 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: an update 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2004 
 8 
 12 
 539 
 546 
 15556023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bremner 
 JD 
 
 
 Vermetten 
 E 
 
 
 Vythilingam 
 M 
 
 
 Afzal 
 N 
 
 
 Schmahl 
 C 
 
 
 Elzinga 
 B 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of the classic color and emotional stroop in women with abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2004 
 55 
 6 
 612 
 620 
 15013830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 Luu 
 P 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Cognitive and emotional influences in anterior cingulate cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2000 
 4 
 6 
 215 
 222 
 10827444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 58 
 3 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2002 
 3 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Denkova 
 E 
 
 
 Wong 
 G 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 S 
 
 
 Sung 
 K 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Coupland 
 N 
 
 
 
 The impact of anxiety-inducing distraction on cognitive performance: a combined brain imaging and personality investigation 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 11 
 e14150 
 21152391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 Iordan 
 AD 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 S 
 
 
 Neural correlates of emotion-cognition interactions: A review of evidence from brain imaging investigations 
 Journal of Cognitive Psychology, In Press 
 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 Kragel 
 P 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Role of the inferior frontal cortex in coping with distracting emotions 
 Neuroreport 
 2006 
 17 
 15 
 1591 
 1594 
 17001274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Dissociable effects of arousal and valence on prefrontal activity indexing emotional evaluation and subsequent memory: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 1 
 64 
 74 
 15325353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolcos 
 F 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Brain systems mediating cognitive interference by emotional distraction 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 7 
 2072 
 2079 
 16481440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive demands 
 Trends Neurosci 
 2000 
 23 
 10 
 475 
 483 
 11006464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Gale 
 S 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 Dissociable neural systems resolve conflict from emotional versus nonemotional distracters 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 6 
 1475 
 1484 
 17940084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erthal 
 FS 
 
 
 de Oliveira 
 L 
 
 
 Mocaiber 
 I 
 
 
 Pereira 
 MG 
 
 
 Machado-Pinheiro 
 W 
 
 
 Volchan 
 E 
 
 
 
 Load-dependent modulation of affective picture processing 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2005 
 5 
 4 
 388 
 395 
 16541809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Kalisch 
 R 
 
 
 Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2011 
 15 
 2 
 85 
 93 
 21167765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Peraza 
 DM 
 
 
 Kandel 
 ER 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 Resolving emotional conflict: a role for the rostral anterior cingulate cortex in modulating activity in the amygdala 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 51 
 6 
 871 
 882 
 16982430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Prater 
 KE 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Failure of anterior cingulate activation and connectivity with the amygdala during implicit regulation of emotional processing in generalized anxiety disorder 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2010 
 167 
 5 
 545 
 554 
 20123913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fichtenholtz 
 HM 
 
 
 Dean 
 HL 
 
 
 Dillon 
 DG 
 
 
 Yamasaki 
 H 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Emotion-attention network interactions during a visual oddball task 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 2004 
 20 
 1 
 67 
 80 
 15130591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fisher 
 RA 
 
 
 Statistical methods for research workers 
 1950 
 London 
 Oliver and Boyd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Spontaneous neuronal activity distinguishes human dorsal and ventral attention systems 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2006 
 103 
 26 
 10046 
 10051 
 16788060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geday 
 J 
 
 
 Gjedde 
 A 
 
 
 Attention, emotion, and deactivation of default activity in inferior medial prefrontal cortex 
 Brain Cogn 
 2009 
 69 
 2 
 344 
 352 
 18950928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geday 
 J 
 
 
 Kupers 
 R 
 
 
 Gjedde 
 A 
 
 
 As time goes by: temporal constraints on emotional activation of inferior medial prefrontal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 12 
 2753 
 2759 
 17332416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gjedde 
 A 
 
 
 Geday 
 J 
 
 
 Deep brain stimulation reveals emotional impact processing in ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
 PLoS One 
 2009 
 4 
 12 
 e8120 
 19997647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldin 
 PR 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Ramel 
 W 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 The neural bases of emotion regulation: reappraisal and suppression of negative emotion 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2008 
 63 
 6 
 577 
 586 
 17888411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Visual recognition: as soon as you know it is there, you know what it is 
 Psychol Sci 
 2005 
 16 
 2 
 152 
 160 
 15686582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Kushnir 
 T 
 
 
 Edelman 
 S 
 
 
 Avidan 
 G 
 
 
 Itzchak 
 Y 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Differential processing of objects under various viewing conditions in the human lateral occipital complex 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 24 
 1 
 187 
 203 
 10677037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Kushnir 
 T 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Edelman 
 S 
 
 
 Itzchak 
 Y 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 A sequence of object-processing stages revealed by fMRI in the human occipital lobe 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1998 
 6 
 4 
 316 
 328 
 9704268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grimm 
 S 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 CF 
 
 
 Bermpohl 
 F 
 
 
 Heinzel 
 A 
 
 
 Dahlem 
 Y 
 
 
 Wyss 
 M 
 
 
 
 Segregated neural representation of distinct emotion dimensions in the prefrontal cortex-an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 30 
 1 
 325 
 340 
 16230029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2001 
 98 
 7 
 4259 
 4264 
 11259662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haas 
 BW 
 
 
 Omura 
 K 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Interference produced by emotional conflict associated with anterior cingulate activation 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2006 
 6 
 2 
 152 
 156 
 17007235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Halari 
 R 
 
 
 Simic 
 M 
 
 
 Pariante 
 CM 
 
 
 Papadopoulos 
 A 
 
 
 Cleare 
 A 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 
 Reduced activation in lateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate during attention and cognitive control functions in medication-naive adolescents with depression compared to controls 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 2009 
 50 
 3 
 307 
 316 
 19175815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hansen 
 CH 
 
 
 Hansen 
 RD 
 
 
 Finding the face in the crowd: an anger superiority effect 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 1988 
 54 
 6 
 917 
 924 
 3397866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holzel 
 BK 
 
 
 Ott 
 U 
 
 
 Hempel 
 H 
 
 
 Hackl 
 A 
 
 
 Wolf 
 K 
 
 
 Stark 
 R 
 
 
 
 Differential engagement of anterior cingulate and adjacent medial frontal cortex in adept meditators and non-meditators 
 Neurosci Lett 
 2007 
 421 
 1 
 16 
 21 
 17548160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanske 
 P 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Modulation of early conflict processing: N200 responses to emotional words in a flanker task 
 Neuropsychologia 
 48 
 12 
 3661 
 3664 
 20654636 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Abrams 
 RA 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 An event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study of voluntary and stimulus-driven orienting of attention 
 J Neurosci 
 2005 
 25 
 18 
 4593 
 4604 
 15872107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 Barrett 
 LF 
 
 
 Joseph 
 J 
 
 
 Bliss-Moreau 
 E 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 K 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Functional grouping and cortical-subcortical interactions in emotion: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 42 
 2 
 998 
 1031 
 18579414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Chau 
 PM 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Neural activation during selective attention to subjective emotional responses 
 Neuroreport 
 1997 
 8 
 18 
 3969 
 3972 
 9462476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Axelrod 
 B 
 
 
 Yun 
 LS 
 
 
 Holmes 
 A 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 GE 
 
 
 Neural correlates of levels of emotional awareness. Evidence of an interaction between emotion and attention in the anterior cingulate cortex 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1998 
 10 
 4 
 525 
 535 
 9712681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 International affective picture system (IAPS): Affective ratings of pictures and instruction manual 
 Technical Report A-8 
 2008 
 Gainesville, FL 
 University of Florida 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lavie 
 N 
 
 
 Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective attention 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 1995 
 21 
 3 
 451 
 468 
 7790827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 J 
 
 
 The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life 
 1996 
 New York 
 Simon and Schuster 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Emotion circuits in the brain 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2000 
 23 
 155 
 184 
 10845062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 King 
 AP 
 
 
 Britton 
 JC 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Abelson 
 JL 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Paralimbic and medial prefrontal cortical involvement in neuroendocrine responses to traumatic stimuli 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2007 
 164 
 8 
 1250 
 1258 
 17671289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luo 
 Q 
 
 
 Holroyd 
 T 
 
 
 Majestic 
 C 
 
 
 Cheng 
 X 
 
 
 Schechter 
 J 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJ 
 
 
 Emotional automaticity is a matter of timing 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 17 
 5825 
 5829 
 20427643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Reppas 
 JB 
 
 
 Benson 
 RR 
 
 
 Kwong 
 KK 
 
 
 Jiang 
 H 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 WA 
 
 
 
 Object-related activity revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging in human occipital cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1995 
 92 
 18 
 8135 
 8139 
 7667258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 DG 
 
 
 Nakic 
 M 
 
 
 Fridberg 
 D 
 
 
 Kamel 
 N 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJ 
 
 
 The impact of processing load on emotion 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 34 
 3 
 1299 
 1309 
 17161627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohanty 
 A 
 
 
 Engels 
 AS 
 
 
 Herrington 
 JD 
 
 
 Heller 
 W 
 
 
 Ho 
 MH 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 
 Differential engagement of anterior cingulate cortex subdivisions for cognitive and emotional function 
 Psychophysiology 
 2007 
 44 
 3 
 343 
 351 
 17433093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moors 
 A 
 
 
 De Houwer 
 J 
 
 
 Automatic appraisal of motivational valence: Motivational affective priming and Simon effect 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 2001 
 15 
 6 
 749 
 766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moors 
 A 
 
 
 De Houwer 
 J 
 
 
 Automaticity: A theoretical and conceptual analysis 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 2006 
 132 
 2 
 297 
 326 
 16536645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 JS 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Perrett 
 DI 
 
 
 Rowland 
 D 
 
 
 Young 
 AW 
 
 
 Calder 
 AJ 
 
 
 
 A differential neural response in the human amygdala to fearful and happy facial expressions 
 Nature 
 1996 
 383 
 6603 
 812 
 815 
 8893004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 JS 
 
 
 Ohman 
 A 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 A subcortical pathway to the right amygdala mediating 'unseen' fear 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1999 
 96 
 4 
 1680 
 1685 
 9990084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 Heinzel 
 A 
 
 
 Bermpohl 
 F 
 
 
 Niese 
 R 
 
 
 Pfennig 
 A 
 
 
 Pascual-Leone 
 A 
 
 
 
 Reciprocal modulation and attenuation in the prefrontal cortex: an fMRI study on emotional-cognitive interaction 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2004 
 21 
 3 
 202 
 212 
 14755839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 Richter 
 A 
 
 
 Gessner 
 M 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Fell 
 J 
 
 
 Baumgart 
 F 
 
 
 
 Functional dissociation between medial and lateral prefrontal cortical spatiotemporal activation in negative and positive emotions: a combined fMRI/MEG study 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2000 
 10 
 1 
 93 
 107 
 10639399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O"Connor 
 DH 
 
 
 Fukui 
 MM 
 
 
 Pinsk 
 MA 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Attention modulates responses in the human lateral geniculate nucleus 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2002 
 5 
 11 
 1203 
 1209 
 12379861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 The cognitive control of emotion 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2005 
 9 
 5 
 242 
 249 
 15866151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ohman 
 A 
 
 
 Flykt 
 A 
 
 
 Esteves 
 F 
 
 
 Emotion drives attention: detecting the snake in the grass 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 
 2001 
 130 
 3 
 466 
 478 
 11561921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ohman 
 A 
 
 
 Lundqvist 
 D 
 
 
 Esteves 
 F 
 
 
 The face in the crowd revisited: a threat advantage with schematic stimuli 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 2001 
 80 
 3 
 381 
 396 
 11300573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Emotion and attention effects: is it all a matter of timing? Not yet 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 To what extent are emotional visual stimuli processed without attention and awareness? 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2005 
 15 
 2 
 188 
 196 
 15831401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Attentional control of the processing of neural and emotional stimuli 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 2002 
 15 
 1 
 31 
 45 
 12433381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 McKenna 
 M 
 
 
 Gutierrez 
 E 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Neural processing of emotional faces requires attention 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2002 
 99 
 17 
 11458 
 11463 
 12177449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Padmala 
 S 
 
 
 Morland 
 T 
 
 
 Fate of unattended fearful faces in the amygdala is determined by both attentional resources and cognitive modulation 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 1 
 249 
 255 
 15993624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Gao 
 K 
 
 
 Moore 
 GJ 
 
 
 Tancer 
 ME 
 
 
 Posse 
 S 
 
 
 Real-time fMRI of cortico-limbic brain activity during emotional processing 
 Neuroreport 
 2004 
 15 
 3 
 527 
 532 
 15094517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Decker 
 LR 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 
 Activation of the medial prefrontal cortex and extended amygdala by individual ratings of emotional arousal: a fMRI study 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2003 
 53 
 3 
 211 
 215 
 12559653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Ho 
 SH 
 
 
 Britton 
 JC 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Neural correlates of individual ratings of emotional salience: a trial-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 2 
 768 
 780 
 14980580 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 16 
 2 
 331 
 348 
 12030820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of human emotions 
 CNS Spectr 
 2004 
 9 
 4 
 258 
 266 
 15048050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Ling 
 S 
 
 
 Carrasco 
 M 
 
 
 Emotion facilitates perception and potentiates the perceptual benefits of attention 
 Psychol Sci 
 2006 
 17 
 4 
 292 
 299 
 16623685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Rauch 
 SL 
 
 
 Lane 
 R 
 
 
 Neurobiology of emotion perception I: The neural basis of normal emotion perception 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2003 
 54 
 5 
 504 
 514 
 12946879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 The attention system of the human brain 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1990 
 13 
 25 
 42 
 2183676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Grandjean 
 D 
 
 
 Sander 
 D 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Electrophysiological correlates of rapid spatial orienting towards fearful faces 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 6 
 619 
 633 
 15054077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 S 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Lazeyras 
 F 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Neural systems for orienting attention to the location of threat signals: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 2 
 920 
 933 
 16487729 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Spinelli 
 L 
 
 
 Seeck 
 M 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Temporal precedence of emotion over attention modulations in the lateral amygdala: Intracranial ERP evidence from a patient with temporal lobe epilepsy 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 10 
 1 
 83 
 93 
 20233957 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Comparative aspects of amygdala connectivity 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2003 
 985 
 50 
 58 
 12724147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rotshtein 
 P 
 
 
 Richardson 
 MP 
 
 
 Winston 
 JS 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Eimer 
 M 
 
 
 
 Amygdala damage affects event-related potentials for fearful faces at specific time windows 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2010 
 31 
 7 
 1089 
 1105 
 20017134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabatini 
 E 
 
 
 Della Penna 
 S 
 
 
 Franciotti 
 R 
 
 
 Ferretti 
 A 
 
 
 Zoccolotti 
 P 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 
 Brain structures activated by overt and covert emotional visual stimuli 
 Brain Res Bull 
 2009 
 79 
 5 
 258 
 264 
 19480985 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schnall 
 S 
 
 
 Harber 
 KD 
 
 
 Stefanucci 
 JK 
 
 
 Proffitt 
 DR 
 
 
 Social support and the perception of geographical slant 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 
 2008 
 44 
 1246 
 1255 
 22389520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schupp 
 HT 
 
 
 Ohman 
 A 
 
 
 Junghofer 
 M 
 
 
 Weike 
 AI 
 
 
 Stockburger 
 J 
 
 
 Hamm 
 AO 
 
 
 The facilitated processing of threatening faces: an ERP analysis 
 Emotion 
 2004 
 4 
 2 
 189 
 200 
 15222855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaw 
 K 
 
 
 Lien 
 M-C 
 
 
 Ruthruff 
 E 
 
 
 Allen 
 PA 
 
 
 Elelectrophysiological evidence of emotion perception without central attention 
 Journal of Cognitive Psychology 
 2011 
 23 
 6 
 695 
 708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shin 
 LM 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Pitman 
 RK 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 Macklin 
 ML 
 
 
 Lasko 
 NB 
 
 
 
 An fMRI study of anterior cingulate function in posttraumatic stress disorder 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2001 
 50 
 12 
 932 
 942 
 11750889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silvert 
 L 
 
 
 Lepsien 
 J 
 
 
 Fragopanagos 
 N 
 
 
 Goolsby 
 B 
 
 
 Kiss 
 M 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JG 
 
 
 
 Influence of attentional demands on the processing of emotional facial expressions in the amygdala 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 38 
 2 
 357 
 366 
 17870614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Matthews 
 SC 
 
 
 Feinstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Hitchcock 
 C 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 Stein 
 MB 
 
 
 Anxiety vulnerability is associated with altered anterior cingulate response to an affective appraisal task 
 Neuroreport 
 2008 
 19 
 10 
 1033 
 1037 
 18580574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simpson 
 JR 
 Jr 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Emotion-induced changes in human medial prefrontal cortex: I. During cognitive task performance 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2001 
 98 
 2 
 683 
 687 
 11209065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 M 
 
 
 The effect of stimulus duration on the processing of facial expressions of emotion - an EEG study 
 2008 
 Naples, FL 
 Paper presented at the Vision Sciences Society Meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stefanucci 
 JK 
 
 
 Proffitt 
 DR 
 
 
 The roles of altitude and fear in the perception of height 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 2009 
 35 
 2 
 424 
 438 
 19331498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stefanucci 
 JK 
 
 
 Proffitt 
 DR 
 
 
 Clore 
 GL 
 
 
 Parekh 
 N 
 
 
 Skating down a steeper slope: fear influences the perception of geographical slant 
 Perception 
 2008 
 37 
 2 
 321 
 323 
 18414594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stefanucci 
 JK 
 
 
 Storbeck 
 J 
 
 
 Don"t look down: emotional arousal elevates height perception 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 2009 
 138 
 1 
 131 
 145 
 19203173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Decker 
 LR 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Subjective rating of emotionally salient stimuli modulates neural activity 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 18 
 3 
 650 
 659 
 12667842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Teachman 
 BA 
 
 
 Stefanucci 
 JK 
 
 
 Clerkin 
 EM 
 
 
 Cody 
 MW 
 
 
 Proffitt 
 DR 
 
 
 A new mode of fear expression: perceptual bias in height fear 
 Emotion 
 2008 
 8 
 2 
 296 
 301 
 18410203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 How brains beware: neural mechanisms of emotional attention 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2005 
 9 
 12 
 585 
 594 
 16289871 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Armony 
 JL 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Effects of attention and emotion on face processing in the human brain: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuron 
 2001 
 30 
 3 
 829 
 841 
 11430815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Modulation of visual processing by attention and emotion: windows on causal interactions between human brain regions 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 2007 
 362 
 1481 
 837 
 855 
 17395574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Richardson 
 MP 
 
 
 Armony 
 JL 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Distant influences of amygdala lesion on visual cortical activation during emotional face processing 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2004 
 7 
 11 
 1271 
 1278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Walther 
 DB 
 
 
 Caddigan 
 E 
 
 
 Fei-Fei 
 L 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 Natural scene categories revealed in distributed patterns of activity in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 34 
 10573 
 10581 
 19710310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 Labar 
 KS 
 
 
 Amygdala activation to sad pictures during high-field (4 tesla) functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Emotion 
 2005 
 5 
 1 
 12 
 22 
 15755216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 McNally 
 RJ 
 
 
 Wilhelm 
 S 
 
 
 McInerney 
 SC 
 
 
 Jenike 
 MA 
 
 
 
 The emotional counting Stroop paradigm: a functional magnetic resonance imaging probe of the anterior cingulate affective division 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 1998 
 44 
 12 
 1219 
 1228 
 9861465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rauch 
 SL 
 
 
 Etcoff 
 NL 
 
 
 McInerney 
 SC 
 
 
 Lee 
 MB 
 
 
 Jenike 
 MA 
 
 
 Masked presentations of emotional facial expressions modulate amygdala activity without explicit knowledge 
 J Neurosci 
 1998 
 18 
 1 
 411 
 418 
 9412517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 White 
 M 
 
 
 Preattentive analysis of facial expressions of emotion 
 Cognition and Emotion 
 1995 
 9 
 5 
 439 
 460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yamasaki 
 H 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Dissociable prefrontal brain systems for attention and emotion 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2002 
 99 
 17 
 11447 
 11451 
 12177452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Diagram of the Perception Task Showing the Event Order for One Trial 
 Trial type was defined by the type of rectangular picture (HiEmo, LowEmo, Neu, AbsNeu, scrambled), the duration that the stimulus was presented (1000, 250 ms), and the perceptual load required to successfully perform the discrimination task (low, high). Participants were instructed to determine the orientation of the rectangular picture (1, horizontal; 2, vertical) and to maintain focus on the task. Participants then followed the orientation response with a confidence rating for their response. HiEmo = High Emotional; LoEmo = Low Emotional; Neu = Neutral; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Emotional Distraction Augmented by the Availability of Attentional Resources 
 Figure shows average reaction time data for correctly identified rectangles. Trials with HiEmo distractors resulted in longer reaction time than those with AbsNeu distractors in all conditions, but also revealed an interaction between emotional content and stimulus duration that was driven by Lo-Load indicating the amount of emotional distraction was augmented when more attentional resources were available for distraction. Mean and standard error for each of the eight conditions were as follows: HiEmo, Lo-Load, Short-Dur (M = 765.37, SE = 48.27); AbsNeu, Lo-Load, Short-Dur (M = 734.46, SE = 40.88); HiEmo, Lo-Load, Long-Dur (M = 790.26, SE = 46.44); AbsNeu, Lo-Load, Long-Dur (M = 686.85, SE = 35.13); HiEmo, Hi-Load, Short-Dur (M =914.12, SE = 68.35); AbsNeu, Hi -Load, Short-Dur (M = 844.42, SE = 49.26); HiEmo, Hi -Load, Long-Dur (M = 922.89, SE = 64.2); AbsNeu, Hi -Load, Long-Dur (M = 827.37, SE = 49.97). HiEmo = High Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; Lo-Load = Low Perceptual Load; Hi-Load = High Perceptual Load; Dur = Duration. *interaction significant at p < 0.05, two-tailed. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Amygdala Sensitivity to Emotional Charge: Increased Impact of Emotional Distraction when Pictures with most Dissimilar Emotional Charge are Compared 
 The figure highlights the importance of manipulations in emotional change when investigating alterations in basic emotion processing regions. The extent of amygdala (AMY) activation was dependent upon the degree of difference between the emotional and neutral picture content. The top left panel shows unilateral AMY activation (R. AMY, t = 3.43, p < 0.005) when All-Emo and All-Neu distractors were used for comparison, whereas the bottom left panel shows bilateral AMY activation surviving a higher threshold (R. AMY, t = 8.45, p < 0.001; L. AMY, t = 6.45, p < 0.001) when the most extreme distractors were selected for comparison (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu). The right side panels show the corresponding contrast estimates for these comparisons from the same peak voxel (Talairach coordinates: x = 14, y = −4, z = −14). HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; All-Emo = All Emotional; All-Neu = All Neutral. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Dorsomedial and Ventrolateral PFC areas with Increased Susceptibility to Emotional Distraction Under Conditions of Low Attentional Demand 
 Image showing two brain regions where decreases in attentional demand of the main task resulted in increased susceptibility to emotional distraction. Specifically, areas of the medial and ventrolateral PFC were sensitive to emotional relative to neutral distractors only when the attentional demand necessary to perform the task was low. The left side panels show mPFC (top) and vlPFC (bottom) activations resulting from the Emotion x Load interaction where modulation by emotion only occurred under Lo-Load, and the right side panels show the corresponding contrast estimates for the peak voxels within these regions identified in the interaction analyses (L. mPFC, Talairach coordinates: x = −2, y = 27, z = 54; L. vlPFC, Talairach coordinates: x = −49, y = 40, z = 4). The double conjunction map resulted from the interaction t-map [(HiEmo Lo-Load – AbsNeu Lo-Load) vs (HiEmo Hi-Load – AbsNeu Hi-Load)], which was inclusively masked with the map identifying an effect of emotion in the Lo-Load condition (HiEmo Lo-Load – AbsNeu Lo-Load). The joint probability of this double conjunction map was p < 0.00025 (resulting from p < 0.05 x p < 0.005, for the interaction and mask maps, respectively). Similar patterns were also observed in the R. vlPFC, L. PC, bilateral LOC, and subcortical areas (See  Table 3 ). HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; Lo-Load = Low Perceptual Load; Hi-Load = High Perceptual Load. mPFC = Medial Prefrontal Cortex; vlPFC = ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex; LOC = Lateral Occipital Cortex; PC = Posterior Cingulate. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Dorsal ACC Activity Reflected Processing that Helped Diminish the Impact of Emotional Distraction 
 Of the regions that exhibited patterns of activity paralleling the behavioral results, where emotional distraction was greatest for long vs. short Dur under conditions of Lo-Load, only the R. ACC (BA 24) and L. MOG (BA 19) negatively co-varied with reaction time (r = −0.49, p < 0.05, r = −0.62, p < 0.05, respectively). The left and middle panels show the contrast estimates as extracted from the peak voxel in the R. ACC (Talairach coordinates: x = −1, y = 10, z = 33) where the interaction in brain imaging data that parallels the behavioral results was identified. The right panel shows a scatterplot illustrating the results of the correlation calculated on the contrast estimates from the peak voxel identified in the interaction analysis and the RT data. The triple conjunction map resulted from the correlation map described above, which was inclusively masked with the interaction t-map identifying the interaction that parallels the behavioral findings [((HiEmo Long Dur Lo-Load) – (AbsNeu Long Dur Lo-Load)) vs. ((HiEmo Short Dur Lo-Load) – (AbsNeu Short Dur Lo-Load))] and with the map identifying an effect of emotion in the long duration and low load condition. The joint probability of this triple conjunction map was p < 0.0000125 (resulting from p < 0.05 x p < 0.05 x p < 0.005, for the correlation, interaction, and effect of emotion maps, respectively) Other brain regions paralleling the behavioral interaction (emotional distraction greatest for long vs. short Dur under conditions of Lo-Load) were found bilaterally in the AI (BA 13, L. AI, Talairach coordinates: x = −38, y = 20, z = 9; R. AI, Talairach coordinates: x = 29, y = 20, z = 14), L. ITG and FG (BA 37,Talairach coordinates: x = −42, y = −65, z = −3 and x = −42, y = −45, z = −19), L. MOG (BA 19, Talairach coordinates: x = −42, y = −81, z = 3), R. IFG (BA 47, Talairach coordinates: x = 36, y = 7, z = 31), and bilateral ACC (BA 32, L. ACC, Talairach coordinates: x = −1, y = 10, z = 38; BA 24, R. ACC, Talairach coordinates: x = 2, y = 3, z = 33). HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; Lo-Load = Low Perceptual Load; Hi-Load = High Perceptual Load; Dur = Stimulus Duration; BA = Brodmann Area; ACC = Anterior Cingulate Cortex; MOG = Middle Occipital Gyrus; AI = Anterior Insula; ITG = Inferior Temporal Gyrus; FG = Fusiform Gyrus; IFG = Inferior Frontal Gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Average Reaction Time (ms) and Accuracy (%) as a Function of Perceptual Load, and Stimulus Duration for All-Emo, All-Neu, and Scrambled Distractor Trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Perceptual Load 
 
 
 
 Low Stimulus Duration 
 High Stimulus Duration 
 
 
 Distractor Type 
 250 ms 
 1000 ms 
 250 ms 
 1000 ms 
 
 
 
 
 All-Emo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Reaction Time 
 767.99 
 770.44 
 888.84 
 912.10 
 
 
     Accuracy (%) 
 95.00 
 91.40 
 70.90 
 70.00 
 
 
 All-Neu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Reaction Time 
 730.83 
 703.62 
 847.06 
 839.99 
 
 
     Accuracy (%) 
 94.60 
 94.80 
 71.50 
 71.40 
 
 
 Scrambled 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Reaction Time 
 696.47 
 702.06 
 794.05 
 840.94 
 
 
     Accuracy (%) 
 97.70 
 93.90 
 82.30 
 66.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 All-Emo = All Emotional distractors; All-Neu = All Neutral distractors. n = 18 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Heightened Emotional Response to Increased Emotional Charge. 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Regions 
 Talariach Coordinates 
 T Values 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 HiEmo > AbsNeu / All-Emo > All-Neu 
 
 
 
 
 Overlapping Areas of Activation between (HiEmo > AbsNeu) and (All-Emo > All-Emo) 
 
 
 mPFC 
 L. Superior / Medial Frontal 
 8 
 −9 
 43 
 44 
 5.08 / 2.20 * 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 −5 
 19 
 56 
 4.83 / 4.57 
 
 
 dlPFC 
 L. Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 9 / 46 
 −49 
 31 
 21 
 6.44 / 4.23 
 
 
 
 R. Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 51 
 18 
 28 
 7.69 / 4.32 
 
 
 vlPFC 
 L. Insula / Inferior Frontal 
 13 / 45 
 −45 
 24 
 9 
 6.75 / 4.46 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 −27 
 26 
 −12 
 6.28 / 2.51 * 
 
 
 
 R. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 21 
 26 
 −7 
 7.78 / 5.87 
 
 
 Cingulate 
 L. Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 −1 
 14 
 31 
 5.86 / 3.85 
 
 
 
 R. Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 2 
 3 
 30 
 4.24 / 2.67 ** 
 
 
 
 L. Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 −5 
 −53 
 24 
 5.46 / 2.25 * 
 
 
 LOC 
 L. Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 19 
 −49 
 73 
 0 
 12.30 / 8.60 
 
 
 
 R. Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 40 
 −76 
 −6 
 7.76 / 5.12 
 
 
 
 L. Fusiform Gyrus 
 20 
 −38 
 −37 
 −18 
 9.53 / 6.95 
 
 
 
 
 37 
 −38 
 −56 
 −13 
 6.41 / 5.00 
 
 
 
 R. Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 39 
 54 
 −59 
 14 
 7.54 / 4.22 
 
 
 MOC 
 L. Lingual Gyrus 
 17 
 −12 
 −95 
 −5 
 6.3 / 4.03 
 
 
 
 L. Cuneus 
 18 
 −24 
 −91 
 −1 
 4.34 / 3.09 *** 
 
 
 
 R. Cuneus 
 18 
 17 
 −94 
 21 
 4.21 / 2.29 * 
 
 
 
 R. Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 21 
 −90 
 10 
 4.71 / 3.63 *** 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 L. Uncus 
 28 
 −23 
 5 
 −21 
 8.55 / 2.15 * 
 
 
 
 L. Amygdala 
 
 −19 
 −3 
 −18 
 6.45 / 2.83 ** 
 
 
 
 R. Amygdala 
 
 14 
 −4 
 −14 
 8.45 / 3.43 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Non-overlapping Areas of Activation for HiEmo > AbsNeu 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 L. Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 34 
 −23 
 4 
 −17 
 6.43 
 
 
 
 L. Caudate Body 
 
 −9 
 1 
 11 
 3.42 *** 
 
 
 
 L. Hippocampus 
 
 −30 
 −22 
 −16 
 5.24 
 
 
 
 R. Putamen 
 
 21 
 14 
 −8 
 5.00 
 
 
 
 R. Midbrain 
 
 10 
 −23 
 −9 
 4.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overlapping and non-overlapping activity between comprehensive (All-Emo vs. All-Neu) and finer assessments (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu) of emotional reactivity. Analysis shows brain regions associated with emotional response are sensitive to the magnitude of difference in emotional charge between emotional and neutral stimuli. Overlapping activity = [(HiEmo > AbsNeu) ∩ (All-Emo > All-Neu)]. Non-overlapping activity = [(HiEmo > AbsNeu) exclusively masked by (All-Emo > All-Neu)]. The comprehensive assessment (All-Emo vs. All-Neu) did show any areas of activation that were not present in the finer assessment (HiEmo vs. AbsNeu). mPFC = Medial Prefrontal Cortex; dlPFC = Dorso-Lateral Prefrontal Cortex; vlPFC = Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex; MOC = Medial Occipital Cortex; BA = Brodmann Area; x, y, z denote coordinates in Talariach space; HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; All-Emo = All Emotional; All-Neu = All Neutral. No asterisks denote significance at p < 0.001. 
 
 
 *** 
 Significance at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 ** 
 Significance at p < 0.01. 
 
 
 * 
 Significance at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain Regions Sensitive to Emotion Processing and Manipulations of Load, Despite the Absence of Behavioral Differences 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Regions 
 
 Talairach Coordinates 
 T values 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Interaction 
 Mask 
 
 
 
 
 HiEmo > AbsNeu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Lo-Load > Hi-Load 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 dmPFC 
 L Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 −2 
 27 
 54 
 2.78 ** 
 4.06 
 
 
 dlPFC 
 L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 −46 
 19 
 27 
 3.29 *** 
 5.05 
 
 
 
 R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 51 
 22 
 25 
 2.81 ** 
 7.83 
 
 
 vlPFC 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 −57 
 11 
 33 
 2.86 ** 
 4.63 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 −57 
 23 
 20 
 3.19 *** 
 4.41 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 −49 
 40 
 4 
 3.27 *** 
 3.50 *** 
 
 
 
 R Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 33 
 11 
 −12 
 3.37 *** 
 3.15 *** 
 
 
 Cingulate 
 L Poster Cingulate Gyrus 
 23 
 −1 
 −59 
 17 
 2.05 * 
 2.94 *** 
 
 
 LOC 
 L Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 −38 
 −72 
 4 
 2.06 * 
 6.50 *** 
 
 
 
 L Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 37 
 −46 
 −65 
 −6 
 2.09 * 
 6.48 *** 
 
 
 
 L Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 −45 
 −60 
 −11 
 2.04 * 
 3.08 *** 
 
 
 
 R Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 54 
 −43 
 5 
 3.47 *** 
 3.89 *** 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 L Caudate Body 
 
 −9 
 1 
 19 
 3.60 *** 
 3.77 *** 
 
 
 
 R Caudate Body 
 
 6 
 4 
 19 
 2.74 ** 
 2.99 *** 
 
 
 
 L Uncus 
 28 
 −23 
 5 
 −21 
 2.60 ** 
 7.18 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HiEmo > AbsNeu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Hi-Load > Lo-Load 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cingulate 
 R Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 2 
 −4 
 29 
 2.22 * 
 3.73 
 
 
 LOC 
 R Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 39 
 −74 
 9 
 2.48 * 
 4.21 
 
 
 
 
 
 A number of brain regions sensitive to emotion processing were also differentially affected by load (low vs. high), even in the absence of behavioral evidence showing an effect of Load on emotional distraction. Top interaction = [(HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load) vs. (HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load)]. Top Mask = HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load. Bottom interaction = [(HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load) vs. (HiEmo Lo-Load > AbsNeu Lo-Load)]. Bottom Mask = HiEmo Hi-Load > AbsNeu Hi-Load. The joint probability of the resulting double conjunction maps was p < 0.00025 (resulting from p < 0.05 x p < 0.005, for the interaction and the masking contrasts, respectively). dmPFC = Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex; dlPFC = Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex; vlPFC = Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex; LOC = Lateral Occipital Cortex; BA = Brodmann Area; x, y, z denote coordinates in Talairach space; HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; Lo-Load = Low Perceptual Load; Hi-Load = High Perceptual Load. No asterisks denote significance at p < 0.001. 
 
 
 *** 
 Significance at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 ** 
 Significance at p < 0.01. 
 
 
 * 
 Significance at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Effect of Stimulus Duration on the Neural Response to Emotional Distraction. 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Regions 
 Talairach Coordinates 
 T values 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Interaction 
 Mask 
 
 
 
 
 HiEmo > AbsNeu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Long Dur > Short Dur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 dmPFC 
 L Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 −2 
 −7 
 58 
 2.68 ** 
 3.19 *** 
 
 
 vlPFC 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 −34 
 29 
 3 
 2.35 * 
 4.89 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 −42 
 24 
 9 
 2.76 ** 
 5.68 
 
 
 
 R Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 25 
 18 
 −12 
 4.65 
 5.73 
 
 
 Cingulate 
 L Cingulate Gyrus 
 32 
 −1 
 14 
 38 
 4.11 
 3.69 
 
 
 Parietal 
 R Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 36 
 −1 
 30 
 2.24 * 
 4.17 
 
 
 LOC 
 L Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 −38 
 −72 
 −3 
 2.88 ** 
 6.36 
 
 
 MOC 
 L Cuneus 
 18 
 −20 
 −96 
 2 
 2.24 * 
 3.08 *** 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 R Thalamus 
 
 10 
 −16 
 −4 
 3.58 *** 
 3.24 *** 
 
 
 
 R Midbrain 
 
 10 
 −4 
 −10 
 2.11 * 
 5.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HiEmo > AbsNeu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Short Dur > Long Dur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 dmPFC 
 L Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 8 
 −13 
 35 
 54 
 2.60 ** 
 4.88 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −16 
 39 
 47 
 2.17 * 
 2.93 *** 
 
 
 Insula 
 L Insula 
 13 
 −38 
 −26 
 23 
 2.62 ** 
 3.17 *** 
 
 
 
 R Insula 
 13 
 44 
 −8 
 −7 
 4.23 * 
 3.66 
 
 
 MPC 
 L Precuneus 
 31 
 −24 
 −71 
 19 
 3.47 *** 
 4.04 
 
 
 LOC 
 R Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 36 
 −60 
 17 
 2.07 * 
 3.69 
 
 
 MOC 
 R Cuneus 
 18 
 17 
 −78 
 15 
 3.46 *** 
 3.09 *** 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 28 
 −90 
 21 
 4.33 
 3.65 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 L Parahippocampus Gyrus 
 30 
 −20 
 −50 
 3 
 2.84 ** 
 3.25 *** 
 
 
 
 L Caudate Tail 
 
 −20 
 −30 
 19 
 3.39 *** 
 3.04 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 Unlike the pattern of activation observed with the manipulation of Load, where more regions were responsive to emotional distraction when Load was low, the manipulation of stimulus duration showed response to emotional distraction under both long and short duration times. Top table interaction = [(HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur) vs. (HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur)]. Top table mask = HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur. Bottom table interaction = [(HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur) vs. (HiEmo Long Dur > AbsNeu Long Dur)]. Bottom table mask = HiEmo Short Dur > AbsNeu Short Dur. The joint probability of the resulting double conjunction maps was of p < 0.00025 (resulting from p < 0.05 x p < 0.005, for the interaction and the masking contrasts, respectively). dmPFC = Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex; vlPFC = Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex; MPC = Medial Parietal Cortex; LOC = Lateral Occipital Cortex; MOC = Medial Occipital Cortex; BA = Brodmann Area; x, y, z denotes coordinates in Talairach space; HiEmo = Highly Emotional; AbsNeu = Absolute Neutral; Dur = Stimulus Duration. No asterisks denote significance at p < 0.001. 
 
 
 *** 
 Significance at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 ** 
 Significance at p < 0.01. 
 
 
 * 
 Significance at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
