
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0375566 
 1119 
 Biol Psychol 
 Biol Psychol 
 
 Biological psychology 
 
 0301-0511 
 1873-6246 
 
 
 22579718 
 3407296 
 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.05.001 
 NIHMS376452 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Characterizing the Anomalous Cognition-Emotion Interactions in Externalizing 
 
 
 
 
 Baskin-Sommers 
 Arielle R. 
 
 M.S. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Curtin 
 John J. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 Christine L. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 2 
 
 
 
 Stout 
 Daniel 
 
 M.S. 
 2 
 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 Kent A. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 3 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 Joseph P. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 
 
 1 University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1202 W Johnson, Madison WI 53706 USA 
 2 University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 2441 E. Hartford Avenue, Milwaukee WI 53211 USA 
 3 University of New Mexico, MSC03 2220, Albuquerque NM 87131 USA 
 
 Address all correspondence to: Arielle Baskin-Sommers, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1202 W Johnson St., Madison WI, 53706, Phone: (608) 262-3810, Fax: (608) 262-4029,  baskinsommer@wisc.edu 
 
 
 19 
 5 
 2012 
 
 
 09 
 5 
 2012 
 
 
 9 
 2012 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2013 
 
 91 
 1 
 48 
 58 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Externalizing traits are characterized by exaggerated emotional (e.g., frustration, anger) and behavioral (e.g., drug seeking, reactive aggression) reactions to motivationally-significant stimuli. Explanations for this exaggerated reactivity emphasize attention, executive function, and affective processes, but the associations among these processes is rarely investigated. To examine these interactions, we measure fear potentiated startle (FPS; Experiment 1) and neural activation (Experiment 2) in an instructed fear paradigm that manipulates attentional focus, demands on executive functioning, and emotion. In both studies, exaggerated emotional reactivity associated with externalizing was specific to conditions that focused attention on threat information and placed minimal demands on executive functioning. Results suggest that a crucial cognition-emotion interaction affecting externalizing is the over-prioritization and over-allocation of attention to motivationally-significant information, which in turn, may impair executive and affective regulation. 
 
 
 Externalizing 
 Fear Potentiated Startle 
 fMRI 
 Cognition-Emotion Interaction 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH078980 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 The externalizing spectrum encompasses a heterogeneous mixture of behaviors, such as reactive aggression, excessive reward seeking, and low distress tolerance, which are united by overlapping genetic variance ( Krueger, Markon, Patrck & Iacono, 2005 ). When particularly severe or persistent, these behaviors may culminate in diagnosable disinhibitory psychopathology, including conduct disorder, substance use disorders, and antisocial personality disorder. Although externalizing behaviors may result in diverse diagnoses, the essence of the externalizing construct is that these behaviors and disorders reflect a common predisposition or temperament associated with basic personality traits (e.g., low constraint, impulsivity, negative emotionality). Thus, specifying the risk associated with these predisposing personality traits has far-reaching implications for understanding and preventing a diverse array of externalizing behaviors and disinhibitory psychopathology ( Iacono, Malone, McGue, 2008 ;  Krueger et al., 2005 ;  Gorenstein & Newman, 1980 ;  Newman, 1997 ;  Patrick & Zempolich, 1998 ;  Zuckerman, 1998 ). 
 Clinical descriptions of externalizing highlight an exaggerated emotional reactivity that is presumed to underlie diverse externalizing behavior problems ( Buckholtz et al., 2010a ;  Gorenstein & Newman, 1980 ;  Krueger, Markon, Patrick & Iacono, 2005 ;  Lejuez, Magidson, Mitchell, et al., 2010 ; Pridmore, Chambers & McArthur, 2005;  Newman & Lorenz, 2003 ). This reactivity plays out in the context of rewards ( Buckholtz et al., 2010a ;  Endres et al., 2011 ;  Martin & Potts, 2004 ;  Newman, Widom & Nathan, 1985 ;  Nichols & Newman, 1986 ;  Newman, Patterson, Howland & Nichols, 1990 ;  Patterson, Kosson & Newman, 1987 ), stressful events ( Taylor, Carlson, Iacono, Lykken et al, 1999 ;  Verona, Patrick & Lang, 2002 ), and other motivationally-significant cues (i.e., drug cues;  Volkow & Li, 2004 ). 
 Prominent explanations for the exaggerated reactivity associated with externalizing traits, commonly emphasize cognitive dysfunctions, such as poor executive functioning (e.g.,  Finn, Mazas, Justus & Steinmetz, 2002 ;  Giancola & Tarter, 1999 ). Such explanations highlight the fact that limitations in cognitive control or working memory capacity can undermine a person's ability to regulate (i.e., bias) attention and, thus, increase the likelihood that motivational stimuli will hijack attention and control behavior ( Bishop, 2009 ). In the absence of such executive control, reactions to motivationally-significant information are difficult to inhibit (e.g., negative mood, aggressive impulse, drug seeking) and become distracting regardless of their adaptive relevance ( Bishop, 2009 ;  MacCoon, Wallace & Newman, 2004 ). Consistent with these models, there is considerable evidence that externalizing traits are associated with executive functioning deficits ( Dolan, Bechara & Nathan, 2008 ;  Endres, Rickert, Bogg, Lucas & Finn 2011 ;  Morgan & Lilienfeld, 2000 ; Ogilvie, Stewart, Chan & Shum, 2011). To the extent that this understanding of externalizing traits is correct, it follows that individuals with a high level of externalizing traits (i.e., externalizers) would be especially prone to exaggerated emotional reactivity under conditions that pit salient emotional information against a goal-directed focus (i.e., a go/no-go mixed-incentive learning task; see  Endres et al., 2011 ;  Patterson et al., 1987 ). 
 An alternative explanation for the exaggerated emotional reactivity and disinhibited behavior associated with externalizing traits involves the over-allocation of attention resources. Attention-based models of externalizing commonly assume that when these individuals encounter information in their environment that is motivationally-significant, they allocate attention to this information more strongly and thus, have more difficulty reallocating attention ( Avila & Parcet, 2001 ;  Derryberry & Reed, 1994 ; Farmer, Whitehead, Woolcock, 2007; Lubman, Allen, Peters & Deakin, 2008; Pessoa, 2001;  Wallace & Newman, 1997 ). In this context, the strength of the over-allocation of attention is dependent on the interaction between the pre-existing priorities (i.e., readiness to perceive specific information) and the stimulus (i.e., what is actually seen in the environment). In other words, information that matches pre-existing priorities, like rewards, threat, or drugs, is strongly attended to, particularly when the individual is seeking or expecting those cues (see  Bishop, 2009 ;  Fox, Russo, & Dutton, 2002 ;  Wallace & Newman, 1990  for examples of this attentional process in other populations). Consistent with this attentional-related proposal, a number of studies find strong attention allocation and difficulties re-allocating attention in the presence of motivationally-significant, goal-relevant cues among individuals high on externalizing traits ( Avila & Parcet, 2001 ;  Baskin-Sommers, Wallace, MacCoon, Curtin & Newman, 2010 ;  Derryberry & Reed, 1994 ; Tiffany & Conklin, 2000;  Wallace & Newman, 1997 ). Moreover, some theoretical accounts of this attentional response suggest that the over-prioritization and over-allocation of attentional resources, in turn, may impair executive functions that normally moderate responding, including inhibition, shifting, and control ( Ellis & Ashbrook, 1988 ; Farmer et al., 2007;  Keil et al., 2007 ). Thus, externalizing traits would be most associated with exaggerated emotional reactivity when anticipation of motivationally-significant stimuli increases the intensity of attention responses to environmental cues and interferes with the executive function-based regulation of this response. Importantly, such a process appears to play an important role in disrupting the inhibition of drug craving (Tiffany & Conklin, 2000;  Volkow & Li, 2004 ) and violent responses ( Blair, 2001 ). 
 In light of growing evidence that executive functioning, attentional, and emotional processes interact to yield the exaggerated emotional reactivity and disinhibited behavior associated with externalizing, it is increasingly important to clarify the specific and/or differential contributions of these factors for the disinhibited reactions associated with externalizing traits (see also  Endres et al., 2011 ;  Handley et al, 2011 ). A simple explanation for the emotional hyper-reactivity of externalizing individuals is that the intensity of their emotion reactions is so powerful and pervasive that it directly gives rise to this emotional reaction. However, the executive functioning perspective suggests that deficits in regulating competing demands (i.e., goal versus processing motivationally-significant information) impacts emotional reactivity, such that when an individual does not have the capacity to maintain their goal-directed focus and resolve the competition, motivationally-significant information hijacks attention and externalizers are likely to over-react to that emotional information. In contrast to these other explanations, the attention-based perspective attributes the exaggerated emotional reactions of externalizing individuals to the interaction between their motivational priorities and the occurrence of stimuli that match these priorities. When individuals with high externalizing traits encounter motivationally-significant stimuli that match their processing priorities, the stimuli attract strong attentional responses, consume resources, and yield emotional reactions that are dictated by the pre-existing processing priorities and the affective significance of the information. Although each of these psychobiological explanations is plausible, they predict different sources of emotional and behavioral disinhibition. Thus, it is important to examine the differential contributions of emotional hyper-reactivity, executive functioning, and attention to the disinhibited emotional reactions of externalizing individuals. 
 The goal of the present studies is to examine these alternative explanations for the exaggerated emotional reactivity associated with externalizing traits. To this end, we employed an instructed fear paradigm developed by  Baskin-Sommers and colleagues (2011)  (see  Figure 1 ). In all conditions, trials contain colored boxes that are associated with the delivery of an electric shock (red box) or not (green box). Additionally, this paradigm orthogonally manipulates two factors: the focus of attention and the timing of goal-relevant stimulus presentation. In two conditions instructions are given that establish the threat information as goal-relevant and thus the primary focus of attention [Threat Focus conditions]. In two other conditions the threat information is peripheral to the primary goal (i.e., the primary goal is to categorize the case of a letter, yet the box predicting shock still appears in the trial) [Alternative Focus conditions]. The paradigm also manipulates the timing with which goal-relevant and distracting stimuli are presented (i.e., from the start of the trial (early) or after a distractor is presented (late)). Together, these manipulations result in four conditions (Early Threat Focus, Late Threat Focus, Early Alternative Focus, Late Alternative Focus). Based on this paradigm and the theoretical alternatives outlined above (i.e., general hypersensitivity to emotion, weak executive functioning, and over-allocation of attention), we investigated three hypotheses that aim to characterize and disambiguate the cognition-emotion interactions that culminate in the disinhibited emotional reactivity associated with externalizing: 
 
 Hypothesis 1 
 To the extent that externalizing traits are associated with a global hyper-reactivity to motivationally-significant information, individuals high on these traits should display greater emotion in all conditions (i.e., main effect), regardless of executive functioning or attentional focus. 
 
 
 Hypothesis 2 
 To the extent that externalizing traits are associated with a fundamental deficit in executive functioning then emotional hyper-reactivity would be apparent especially under conditions that require participants to maintain a goal-directed focus of attention despite competing demands to focus attention on the highly distracting threat information (i.e., the two Alternative Focus Conditions). By contrast, in the Threat Focus conditions the goal is to focus on the threat information while ignoring an irrelevant, and actually meaningless, letter. Because the letter lacks the bottom-up salience of the threat information and does not compete meaningfully with the primary goal (i.e., focusing on the threat), the executive functioning hypothesis does not primarily predict emotional dysregulation in the Threat Focus conditions. 
 
 
 Hypothesis 3 
 To the extent that emotional hyper-reactivity in externalizing relates to over-allocation of attention to motivationally-significant stimuli, this problem would be most apparent under conditions that activate a specific motivational focus (i.e., focusing on threat) and then initially display stimuli that match that motivational focus (goal-relevant threat cues; i.e., Early Threat Focus). Paradoxically, though, when information that does not match the motivational set appears, the over-allocation of attention in anticipation of perceiving motivationally-significant stimuli would reduce the flexibility of attention, interfere with reallocation of attention to actual goal-relevant information (i.e., threat), and thus diminish emotion responses to threat-relevant stimuli. By contrast, in the Alternative Focus conditions the threat information is peripheral to the primary goal, thus participants with high and low levels of externalizing traits would be expected to allocate attention to both goal-relevant (i.e., letters) and intrinsically-relevant (i.e., colored boxes) stimuli and display comparable emotional reactivity in the Alternative Focus conditions. 
 To assess these alternative hypotheses, we conducted two studies. The first, used fear potentiated startle (FPS), a psychophysiological measure of fear reactivity, to examine the effect of specific cognitive-affective interactions on externalizing-related differences in emotional reactivity. The second study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in a different sample as a means of extending the findings of Study 1 and evaluating the neural correlates associated with these cognition-emotion interactions and reactivity. 
 
 
 Study 1: Fear Potentiated Startle 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were 84 male inmates from a maximum-security prison in southern Wisconsin. First, participants who were older then 45 years of age were eliminated because the expression of externalizing traits (i.e., impulsivity) has been found to decline with advancing age (Hare, Harpur & Hakstian, 1990). Also, some research suggests that memory and cognitive functioning begins to decline starting around age 45 ( Singh-Manoux et al., 2012 ). Second, to increase the likelihood that participants had the intellectual aptitude to complete self-report measures and laboratory tasks, we excluded those with scores below 70 on the Shipley Institute of Learning ( Zachary, 1986 ) estimate of intelligence. Third, based on institutional records, we disqualified individuals with clinical diagnoses of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or psychosis NOS. Lastly, anyone who was currently using psychotropic medications was excluded because this class of medication may interfere with startle reactivity (see  Table 1  for descriptive statistics). 
 Externalizing was assessed using the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire-Brief (MPQ-B), a 155 item self-report questionnaire ( Patrick, Curtin & Tellegen, 2002 ). The higherorder factors of Constraint (CON) and Negative Affect (NA) of the MPQ-B are related to externalizing tendencies ( Eisenberg, Guthreie, Fabes et al., 2000 ;  Krueger, Caspi & Moffitt, 2000 ;  Miller, Greif & Smith, 2003 ). Those high on negative emotionality have tendencies towards stress reactivity, aggression, and alienation. Individuals low on constraint are characterized by impulsivity, low harm avoidance, and disinhibition (CON reverse scored). Here, we standardized and mean-centered NA and CON scales so that each was weighted equally. Then, we created a composite of NA and CON (i.e., high NA and low CON) as an index of externalizing psychopathology (Cronbach's alpha =.84). 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Individuals meeting the inclusion criteria (see  Participants  section) were invited to participate in an ongoing study. All participants provided written informed consent according to the procedures set forth by the University of Wisconsin–Madison Human Subjects Committee. Participants were tested by one of two male experimenters in a quiet and private testing room on prison grounds. Before beginning the main task, the intensity of shocks received during the experimental session was calibrated to a participant's subjective shock sensitivity (see  Shock sensitivity evaluation  below). Then, participants were given verbal instructions about the instructed fear-conditioning task. During the main task, participants were reminded on the computer of the instructions for each condition prior to the start of that condition. 
 
 
 Shock sensitivity evaluation 
 To control for individual differences in shock sensitivity, the intensity of shocks received during the instructed fear task was calibrated to the participants' individual subjective shock sensitivity prior to the beginning of the task. A series of electric shocks was administered in increasing intensity to the fingers of their non-dominant hand. Participants reported two intensity anchors: the first intensity that they considered uncomfortable and then the maximum intensity level that they could tolerate. The series was terminated when they reached their maximum intensity level. The shock intensity administered during the experimental session was calibrated to the reported maximum intensity level. 
 
 
 Instructed fear-conditioning task 
 Presentation of stimuli and recording of responses were controlled by DMDX (Forster & Forster, 2003) and NeuroScan Synamps2 amplifiers and acquisition software. The instructed fear task consisted of four conditions with 80 trials per condition. The task conditions crossed focus of attention and timing of goal-relevant information, yielding the Early Threat Focus, Late Threat Focus, Early Alternative Focus, and Late Alternative Focus conditions ( Figure 1 ). At the start of each condition participants were given instructions about which stimulus was goal-relevant. In the two Threat Focus conditions, participants attended to the color of a box predicting shock administration (red = potential shock, green = safe, no chance of shock). In the two Alternative Focus conditions, participants were instructed to attend to the case of a letter stimulus and the case of the letter was unrelated to administration of electric shocks. In both condition types, the intensity of shocks was calibrated to participants' subjective tolerance (a procedure administered prior to the task). Also, each condition was presented in a blocked format with the order counterbalanced across participants ( Note : Order of condition did not interact significantly with the effects reported below). 
 In each trial the box (red or green) and letter (uppercase “N” or lowercase “n”) were presented sequentially with the order varying according to condition. During Early trials the goal-relevant stimuli (i.e., stimuli individuals were to respond to at the end of the trial) were presented first and during Late trials goal-relevant stimuli were presented second after goal-irrelevant information was on the screen. Every trial in all conditions started with a fixation cross. The first stimulus appeared alone at 200 ms, and then the second stimulus appeared concurrently with the first at 400 ms. Following the offset of the stimuli, a blank screen appeared. Shocks were presented during the last 200 ms of the blank screen (at 1400ms). Finally, 1,600 ms after the onset of the first stimulus participants were signaled to press a button indicating whether a probe word, “Red” or “Green” for the Threat Focus conditions and “Upper or “Lower” for the Alternative Focus conditions matched the stimulus presented during that trial. 
 Across conditions, fifteen percent of the trials where shocked. In addition to the shocked trials, sixty-four startle-eliciting noise probes (50ms, 102dB white noise burst with near instantaneous rise time) were presented 1400ms after the onset of the first stimulus. The noise probes were equally distributed across threat/no-threat trials in all four task conditions so that each participant received 16 noise probes (8 threat and 8 no-threat) per task condition. Noise probes were also equally distributed across upper/lower case trials. Noise probes were separated by a minimum of 13s and never occurred on the same trial as shock administration. 
 
 
 Startle Measurement 
 Startle eyeblink electromyographic activity was sampled and amplified with Neuroscan Synamps2 amplifiers (Comupmedics Inc., North Carolina) at 2000Hz with a bandpass filter (30500Hz; 24dB/octave roll-off) from electrodes placed on the skin overlaying the orbicularis oculi muscle under the right eye. Data reduction and processing followed published guidelines ( Blumenthal, Cuthbert, Filion, Hackley et al., 2005 ). Offline processing included signal epoching (-50 ms to 250 ms period surrounding noise probe), rectification and smoothing (30 Hz lowpass filter following rectification), and baseline correction. Trials with no responses (i.e., peak of startle response is less than or equal to the maximum response during the baseline period) or deflections greater than 10 μV (i.e., artifact) in the 50 ms pre-probe baseline were rejected. Prior to arriving at the final sample of 84, two participants were removed from the sample because more than 20% of their probe trials contained excessive artifact. Peak eyeblink response between 20 and 120 ms post-probe onset was scored relative to mean 50 ms pre-probe baseline. Fear potentiated startle (FPS) was scored as the difference between the threat (red box) and no threat (green box) trials. 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 All analyses were performed with SPSS software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois) and were analyzed in a General Linear Model (GLM) with Focus and Time as within-subject categorical factors and Externalizing (Externalizing; continuous and standardized) as a between-subject quantitative factor. Fear response to threat cues was indexed by FPS, which was calculated by subtracting blink-response magnitude to probes following green (no threat) boxes from blink-response magnitude to probes following red (threat) boxes. Potential outliers were detected using studentized residuals with Bonferroni corrected p-values <.05 and were subsequently excluded from analysis. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 The effect of Focus on FPS was not significant (F(1,83)=.74, p=.39); nor was the effect of Time (F(1,83)=.1.87, p=.18) indicating that FPS was comparable across these task manipulations. The main effect of Externalizing was not significant (F(1,82)=.04, p=.842), indicating that Externalizing scores were not consistently related to FPS across conditions (Hypothesis 1). 
 However, a significant three-way interaction indicated that the Externalizing effect was moderated by both focus of attention and timing of goal-relevant information (F(1,82)=8.84, p=.004, pη 2 =.097). In order to unpack the significant three-way, we examine the two-way interaction between timing and Externalizing within each focus (i.e., threat and alternative). Additionally, we report the linear regression coefficients as an index of effect size within each interaction ( Table 2  shows raw startle responses as a function of threat, condition, and externalizing) 1 . 
 In contrast to the predictions based on the executive functioning hypothesis, there was no main effect of Externalizing in the Alternative Focus conditions (F(1,82)=.11, p=.74) (Hypothesis 2). Also, there was no difference in the relationship between Externalizing and FPS in the Early Alternative Focus versus Late Alternative Focus condition, F(1,82)=1.35, p=.249, pη 2 =.016. However, in line with the attentional predictions there was a significant Externalizing-related difference in FPS in the Early Threat Focus versus Late Threat Focus condition, F(1,82)=11.62, p=.001, pη 2 =.12 (Hypothesis 3). Moreover, the simple effect of Externalizing within the Early Threat Focus condition was significant ( B =5.52 p=.027, pη 2 =.06), indicating that individuals high on Externalizing demonstrated significantly greater FPS in the Early Threat Focus condition ( Figure 2 ). The relationship between Externalizing and FPS in the Late Threat Focus condition was a trend (B=-5.55, p=.084, pη 2 =.04), suggesting that externalizers displayed diminished FPS in this condition 2 . 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Based on previous research, we might have expected to find a global emotional hyper-reactivity in externalizing, but the present study did not produce such evidence. That is, across conditions, externalizing was not consistently associated with exaggerated reactivity to emotion stimuli. Similarly, although research frequently identifies executive functioning deficits as the underlying process responsible for externalizing dysfunction, in the current study, individuals high on externalizing traits were as able as individuals low on externalizing traits to focus on the goal-relevant information and resolve competing demands by ignoring distracting emotion cues in the Alternative Focus conditions. 
 The present results do, however, appear consistent with the attention hypothesis. According to this model, externalizers over-prioritize goal-relevant, motivationally-significant information and so are primed to allocate attention more strongly than other individuals to that information. Thus, when the presentation of goal-relevant information coincides with their pre-existing priorities, individuals high on trait externalizing display emotional hyper-reactivity (i.e., significantly more FPS in the Early Threat Focus condition). Conversely, when a stimulus occurs that is at odds with this goal (i.e., mismatch between pre-existing prioritization of motivationally-significant information and actual stimulus), the over-prioritization of attention toward motivationally-significant information might diminish the resources available for re-allocating attention (i.e., employing executive control) to facilitate goal-directed behavior. Ultimately, this attentional response would inhibit fluent processing, disrupt the processing of goal-directed motivationally-significant information, and undermine the threat response. In the present study, there was some evidence of the affective disruption, presumably as a consequence of the attentional response, in the trend-level effect in Late Threat Focus condition. Overall, this attentional response appears to exaggerate emotional reactivity when information is congruent with pre-existing processing priorities, but interfere with resource allocation and processing when information in incongruent with those priorities. 
 It is worth noting that the effect of this attention response is not evident in the Alternative Focus conditions, suggesting that the specific attentional abnormality operating in externalizing is not simply associated with an over-allocation of attention to motivationally-significant information. If this was the case, then emotion hyper-reactivity should have been apparent when the threat appeared first but was not goal-relevant (Late Alternative Focus), but there were no externalizing-related differences in this condition. Rather, the results indicate that the attentional anomaly is only apparent when motivationally-significant information conforms to goal-related expectations. Such findings suggest the match between pre-existing priorities and the presentation of information that fits those priorities is the key factor responsible for over-allocation of attention. However, it is possible that this over-prioritization of attention is also present in the Alternative Focus conditions, but fails to engender emotion hyper-reactivity in externalizing individuals. For instance, it is possible that individuals with high externalizing traits initially over-allocate attention to the goal-irrelevant threat cues (i.e., colored box), but do not dwell on the threat-relevant information when their pre-potent focus involves detecting goal-relevant, neutral cues (i.e., letter case). Thus, motivationally-significant cues may be less likely to command their attention when they are actively involved in pursuing alternative goals. 
 Overall, these findings specify an important dynamic underlying the dysfunctional cognitive-affective interactions associated with externalizing traits. Specifically, an over-prioritization and over-allocation of limited capacity processing resources to motivationally-significant stimuli exacerbates emotional reactions and may, paradoxically, decrease cognitive resources available for regulating executive control and emotional reactions. Further, the emotional dysregulation seems most apparent when emotion information is related to the primary goal (e.g., in this task during Threat Focus conditions, in real life possibly when drug seeking, when gambling to attain money). The fact that the response to threat mimics the exaggerated responsivity to rewards commonly seen in externalizing suggests that this attentional response may be a general mechanism operating in externalizing. Given that this is a new finding, though, it is important to replicate it and expand our understanding of the mechnisms at play. 
 
 
 
 Study 2: fMRI 
 Results from Study 1 support a novel framework for understanding the emotionally reactive disinhibition associated with externalizing. In light of the newness of this proposal it is important to replicate the findings and examine the neural processes implicated in this cognition-emotion interaction. The focus of Study 2 is to measure brain activity in key regions associated with affective responding, executive functioning, and attention during performance on the task that revealed externalizing-related differences in Study 1. 
 The amygdala and regions of the prefrontal cortex play an important role in emotional processing, and have been found to be differentially activated in individuals with externalizing psychopathology ( Lindquist, Wagner, Kober, Mliss-Moreau & Barrett, in press ;  Phan et al., 2003 ; Walter, Malthia, Wiebking, Rotte, Templemann, et al., 2009). The amygdala plays a crucial role in the emotional modulation of attention ( Anderson & Phelps, 2001 ) and the extended amygdala is a key modulator of measures such as fear potentiated startle ( Anderson & Phelps, 2001 ; Davis, Falls, Campeau, & Kim, 1993;  Davis & Whalen, 2001 ; Grillon, Ameli, Goddard, Woods, & Davis, 1994). While many regions of the prefrontal cortex are important for attention, executive function and detection of emotional salience, recently, a number of studies have identified the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) as a key region in the allocation of attention to motivationally-significant information, particularly as it relates to the expression of fear ( Etkin, Egner & Kalisch, 2011 ;  Hanson et al., 2010 ; Milad, Quirk, Pitman, Orr, Fischl & Rauch, 2007; Walter, Malthia, Wiebking, Rotte, Templemann, et al., 2009). This region also aids in the monitoring and resolution of conflict in the environment ( Blair, 2008 ;  Cohen, Botvinick & Carter, 2000 ). 
 Specifically with regard to externalizing, some research highlights an externalizing-related association between reduced gray matter volumes in the right amygdala and functional amygdala hyperactivity (Benegal, Antony, Venkatasubramanian, & Jayakumar, 2007;  Coccaro, et al., 2007 ;  Raine, Meloy, Bihrle, Stoddard, LaCasse, & Buchsbaum, 1998 ;  Sterzer, Stadler, Krebs et al., 2005 ). Additionally, studies often report prefrontal (i.e., dmPFC) abnormalities, both hypo-and-hyper activation, among individuals high on externalizing traits ( Bufkin & Luttrell, 2005 ;  Davidson, Pizzagalli, Nitschke & Kalin, 2003 ;  Herpertz, Huebner, Marx, Vloet, Fink, et al., 2008 ;  Raine, Lencz, Bihrle, et al., 2000 ). 
 In the present study, we investigated whether the pattern of activation in key regions such as the amygdala and dmPFC would track the predictions related to the attention model and results reported in Study 1. If individuals with high trait externalizing are associated with an over-allocation of attention and hyper-reactivity to goal-relevant-threat cues as found in Study 1, then they should display increased amygdala and dmPFC activation in the Early Threat Focus condition. However, in the Late Threat Focus condition amygdala and dmPFC activation would be reduced, reflecting a disruption in attentional-affective processing when information that does not match the motivational set appears. Lastly, based on the results from Study 1 and the attentional hypothesis, there should be no specific externalizing-related effects (i.e., comparable amygdala and dmPFC activation in low and high trait externalizing individuals) associated with the Alternative Focus conditions, as these conditions are more associated with executive functioning demands (i.e., competition between goal-relevant focus and peripheral goal-irrelevant threat information). 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were 37 male inmates from a maximum-security prison in southern Wisconsin ( Note:  This sample was drawn from a different institution than the sample in Study 1). In addition to the exclusion criteria listed in Study 1, participants were also excluded from the imaging study if they had contraindications for MRI (e.g., ferromagnetic or electronic implants). 
 The fMRI sample was collected at a different institution, where other measures of externalizing were administered. For this sample, externalizing was measured using the Externalizing Spectrum Inventory (ESI; Hall et al., 2007). The ESI is a 100-item self-report questionnaire developed to assess a broad range of behavioral (i.e., substance use) and personality characteristics (i.e., alienation, rebelliousness, impulsivity) associated with the externalizing spectrum of psychopathology. The 100-item version was derived from  Krueger et al's (2007)  415-item self-report measure and is correlated r=.98 with the original measure ( Krueger, Markon, Patrick, Benning et al., 2007 )  3 . For this sample the internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha) was .96. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Presentation of stimuli and recording of responses were controlled by ePrime software (Psychological Software Tools). Stimuli were presented via a rear projection screen and responses were recorded with a fiber optic response box. Prior to beginning the experiment, the intensity of shocks received during the experimental session was calibrated to a participant's subjective shock sensitivity. 
 
 
 Shock Sensitivity 
 The shock sensitivity procedure was the same as Study 1. However, due to the scanner environment shocks were delivered via an AC source (Contact Precision Instruments, Boston, MA) through two Ag/AgCl electrodes placed over the right tibial nerve over the right medial malleolus (right ankle). 
 
 
 Instructed fear-conditioning task 
 The instructed fear task was essentially like the one presented in Study 1. However, in order to adapt the task to a scanner setting, each condition had only 60 trials and a fixation cross was displayed for 400 to 1200 ms (mean = 800 ms) at the beginning of each trial. Twenty percent of the trials where shocked and no white noise probes where administered in the imaging study. 
 
 
 Image Acquisition 
 Data were collected on the Mind Research Network's 1.5 T Siemens Avanto scanner with advanced SQ gradients (max slew rate 200T/m/s, 346 T/m/s vector summation, rise time us) with a 12-element head coil. EPI echoplanar functional images were collected according to the following parameters: TR/TE (2000/39 ms, flip angle 75 °, FOV 24 × 24 cm, 64 × 64 matrix, 3.75 × 3.75 mm in plane resolution, 5 mm slice thickness, 27 axial oblique slices). Head motion was limited using padding. Participants with motion greater than 3 mm were excluded from analysis. High-resolution MPRAGE structural images were obtained to cover the whole brain with 128 1-mm sagittal slices, 8° flip angle and 24 cm FOV. 
 
 
 Image Preprocessing 
 All fMRI data pre-processing and analysis was conducted with AFNI software ( Cox, 1996 ). After image reconstruction and slice-time correction, rigid-body motion correction was done in three translational and three rotational directions, with all images registered to the fifth functional image. The amount of motion in these directions was estimated and then included as regressors in subsequent analyses. Participants with more than 3 mm displacement were excluded. Functional timeseries were deconvolved using a tent function including 8 tents spanning the 14 s following the first stimulus onset. Mean parameter estimates (beta) for tents two through five were calculated. A spatial blur of 4 mm full width half maximum was applied and images were resampled to 1 mm 3  voxels. Anatomical images for each participant were nonlinearly transformed to Talairach space using the TT_N27 template and each functional run was transformed to the Talairach-transformed anatomical image. One participant did not have usable anatomical scans so the functional images were transformed to a standard Talairach (TT_N27) template. Threat minus safe difference scores were calculated for each condition for each subject. For all whole brain analyses cluster thresholding was applied to correct for multiple comparisons. Using a voxel-based p < .025 and nearest-neighbor selection criteria, clusters greater than 562 mm 3  achieved a whole-brain corrected  p  value < 0.05. 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 Participants were grouped into high and low externalizing traits based on a median split of externalizing scores on the ESI (N=19 individuals low on externalizing; N=18 individuals high on externalizing). First, a Group × Condition ANOVA was run. Based on this ANOVA, parameter estimates for regions relevant to the hypothesized mechanisms were extracted for significant clusters identified in the Group × Condition interaction. Analyses were focused on amygdala and dmPFC clusters, however  Table 3  displays all clusters with a significant Group × Condition interaction. Lastly, simple effects (e.g. high vs. low externalizing in Threat Focus conditions) were examined. For all whole brain analyses, cluster thresholding was applied to correct for multiple comparisons using the Alphasim procedure in AFNI with the following input parameters: voxel-based p < .025, nearest-neighbor selection criteria, and estimated smoothing parameters of x = 4.066, y = 4.621, and z = 4.755. Spatial smoothness was estimated by calculating full width half max on the residual timeseries (noise) generated following deconvolution. 
 
 
 
 Results and Discussion 
 Consistent with the FPS results, there was no main effect of externalizing on amygdala (F(1,35)=.02, p=.88) or dmPFC (F(1,35)=1.57, p=.22) activation. Significant three-way interactions in the amygdala (F(1,35)=6.77, p=.01, pη 2 =.16) and dmPFC (F(1,35)=4.74, p=.04, pη 2 =.12), respectively, indicated that the Externalizing effect was moderated by both focus of attention and timing of goal-relevant information. Next, in order to unpack the significant three-way interactions, we examine the two-way interactions between timing and Externalizing within each focus (i.e., threat and alternative). Of note, like Study 1, none of the Group × Condition interactions in the Alternative Focus conditions were significant (amygdala: F(1,35)=.40, p=.53; dmPFC: F(1,35)=.59, p=.45). 
 Moreover, like the FPS results in Study 1, there were significant amygdala (F(1, 35)=28.55, p<.001 uncorrected, pη 2 =.45; peak for Group × Condition interaction cluster: x= 15, y=-6, z=-12; a region including parahippocampal gyrus) and dmPFC (F(1,35)=13.63, p=.001, pη 2 =.28; peak for Group × Condition interaction cluster: x=-8, y =-18, z=54) differences found for the Early versus Late Threat Focus contrast. In the Early Threat Focus condition, individuals high on externalizing exhibited significantly more amygdala activation than individuals low on externalizing (F(1,35)=7.81, p=.008, pη 2 =.18). Conversely, in the Late Threat Focus condition, individuals high on externalizing exhibited significantly less amygdala activation than individuals low on externalizing (F(1,35)=8.69,p=.006, pη 2 =.20;  Figure 3 ). Second, in the Early Threat Focus condition individuals high on externalizing traits also exhibited significantly more activation in the dmPFC than individuals low on externalizing (F(1,35)=9.16, p=.005, pη 2 =.21), whereas in the Late Threat Focus condition individuals high on externalizing exhibited significantly less activation in the dmPFC region than individuals low on externalizing (F(1,35)=9.67, p=.004, pη 2 =.22;  Figure 4 ) 4 . 
 The results from this imaging study are consistent with the FPS findings from Study 1 and reinforce the tenets of the attention hypothesis. Again there was no evidence for an externalizing-related difference in global emotional reactivity (i.e., main effect across conditions) or deficit in executive functioning (i.e., effects in the Alternative Focus conditions). However, like in Study 1, individuals with high externalizing traits compared to individuals with low externalizing traits displayed greater amygdala and dmPFC activation when asked to focus directly on the threat and the threat appeared first (i.e., when there was a match between pre-existing priorities and presentation of motivationally-significant, goal-relevant information). Both amygdala and dmPFC are important neural regions reflecting attention-emotion interactions ( Etkin et al., 2011 ). Given the role of these regions in integrating attentional and affective responses, increased activation in the Early Threat Focus condition among externalizing individuals may reflect, at a neural level, the dysfunctional process that occurs when there is a match between pre-existing priorities and goal-relevant stimuli. Moreover, in the Early Threat Focus condition, brain regions implicated in the mesolimbic dopamine system (i.e., Caudate and Substantia Nigra, see  Table 3 ), a system involved in integrating information about motivational salience, were hyper-activated in the high externalizing group. This evidence is consistent with previous work that found significantly greater neural activation in this system among externalizers (i.e., high impulsive traits) during the presentation of “behaviorally relevant environmental reinforcers” (pg. 3,  Buckholtz et al., 2010b ). Thus, in conjunction with the primary analyses, the overall pattern of neural activation in externalizers suggests widespread hyper-reactivity in regions related to the detection, processing, and regulation of motivational salience, particularly when the motivationally-significant stimuli match pre-existing priorities. 
 Conversely, in the Late Threat Focus condition, when participants were primed to focus on threat but an irrelevant distractor appeared first, deficits in allocating attention, executive control, and affective regulation were evident in high trait externalizing, as indicated by decreased amygdala and dmPFC activation. Previous studies suggest that reduction in dmPFC activation is prominent when threat processing occurs under cognitive load (e.g., due to conflict in the environment;  Etkin et al., 2011 ). In the Late Threat Focus condition, reduced dmPFC activation may indicate that externalizing individuals are over-reacting to the presence of conflict (i.e., mismatch between goal and environmental stimuli). That is, because externalizing individuals prioritize affective stimuli, they must dedicate more resources to reorienting attention toward goal-directed information when distracting or irrelevant information is presented. Ultimately this capacity-demanding process results in a disruption in emotion responding (i.e., reflected in reduced amygdala and dmPFC activation; Blair, 2007;  Corbetta, Patel & Shulman, 2008 ). 
 One issue deserving further consideration is the weak amygdala activation to threat versus safe stimuli in Early Threat Focus condition in the low externalizing group. It might be expected that when directly focusing on threat, amygdala activation in the low externalizing group would be greater to the threat than safe stimuli. However, two factors are important to consider in this case. First, some research reports decreased response to threat stimuli and postulate that this reflects the attentional demands associated with regulating affective responses ( Delgado, Nearing, LeDoux & Phelps, 2008 ). The present task is verbally demanding and given the attentional manipulations, the demands on regulating attention and affect may have impacted the pattern of amygdala activation in the low externalizing group. Second, this pattern of amygdala activation may not be surprising given the nature of the sample. Virtually none of the previously published fMRI studies examining threat- and affect-related amygdala activation used an incarcerated control group ( Birbaumer, Veit, Lotze, Erb, Hermann, Grodd. et al., 2005 ;  Deeley, Daly, Surguladze, Tunstall, Mezey, Beer, et al., 2006 ;  Muller, Sommer, Wagner, Lange, Taschler, Roder, et al., 2003 ) and fMRI studies using incarcerated samples fail to show a consistent pattern in terms of amygdala activation. Thus, it is unclear what the expected pattern of amygdala activity in incarcerated samples is, although this certainly warrants further study. Regardless, the effects within the high externalizing group are highly consistent across two studies and with a theoretical model that posits an anomalous attention response is driving emotion dysregulation in these individuals. 
 
 
 General Discussion 
 Across two studies using highly similar tasks but different prison samples, assessments of externalizing, and measures of emotional reactivity, we traced the disinhibited emotional responses associated with externalizing traits to the same dysfunctional cognitive-affective interaction. As expected, individuals with high levels of externalizing displayed exaggerated emotional reactivity, but this finding was highly specific and thus provided little support for the hypothesis that externalizing involves global hyper-reactivity to motivationally-significant stimuli (i.e., Hypothesis 1). Moreover, we found no support for the hypothesis that a deficit in executive functioning would interfere with the ability of externalizers to inhibit emotionally salient distractors while performing a task that required them to maintain a goal-directed focus on emotionally neutral stimuli (i.e., Hypothesis 2). In contrast to these more general hypotheses, the association between exaggerated emotion reactivity and externalizing traits was found to vary as a function of attentional focus and stimulus order. That is, consistent with Hypothesis 3, our results indicate that the over-allocation of attention to anticipated threat stimuli set up the dysregulation in executive functioning and emotional hyper-reactivity. This is not to deny that in certain contexts externalizers appear to have executive functioning deficits (e.g.,  Endres et al., 2011 ); but the results of the present study suggest that externalizing traits are associated with emotional hyper-reactivity largely due to their exaggerated attentional response and that this response may explain the apparent executive functioning deficits in other studies (i.e., over-allocation of attentional resources to specific stimuli would reduce the available resources for executive functions). 
 While it is premature to specify the exact attentional mechanism responsible for the attentional response in externalizing, it is interesting to speculate about the type of attentional processes underlying the cascade of events that culminate in emotion reactivity. In general, models of selective attention hold that information competes for limited processing resources, and particularly at later stages of attention, this competition is tightly coupled with demands on limited-capacity cognitive (i.e., executive functioning) resources ( Desimone & Duncan, 1995 ). Emotion information appears to be privileged in this respect and typically takes-hold of perceptual and attentional resources (Pessoa, 2008). Moreover, individual differences, such as externalizing, may modulate responsivity to emotion information. Thus, in situations where motivationally-significant stimuli (e.g., threats or rewards) are particularly salient or intrinsically important to an individual, the emotion information commands processing resources and reduces the resources available for other functions (i.e., executive functions). As a result, the engagement of executive resources to control and inhibit the response to emotion information is hampered (see  Wallace & Newman, 1997 ). Overall, the regulation of affective reactions will depend upon the application of resources associated with executive control/function, but the current findings suggest that for externalizers these downstream effects begin with an over-allocation of resources at the perceptual/attentional stage. 
 The present emphasis on attention as the crucial/controlling process underlying externalizing-related emotional reactivity fits well with externalizers' tendency to over-react in emotionally-charged situations. To illustrate the potential relevance of such cognitive-emotion interactions for behavior, we consider their implications for aggressive behaviors. Individuals high on externalizing are prone to display reactive aggression, which typically involves a reaction to frustration or threat ( Blair, 2001 ). Models for reactive aggression assume roles for executive functions (i.e., cognitive control;  Giancola et al., 1996 ) and emotion systems ( Blair, 2001 ;  Dougherty, Rauch, Deckersback, Marci et al., 2004 ). In essence, the combination of poor inhibitory control and an inability to process and manage emotions effectively, particularly frustration, results in the disinhibited expression of aggressive responses. One implication of the current findings is that externalizers' tendency to over-focus attention on motivationally-significant cues, such as a threat or an insult, may reduce their capacity for executive functioning and emotion regulation (i.e., not thinking before acting). Research suggests that some individuals with externalizing are hyper-sensitive to interpersonal slights and provocations (i.e., hostile attribution style;  Dodge, 2006 ). Thus, if an individual with externalizing experiences a slight or insult in the context of an interpersonal interaction, they may over-allocate attention to that insult, have difficulty using executive functioning to regulate their reaction to the insult, and behave in a hyper-emotional way (i.e., display reactive aggression). Furthermore, this reaction may exist for any “trigger” that is over-prioritized for an externalizing individual (e.g., a substance-dependent externalizer may over-allocate attention to drug cues and display disinhibited reactions in response to these specific cues). 
 One limitation of the current studies is that our assessment of emotional reactivity was restricted to fear responses. Given the relationship between externalizing and hypersensitivity to rewards and drug cues, it is important to examine emotion dysregulation in the context of appetitive as well as aversive stimuli. However, in light of the more common emphasis on reward stimuli, the present results indicating dysregulated reaction in the presence of aversive stimuli suggest that the dysfunctional cognitive-affective interactions in externalizing may be more general than previously thought. Second, we used different, albeit correlated measures of externalizing in the two studies (see Footnote 3). Be that as it may, the fact that the two studies yielded consistent results speaks to the robustness of our findings across diverse externalizing measures. 
 In conclusion, cognition-emotion interactions involve diverse and interacting attentional, executive function, and affect-related processes. The current results suggest that a crucial cognition-emotion interaction affecting the disinhibited emotional reactivity associated with trait externalizing involves an over-prioritization and over-allocation of attention toward motivationally-significant cues. This attentional response, in turn, appears to preclude the effective utilization of executive functions (e.g., cognitive control, inhibition) and thus, ultimately culminates in the reactive disinhibition of emotion and behavior. 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by grant MH053041 (Newman) and by Award Number T32-MH018931 (Baskin-Sommers) from the National Institutes of Mental Health. The imaging work was also supported by a grant from the University of Wisconsin-Madison/University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee IRIGP (Newman & Larson) and NIMH MH070539/NIDA DA026505 (Kiehl). We thank many at the Wisconsin Department of Corrections for making this research possible. 
 
 
 
 1 
 Analysis of the behavioral data revealed that there were no externalizing-related effects on behavioral performance (reaction time (F (3,246)=1.69, p=.17) or accuracy (F (3,246)=.77, p=.51)). Additionally, results for all of the primary analyses were essentially unaltered when measures of intelligence (Shipley WAIS-R estimate,  Zachary, 1986 ) or working memory (score on digit backwards) were entered into the models. 
 
 
 2 
 Externalizing traits and psychopathy have many behavioral similarities and are often conflated in the literature. However, recent evidence suggests that the etiological underpinnings of these dimensions are different ( Baskin-Sommers & Newman, 2011 ). In light of their symptom overlap and some overlap in participants between this and the  Baskin-Sommers et al. (2011)  study, it seemed important to compare and control for their respective cognitive-emotional interactions in this study. Scores on Hare's Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (2003;  Hare, 2003 ) were entered into the statistical model as a covariate in order to control for the effect of psychopathy and estimate the unique effect of externalizing, as well as to compare the cognition-emotion interactions in psychopathy and externalizing, respectively. The unique effects of externalizing remained significant and were independent of the psychopathy-related FPS. 
 
 
 3 
 There are a variety of psychometric approaches for characterizing externalizing (e.g. using CON, Impulsive Antisociality, NA-CON difference score, ESI), and currently there is no agreed upon gold standard. There is existing evidence that the ESI and MPQ NA-CON measures tap the same underlying construct and moderately to strongly correlated ( Venables & Patrick, 2011 ). In our dataset, using a different sample of participants who recently completed both measures, but did not complete either of the present studies, the correlation between the two measures was, r(326)=.60. 
 
 
 4 
 Due to software limitations we are not able to run a voxel-wise continuous regression-based reduction (like the analyses in Study 1). However, we recognize that some researchers caution against the use of a median split. Thus, we identified the amygdala and dmPFC clusters (region of interest pairwise approach), extracted them, and ran the simple effect analyses with externalizing as a continuous covariate. As with the analysis reported in the main text, there was a significant interaction between externalizing and time for the Threat Focus in the amygdala (i.e., Early Threat Focus versus Late Threat Focus, F(1,35)=10.70, p=.002, pη 2 =.23). The Early Threat Focus versus Late Threat Focus effect in the dmPFC was reduced to a trend, F(1,35)=2.93, p=.09, pη 2 =.08. There were no main effects of externalizing or effects of externalizing in the Alternative Focus conditions for either region of interest. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 2001 
 Lesions of the human amygdala impair enhanced perception of emotionally salient events 
 Nature 
 411 
 305 
 309 
 11357132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ávila 
 C 
 
 
 Parcet 
 MA 
 
 
 2001 
 Personality and inhibitory deficits in the stop-signal task: The mediating role of Gray's anxiety and impulsivity 
 Personality and Individual Differences 
 29 
 975 
 986 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baskin-Sommers 
 AR 
 
 
 Curtin 
 JJ 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 2011 
 Specifying the attentional selection that moderates the fearlessness of psychopathic offenders 
 Psychological Science 
 22 
 226 
 234 
 21245494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baskin-Sommers 
 AR 
 
 
 Wallace 
 J 
 
 
 MacCoon 
 D 
 
 
 Curtin 
 JJ 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 2010 
 Clarifying the factors that underlie Behavioral Inhibition System functioning in psychopathy 
 Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment 
 1 
 203 
 217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birbaumer 
 N 
 
 
 Veit 
 R 
 
 
 Lotze 
 M 
 
 
 Erb 
 M 
 
 
 Hermann 
 C 
 
 
 Grodd 
 W 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Deficient fear conditioning in psychopathy: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 62 
 799 
 805 
 15997022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bishop 
 SJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of attention 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 12 
 92 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJR 
 
 
 2001 
 Neuro-cognitive models of aggression, the antisocial personality disorders and psychopathy 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 71 
 727 
 731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJR 
 
 
 2008 
 The amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex: functional contributions and dysfunction in psychopathy 
 Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society Biological Sciences 
 36 
 2557 
 2565 
 18434283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blumenthal 
 TD 
 
 
 Cuthbert 
 BN 
 
 
 Filion 
 DL 
 
 
 Hackley 
 S 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Committee report: Guidelines for human startle eyeblink electromyographic studies 
 Psychophysiology 
 42 
 1 
 15 
 15720576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckholtz 
 JW 
 
 
 Treadway 
 MT 
 
 
 Cowan 
 R 
 
 
 Benning 
 SD 
 
 
 Li 
 R 
 
 
 
 2010a 
 Mesolimbic dopamine reward system hypersensitivity in individuals with psychopathic traits 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 13 
 419 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckholtz 
 JW 
 
 
 Treadway 
 MT 
 
 
 Cowan 
 R 
 
 
 Woodward 
 ND 
 
 
 Li 
 R 
 
 
 
 2010b 
 Dopaminergic Network Differences in Human Impulsivity 
 Science 
 329 
 532 
 20671181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bufkin 
 JL 
 
 
 Luttrell 
 VR 
 
 
 2005 
 Neuroimaging studies of aggressive and violent behavior: Current findings and implications for criminology and criminal justice 
 Trauma, Violence, and Abuse 
 6 
 176 
 191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2008 
 The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: From Environment to Theory of Mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coccaro 
 EF 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Amygdala and orbitofrontal reactivity to social threat in individuals with impulsive aggression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 62 
 168 
 178 
 17210136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 M 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2000 
 Anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex: who's in control? 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 3 
 421 
 423 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2001 
 The amygdala: Vigilance and emotion 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 6 
 13 
 34 
 11244481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 D 
 
 
 Nitschke 
 JB 
 
 
 Kalin 
 NH 
 
 
 2003 
 Parsing the subcomponents of emotion and disorders of emotion: Perspectives from affective neuroscience 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Scherer 
 KR 
 
 
 Goldsmith 
 HH 
 
 
 Handbook of Affective Sciences 
 8 
 24 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deeley 
 Q 
 
 
 Daly 
 E 
 
 
 Surguladze 
 S 
 
 
 Tunstall 
 N 
 
 
 Mezey 
 G 
 
 
 Beer 
 D 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Facial emotion processing in criminal psychopathy. Preliminary functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 British Journal of Psychiatry 
 189 
 533 
 539 
 17139038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nearing 
 KI 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural circuitry underlying the regulation of conditioned fear and its relation to extinction 
 Neuron 
 59 
 829 
 838 
 18786365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 1995 
 Neural mechanisms of selective attention 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 18 
 193 
 222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Derryberry 
 D 
 
 
 Reed 
 MA 
 
 
 1194 
 Temperament and attention: Orienting toward and away from positive and negative signals 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 66 
 1128 
 1139 
 8046580 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dodge 
 KA 
 
 
 2006 
 Translational science in action: Hostile attributional style and the development of aggressive behavior problems 
 Developmental Psychopathology 
 18 
 791 
 814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dolan 
 SL 
 
 
 Bechara 
 A 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PE 
 
 
 2008 
 Executive dysfunction as a risk marker for substance abuse: the role of impulsive personality traits 
 Behavioral Sciences and the Law 
 26 
 799 
 822 
 19039793 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 DD 
 
 
 Rauch 
 SL 
 
 
 Deckersback 
 T 
 
 
 Marci 
 C 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Ventromedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala dysfunction during anger induction positron emission tomography in patients with major depressive disorder with anger attacks 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 61 
 795 
 804 
 15289278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberg 
 N 
 
 
 Guthrie 
 IK 
 
 
 Fabes 
 RA 
 
 
 Shepard 
 S 
 
 
 Losoya 
 S 
 
 
 Murphy 
 B 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Prediction of elementary school children's externalizing problem behaviors from attentional and behavioral regulation and negative emotionality 
 Child Development 
 71 
 1367 
 1382 
 11108101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ellis 
 HC 
 
 
 Ashbrook 
 PW 
 
 
 1988 
 Resource allocation model of the effects of depressed mood states on memory 
 
 
 Fiedler 
 K 
 
 
 Forgas 
 J 
 
 
 Affect, cognition, and social behaviour 
 25 
 43 
 Toronto 
 Hogrefe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Endres 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rickert 
 ME 
 
 
 Bogg 
 T 
 
 
 Lucas 
 J 
 
 
 Finn 
 PR 
 
 
 2011 
 Externalizing psychopathology and behavioral disinhibition: Working memory mediates signal discriminability and reinforcement moderates response bias in approach-avoidance learning 
 Journal of AbnormalPsychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Kalisch 
 R 
 
 
 2011 
 Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 15 
 85 
 93 
 21167765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Finn 
 PR 
 
 
 Mazas 
 C 
 
 
 Justus 
 A 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 JE 
 
 
 2002 
 Early-onset alcoholism with conduct disorder: Go/No Go learning deficits, personality, and working memory capacity 
 Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 
 26 
 186 
 206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 E 
 
 
 Russo 
 R 
 
 
 Dutton 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 Attentional bias for threat: Evidence for delayed disengagement from emotional faces 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 16 
 355 
 379 
 18273395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giancola 
 PR 
 
 
 Tarter 
 RE 
 
 
 1999 
 Executive Cognitive Functioning and Risk for Substance Abuse 
 Psychological Science 
 10 
 203 
 205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giancola 
 PR 
 
 
 Moss 
 HB 
 
 
 Martin 
 CS 
 
 
 Kirisci 
 T 
 
 
 Tarter 
 RE 
 
 
 1996 
 Executive cognitive functioning predicts reactive aggression in boys at high risk for substance abuse: a prospective study 
 Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research 
 20 
 740 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gorenstein 
 EE 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1980 
 Disinhibitory psychopathology: A new perspective and a model for research 
 Psychological Review 
 87 
 301 
 315 
 7384345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Handley 
 ED 
 
 
 Chassin 
 L 
 
 
 Haller 
 MM 
 
 
 Bountress 
 KE 
 
 
 Dandreaux 
 D 
 
 
 Beltran 
 I 
 
 
 2011 
 Do executive and reactive disinhibition mediate the effects of familial substance use disorders on adolescent externalizing outcomes? 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 120 
 528 
 542 
 21668077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hanson 
 J 
 
 
 Chung 
 M 
 
 
 Avants 
 B 
 
 
 Shritcliff 
 E 
 
 
 Gee 
 J 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Pollak 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Early stress is associated with alterations in the orbitofrontal cortex: A tensor-based morphometry investigation of brain structure and behavioral risk 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 30 
 22 
 7466 
 72 
 20519521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 RD 
 
 
 2003 
 Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) 
 2nd 
 Toronto 
 MHS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herpertz 
 SC 
 
 
 Huebner 
 T 
 
 
 Marx 
 I 
 
 
 Vloet 
 TD 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Stoecker 
 T 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Emotional processing in male adolescents with childhood-onset conduct disorder 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 49 
 781 
 791 
 18598245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iacono 
 WG 
 
 
 Malone 
 SM 
 
 
 McGue 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Behavioral disinhibition and the development of Early-Onset Addiction: Common and specific Influences 
 Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 
 4 
 325 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Junghöfer 
 M 
 
 
 Russmann 
 T 
 
 
 Lowenthal 
 W 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Cross-modal attentional capture by affective stimuli 
 Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 7 
 18 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krueger 
 RF 
 
 
 Caspi 
 A 
 
 
 Moffitt 
 TE 
 
 
 2000 
 Epidemiological personology: The unifying role of personality in population-based research on problem behaviours 
 Journal of Personality 
 68 
 967 
 998 
 11130741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krueger 
 RF 
 
 
 Markon 
 PKE 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 Benning 
 SD 
 
 
 Kramer 
 MD 
 
 
 2007 
 Linking antisocial behavior, substance use, and personality: An integrative quantitative model of the adult externalizing spectrum 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 116 
 645 
 666 
 18020714 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krueger 
 RF 
 
 
 Markon 
 PKE 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 Iacono 
 WG 
 
 
 2005 
 Externalizing psychopathology in adulthood: A dimensional-spectrum conceptualization and its implications for  DSM–V 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 114 
 537 
 550 
 16351376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lejuez 
 CW 
 
 
 Magidson 
 JF 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 SH 
 
 
 Sinha 
 
 
 Stevens 
 MC 
 
 
 de Wit 
 H 
 
 
 2010 
 Behavioral and biological indicators of impulsivity in the development of alcohol use, problems, and disorders 
 Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 
 34 
 1334 
 1345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 KA 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 Mliss-Moreau 
 E 
 
 
 Barrett 
 LF 
 
 
 in press 
 The Brain Basis of Emotion: A meta-analytic review 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacCoon 
 DG 
 
 
 Wallace 
 JF 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 2004 
 Self-regulation: the context-appropriate allocation of attentional capacity to dominant and non-dominant cues 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 Vohs 
 KD 
 
 
 Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications 
 422 
 446 
 New York, NY 
 Guilford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 LE 
 
 
 Potts 
 GF 
 
 
 2004 
 Reward sensitivity in impulsivity 
 Neuroreport 
 15 
 1519 
 1522 
 15194887 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 MW 
 
 
 Greif 
 JL 
 
 
 Smith 
 AA 
 
 
 2003 
 Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire profiles of veterans with traumatic combat exposure: Internalizing and externalizing subtypes 
 Psychological Assessment 
 15 
 205 
 215 
 12847781 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morgan 
 AB 
 
 
 Lilienfeld 
 SO 
 
 
 2000 
 A meta-analytic review of the relation between antisocial behavior and neuropsychological measures of executive function 
 Clinical Psychology Review 
 20 
 113 
 156 
 10660831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morgan 
 MA 
 
 
 Romanski 
 LM 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 1993 
 Extinction of emotional learning: Contribution of medial prefrontal cortex 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 163 
 109 
 113 
 8295722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muller 
 JL 
 
 
 Sommer 
 M 
 
 
 Wagner 
 V 
 
 
 Lange 
 K 
 
 
 Taschler 
 H 
 
 
 Roder 
 CH 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Abnormalities in emotion processing within cortical and subcortical regions in criminal psychopaths: evidence from a functional magnetic resonance imaging study using pictures with emotional content 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 54 
 152 
 162 
 12873805 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1987 
 Reaction to punishment in extraverts and psychopaths: Implications for the impulsive behavior of disinhibited individuals 
 Journal of Research in Personality 
 21 
 464 
 485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1997 
 Conceptual models of the nervous system: Implications for antisocial behavior 
 
 
 Stoff 
 DM 
 
 
 Breiling 
 J 
 
 
 Maser 
 JD 
 
 
 Handbook of Antisocial Behavior 
 324 
 335 
 New York, NU 
 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 Lorenz 
 AR 
 
 
 2003 
 Response modulation and emotion processing: Implications for psychopathy and other dysregulatory psychopathology 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Scherer 
 K 
 
 
 Goldsmith 
 HH 
 
 
 Handbook of Affective Sciences 
 904 
 929 
 Oxford, England 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 Patterson 
 CM 
 
 
 Howland 
 EW 
 
 
 Nichols 
 SL 
 
 
 1990 
 Passive avoidance in psychopaths: The effects of reward 
 Personality and Individual Differences 
 11 
 1101 
 1114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 Widom 
 CS 
 
 
 Nathan 
 S 
 
 
 1985 
 Passive-avoidance in syndromes of disinhibition: Psychopathy and extraversion 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 48 
 1316 
 1327 
 3998992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 S 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1986 
 Effects of punishment on response latency in extraverts 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 50 
 624 
 630 
 3701595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 Curtin 
 JJ 
 
 
 Tellegen 
 A 
 
 
 2002 
 Development and validation of a brief form of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire 
 Psychological Assessment 
 14 
 150 
 163 
 12056077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 Zempolich 
 KA 
 
 
 1998 
 Emotion and aggression in the psychopathic personality 
 Aggression and Violent Behavior 
 3 
 303 
 338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 CM 
 
 
 Kosson 
 DS 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1987 
 Reaction to punishment, reflectivity, and passive avoidance learning in extraverts 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 52 
 565 
 576 
 3572724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 How do emotion and motivation direct executive control? 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 13 
 160 
 6 
 19285913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 2005 
 To what extent are emotional visual stimuli processed without attention and awareness? 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 15 
 188 
 196 
 15831401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Decker 
 LR 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Activation of the medial prefrontal cortex and extended amygdala by individual ratings of emotional arousal: A fMRI study 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 53 
 211 
 215 
 12559653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raine 
 A 
 
 
 Lencz 
 T 
 
 
 Bihrle 
 S 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Reduced prefrontal gray matter volume and reduced autonomic activity in antisocial personality disorder 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 57 
 119 
 127 
 10665614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raine 
 A 
 
 
 Meloy 
 JR 
 
 
 Bihrle 
 S 
 
 
 Stoddard 
 J 
 
 
 LaCasse 
 L 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 MS 
 
 
 1998 
 Reduced prefrontal and increased subcortical brain functioning assessed using positron emission tomography in predatory and affective murderers 
 Behavioral Sciences & the Law 
 16 
 319 
 332 
 9768464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singh-Manoux 
 A 
 
 
 Kivimaki 
 M 
 
 
 Glymour 
 MM 
 
 
 Elbaz 
 A 
 
 
 Berr 
 C 
 
 
 Ebmeier 
 KP 
 
 
 Ferrie 
 JE 
 
 
 Dugravot 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Timing of onset of cognitive decline: results from Whitehall II prospective cohort study 
 British Medical Journal 
 344 
 d7622 
 22223828 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 Stadler 
 C 
 
 
 Krebs 
 A 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Abnormal neural responses to emotional visual stimuli in adolescents with conduct disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 57 
 7 
 15 
 15607294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 J 
 
 
 Carlson 
 SR 
 
 
 Iacono 
 WG 
 
 
 Lykken 
 DT 
 
 
 McGue 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 Individual differences in electrodermal responsivity to predictable aversive stimuli and substance dependence 
 Psychophysiology 
 36 
 193 
 198 
 10194966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Venables 
 NC 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Validity of the externalizing spectrum inventory in a criminal offender sample: Relations with disinhibitory psychopathology, personality, and psychopathic features 
 Psychological Assessment 
 Advance online publication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verona 
 
 
 Patrick 
 CJ 
 
 
 Lang 
 AR 
 
 
 2002 
 A direct assessment of the role of state and trait negative emotion in aggressive behavior 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 111 
 249 
 258 
 12003447 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 Li 
 TK 
 
 
 2004 
 Drug addiction: the neurobiology of behaviour gone awry 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 5 
 963 
 970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wallace 
 JF 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1990 
 Differential effects of reward and punishment cues on response speed in anxious and impulsive individuals 
 Personality and Individual Differences 
 11 
 999 
 1009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wallace 
 JF 
 
 
 Newman 
 JP 
 
 
 1997 
 Neuroticism and the attentional mediation of dysregulatory psychopathology 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 21 
 135 
 156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zachary 
 RA 
 
 
 1986 
 Shipley institute of living scale: Revised manual 
 Los Angeles 
 Western Psychological Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zuckerman 
 M 
 
 
 1978 
 Sensation seeking and psychopathy 
 
 
 Hare 
 RD 
 
 
 Schalling 
 D 
 
 
 Psychopathic behavior: Approaches to research 
 New York 
 Wiley 
 165 
 185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Instructed fear paradigm. The task consisted of four conditions in which focus of attention and timing of attentional focus was manipulated: (A) Early Threat Focus, (B) Late Threat Focus, (C) Late Alternative Focus, and (D) Early Alternative Focus. During Threat Focus participants attended to the color of a box predicting shock administration (red = potential shock, green = safe). For Alternative Focus, participants were instructed to attend to the case of a letter stimulus. During Early trials the stimulus to be attended to was presented first and during Late trials it was presented second. For Study 1 80 trials of each condition and for Study 2 60 trials of each condition were presented in a blocked format with the order counterbalanced across participants. For Study 1 only, white-noise startle probes were presented at 1,400 ms to measure fear-potentiated startle. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Fear-potentiated startle (FPS) as a function of Externalizing (±1.5 SD from the mean) and condition. Error bars represent +/- one standard error for FPS point estimates for low and high Externalizing. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 (A) Brain image depicting significant amygdala (x= 15, y=-6, z=-12) activation for the Group x Condition interaction (B) The bar graph depicts mean threat minus safe parameter estimates for each condition based on the amygdala cluster demonstrating a significant Group x Condition interaction. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. For all brain images clusters depicted survive whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons at p < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 (A and B) Brain image depicting significant dmPFC (x=-8, y =-18, z=54) activation for the Group x Condition interaction (C) The bar graph depicts mean threat minus safe parameter estimates for each condition based on the dmPFC cluster demonstrating a significant Group × Condition interaction. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. For all brain images clusters depicted survive whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons at p < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Means, Standard Deviations, and zero-order correlations with externalizing for relevant descriptive variables. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study 1 (N=84) 
 
 
 Study 2 (N=37) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean 
 St Dev 
 r 
 Mean 
 St Dev 
 r 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demographic 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 
 31.82 
 7.21 
 -.18 
 32.76 
 6.66 
 .03 
 
 
 
 
 Shipley Estimated IQ 
 
 102.38 
 9.88 
 -.13 
 102.22 
 11.40 
 -.17 
 
 
 
 Externalizing Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
 NA-CON Composite Raw Score 
 
 -21.50 
 29.47 
 -- 
 -- 
 -- 
 -- 
 
 
 
 
 ESI Raw Score 
 
 -- 
 -- 
 -- 
 236.00 
 66.34 
 -- 
 
 
 
 
 Antisocial Personality Disorder (# of symptoms) 
 
 7.63 
 3.49 
 .52* 
 9.16 
 5.19 
 .71* 
 
 
 
 
 Conduct Disorder (# of symptoms) 
 
 3.56 
 2.69 
 .46* 
 4.36 
 3.49 
 .67* 
 
 
 
 
 Adult Antisocial (# of symptoms) 
 
 4.00 
 1.40 
 .40* 
 3.92 
 1.97 
 .65* 
 
 
 
 Externalizing Behaviors and Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drug Charges (supply and use) 
 
 1.79 
 2.41 
 .05 
 1.43 
 2.09 
 .47* 
 
 
 
 
 Assault Charges 
 
 1.59 
 2.17 
 .23* 
 .97 
 1.28 
 .36* 
 
 
 
 
 Self-Report Alcohol/Drug Use 
 
 9.70 
 5.04 
 .15 
 10.00 
 4.50 
 .66* 
 
 
 
 
 Sensitivity to Punishment 
 
 10.27 
 6.07 
 .19 
 -- 
 -- 
 -- 
 
 
 
 
 Sensitivity to Reward 
 
 13.51 
 4.80 
 .39* 
 -- 
 -- 
 -- 
 
 
 
 
 Digit Backwards 
 
 6.76 
 2.14 
 -.11 
 7.10 
 2.50 
 -.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note:  Flagged cells indicate a significant (p<.05) zero-order correlation involving Externalizing measures (*). Negative Affect-Constraint=NA-CON (negative indicates larger constraint value than negative affect value); ESI=Externalizing Spectrum Inventory; Self-Report Alcohol/Drug Use: Michigan Assessment Screening Test for Alcohol and Drugs. Sensitivity to Punishment/Reward was measured by the Caseras, Avila & Torrubia (2002) Sensitivity to Punishment/Sensitivity to Reward- Revised scale. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 General Linear Model Point Estimates for Startle Responses in the Four Conditions of the Experiment 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early alternative focus 
 Late alternative focus 
 Late threat focus 
 Early threat focus 
 
 
 
 
 No threat 
 
 
 Threat 
 
 
 FPS 
 
 
 No threat 
 
 
 Threat 
 
 
 FPS 
 
 
 No threat 
 
 
 Threat 
 
 
 FPS 
 
 
 No threat 
 
 
 Threat 
 
 
 FPS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low 
 43.20 
 60.24 
 17.04 
 38.60 
 53.52 
 14.92 
 34.02 
 59.91 
 25.89 
 38.00 
 44.75 
 6.75 
 
 
 Externalizing 
 (8.09) 
 (11.00) 
 (5.97) 
 (8.13) 
 (10.60) 
 (4.84) 
 (8.21) 
 (10.63) 
 (5.17) 
 (7.81) 
 (10.02) 
 (4.40) 
 
 
 High 
 49.25 
 59.23 
 9.99 
 44.83 
 61.26 
 16.43 
 49.62 
 58.87 
 9.25 
 46.82 
 70.14 
 23.32 
 
 
 Externalizing 
 (8.09) 
 (11.00) 
 (5.97) 
 (8.13) 
 (10.60) 
 (4.84) 
 (8.21) 
 (10.63) 
 (5.71) 
 (7.81) 
 (10.02) 
 (4.40) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Condition 
 48.07 
 64.87 
 16.80 
 44.19 
 61.32 
 17.13 
 43.31 
 62.41 
 19.10 
 45.29 
 62.39 
 17.10 
 
 
 Mean 
 (4.48) 
 (6.61) 
 (3.78) 
 (4.72) 
 (6.08) 
 (2.86) 
 (4.84) 
 (5.19) 
 (3.32) 
 (4.73) 
 (6.16) 
 (2.79) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note : Fear-potentiated startle (FPS) was calculated by subtracting blink-response magnitude to probes following green (no threat) boxes from blink-response magnitude to probes following red (threat) boxes in each of the four conditions. There was a significant difference between the Threat and No Threat stimuli across conditions, F(1,86)=46.72, p<.001, pη 2 =.35, which indicated that startle was greater in the Threat trials than the No Threat trials. Because we analyzed externalizing continuously instead of using an extreme-groups design, the values presented are point estimates (i.e., estimated using regression analyses) for low and high externalizing points (1.5  SD  below and above the sample mean NA-CON total score, respectively) on the distribution. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Significant clusters from the Group × Condition Interaction showing differences for the Threat Focus conditions ( p  < .05 corrected). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Cluster size (voxel mm 3 ) 
 F  value 
 p  value (corrected) 
 
 
 
 
 FRONTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  L Dorsal Medial Frontal Gyrus * † 
 BA 6 
 -8 
 -18 
 54 
 321 
 4.79 
 .004 
 
 
  L Superior/Medial Frontal Gyrus * 
 BA 10 
 15 
 64 
 -1 
 1608 
 3.72 
 .014 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus * 
 BA 9 
 -39 
 34 
 27 
 214 
 4.32 
 .007 
 
 
  L Middle Frontal Gyrus * 
 BA 10 
 -38 
 51 
 -1 
 155 
 4.17 
 .008 
 
 
  R Inferior Frontal Gyrus * † 
 BA 47 
 32 
 31 
 -12 
 131 
 4.20 
 .008 
 
 
 TEMPORAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Superior Temporal Gyrus * † 
 BA 39 
 47 
 -49 
 17 
 281 
 4.44 
 .006 
 
 
  L Superior Temporal Gyrus * 
 BA 13 
 -50 
 -41 
 20 
 222 
 4.61 
 .006 
 
 
  L Superior Temporal Gyrus * 
 BA 41 
 -40 
 -39 
 11 
 148 
 4.73 
 .005 
 
 
  R Inferior Temporal Gyrus * 
 BA 20 
 62 
 -23 
 -18 
 167 
 4.12 
 .008 
 
 
  R Middle Temporal Gyrus * 
 BA 39 
 45 
 -69 
 19 
 147 
 4.09 
 .009 
 
 
 Parietal/Occiptal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Cuneus/Precuneus * 
 BA 31 
 8 
 -69 
 18 
 1012 
 4.30 
 .007 
 
 
  L Posterior Cingulate * 
 BA 30 
 -12 
 -54 
 18 
 338 
 4.33 
 .007 
 
 
  L Middle Occipital Gyrus * 
 BA 18 
 -34 
 -85 
 4 
 155 
 4.25 
 .007 
 
 
  L Middle Occiptal Gyrus * 
 BA 30 
 -29 
 -58 
 7 
 123 
 4.07 
 .009 
 
 
  R Lingual Gyrus/Culmen † 
 BA 19 
 19 
 -59 
 0 
 570 
 3.75 
 .013 
 
 
 OTHER REGIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  R Thalamus * 
 
 17 
 -26 
 6 
 349 
 4.40 
 .006 
 
 
  L Thalamus * 
 
 -11 
 -21 
 18 
 261 
 4.26 
 .007 
 
 
  R Caudate * 
 
 24 
 -18 
 24 
 311 
 4.22 
 .007 
 
 
  L Substantia Nigra * 
 
 -8 
 -26 
 -11 
 224 
 4.64 
 .004 
 
 
  R Cerebellum * † 
 
 20 
 -54 
 -13 
 198 
 4.23 
 .007 
 
 
  R Amygdala/Parahippocampal Gyrus * † 
 
 15 
 -6 
 -12 
 98 
 3.84 
 .012 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note : The regions flagged in the table are significant contrasts based upon clusters from the Group X Condition interaction. These contrasts highlight the significant externalizing-related effects in the Threat Focus conditions. 
 
 
 * 
 denotes greater activation for high externalizers in the Early Threat Focus condition. 
 
 
 † 
 denotes greater activation for low externalizers in the Late Threat Focus condition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Studied cognition-emotion interplay in externalizing with startle and imaging. 
 
 
 Externalizing was not associated with global emotional hyperreactivity. 
 
 
 Externalizing was not associated with a primary deficit in executive functioning. 
 
 
 Externalizing was associated with an exaggerated attention response to threat. 
 
 
 Exaggerated attention responses undermine executive functions and emotion regulation. 
 
 
 
 
