properties open_access? Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience 1530-7026 1531-135X Springer-Verlag New York 22644759 3400031 100 10.3758/s13415-012-0100-3 Article Trait anxiety and the neural efficiency of manipulation in
working memory Basten Ulrike basten@psych.uni-frankfurt.de 1 2 Stelzel Christine 2 3 Fiebach Christian J. 1 2 4 5 1 grid.7839.5 0000000419369721 Department of Psychology,  Goethe University,  Postfach 11 19 32, Fach 128, 60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany  2 grid.7700.0 0000000121904373 Department of Neuroradiology,  University of Heidelberg,  INF 400, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany  3 grid.6363.0 0000000122184662 Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,  Charité Universitätsmedizin,  Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany  4 IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Mertonstr. 17, 60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany  5 grid.5590.9 0000000122931605 Centre for Cognition, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour,  Radboud University Nijmegen,  Montessorilaan 3, 6525 HR Nijmegen, The Netherlands  29 5 2012 29 5 2012 2012 12 3 571 588 © The Author(s) 2012 The present study investigates the effects of trait anxiety on the neural
efficiency of working memory component functions (manipulation vs. maintenance) in
the absence of threat-related stimuli. For the manipulation of affectively neutral
verbal information held in working memory, high- and low-anxious individuals
( N  = 46) did not differ in their behavioral
performance, yet trait anxiety was positively related to the neural effort expended
on task processing, as measured by BOLD signal changes in fMRI. Higher levels of
anxiety were associated with stronger activation in two regions implicated in the
goal-directed control of attention—that is, right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and left inferior frontal sulcus—and with stronger deactivation in a region
assigned to the brain’s default-mode network—that is, rostral–ventral anterior
cingulate cortex. Furthermore, anxiety was associated with a stronger functional
coupling of right DLPFC with ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. We interpret our
findings as reflecting reduced processing efficiency in high-anxious individuals and
point out the need to consider measures of functional integration in addition to
measures of regional activation strength when investigating individual differences
in neural efficiency. With respect to the functions of working memory, we conclude
that anxiety specifically impairs the processing efficiency of (control-demanding)
manipulation processes (as opposed to mere maintenance). Notably, this study
contributes to an accumulating body of evidence showing that anxiety also affects
cognitive processing in the absence of threat-related stimuli. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.3758/s13415-012-0100-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users. Keywords Anxiety Attention Cognitive control Functional connectivity Personality Working memory issue-copyright-statement © Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2012 Individual differences in trait anxiety have been associated with differences in
cognitive functioning (Bishop,  2007 ;
Eysenck, Derakshan, Santos, & Calvo,  2007 ; Mathews & Mackintosh,  1998 ). The present study investigates the effects of trait anxiety on
the neural efficiency of cognitive processing in the absence of threat-related
stimuli. In a previous study, we showed that for inhibitory control in the Stroop
task, trait anxiety was associated with reduced neural efficiency, in terms of weaker
functional coupling within a network of task-relevant brain regions and increased
activation of a prefrontal control region—that is, the right dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC; Basten, Stelzel, & Fiebach,  2011 ). Here, we tested whether or not trait anxiety also modulates
efficiency in terms of both brain activation and functional coupling during the
manipulation of working memory contents. It has been postulated that anxiety impairs cognitive processing due to an
impairment of the goal-directed control of attention. This assumption stems from
research on the processing of threat-related information by anxious individuals
(Mathews & Mackintosh,  1998 ;
Windmann,  1998 ) and has also been applied
to cognitive processing in the absence of threat-related information (Bishop,
 2007 ; Eysenck et al.,  2007 ). On the basis of the common assumption that
the goal-directed control of attention is impaired in trait-anxious individuals,
different predictions have been put forward concerning the neural correlates of this
impairment. While Bishop ( 2007 ,
 2009 ) expected high-anxious individuals
to show weaker activation of brain regions supporting cognitive control than would
low-anxious individuals, Eysenck and colleagues ( 2007 ; Eysenck & Derakshan,  2010 ) argued that high-anxious individuals should show stronger
activation of these brain regions, reflecting an attempt to gain control by
compensatory increases in neural effort expended on task processing, and thereby to
maintain performance at a high level. With our fMRI studies, we aimed at testing the
predictions put forward by Eysenck et al. ( 2007 ) in their attentional control theory. Attentional control theory (Eysenck et al.,  2007 ) distinguishes between  performance
effectiveness  und  processing
efficiency . While  performance
effectiveness  refers to the quality of performance, as usually assessed
by performance accuracy,  processing efficiency 
relates the observed effectiveness to the  effort 
invested in task processing: the higher the effort expended to reach a given level of
performance effectiveness, the lower the efficiency of processing. The central
prediction of attentional control theory is that anxiety impairs the efficiency of
processing more than it impairs the effectiveness of performance. It is assumed that
high-anxious individuals expend compensatory effort on task processing in order to
make up for their poorer attentional control. On the one hand, this may enable them to
keep a level of performance comparable to that of low-anxious individuals, but on the
other hand, it renders their processing less efficient. Support for the assumptions of attentional control theory has come from behavioral
studies that have used performance accuracy to assess effectiveness and response times
to assess effort and efficiency (Ansari & Derakshan,  2010 ; Ansari, Derakshan, & Richards,  2008 ; Derakshan, Ansari, Hansard, Shoker, &
Eysenck,  2009 ; Derakshan, Smyth, &
Eysenck,  2009 ). These studies, however,
have been criticized for relying on an indirect measure of effort/efficiency that,
furthermore, is difficult to disentangle from the behavioral measure used to assess
effectiveness (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011a ; Derakshan & Eysenck,  2009 ), as both response times and accuracy measure the outcome of
processing rather than the processing itself. A measure more directly reflecting the
effort expended on processing would result from the assessment of brain activity
during task processing. In particular, the blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD)
signal measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is suitable for
assessing effort, as the hemodynamic response reflected in this signal is related to
neural activity (Logothetis, Pauls, Augath, Trinath, & Oeltermann,  2001 ; Logothetis & Wandell,  2004 ) and typically increases with cognitive effort
(Braver et al.,  1997 ; Jonides et al.,
 1997 ; Manoach et al.,  1997 ; Rypma, Prabhakaran, Desmond, Glover, &
Gabrieli,  1999 )—constrained by
physiologically characterized upper limits (Callicott et al.,  1999 ; Linden et al.,  2003 ; Todd & Marois,  2005 ). The first studies using fMRI and electroencephalography (EEG) to investigate the
effects of anxiety on brain activation during affectively neutral tasks focused on
inhibitory control (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011b ; Basten et al.,  2011 ; Bishop,  2009 ) and
task switching (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011a ). Some of these studies found stronger, supposedly
compensatory, activation in high- as compared to low-anxious participants, along with
comparable levels of performance accuracy (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011a ) or lower accuracy in high-anxious individuals
(Basten et al.,  2011 )—both patterns
(investing more and achieving the same or less) that implicate reduced neural
efficiency in high-anxious individuals. Notably, the effect reported in Basten et al.
also held when statistically controlling for variation in performance accuracy. Other
studies found weaker, supposedly insufficient, activation for the high-anxious, along
with slower performance (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011b ; Bishop,  2009 )—a
pattern (investing less and achieving less) not unequivocally interpretable in terms
of neural efficiency. So far, only a single fMRI study has investigated the effects of
trait anxiety on brain activation during working memory processing. Fales et al.
( 2008 ) reported stronger transient
activation of cognitive-control regions for high- relative to low-anxious participants
during a verbal three-back task, while performance levels did not differ between the
two groups. This finding supports the predictions of attentional control theory for
the domain of working memory, as the fact that the high-anxious participants invested
more neural effort for a comparable level of performance renders their processing less
efficient. Yet the  n -back task chosen by Fales et
al. did not allow for specifying which exact component function of working memory was
affected by anxiety. With the present study, we aimed at extending the findings of
Fales et al. (a) by disentangling whether the effects of anxiety on the neural
correlates of working memory are attributable to a specific component function of
working memory—that is, to manipulation versus maintenance (see Baddeley,  2003 )—and (b) by investigating whether, for working
memory, anxiety modulates only the strength of activation in cognitive-control
regions, or also the functional coupling of distributed task-relevant networks (like
we found for the Stroop task in our previous study; see Basten et al.,  2011 ). For our investigation, we chose a delayed-response working memory task that
allowed us to differentiate between the two component functions defining working
memory—that is, maintenance and manipulation (Baddeley,  2003 ). Performance effectiveness was equated with performance
accuracy, the effort invested in task processing was defined as task-related changes
in BOLD signal, and processing efficiency was determined by relating accuracy to BOLD
signal changes (in formal terms, effectiveness = accuracy, effort = brain activation,
and efficiency = accuracy / brain activation). Note that generally when effectiveness
(accuracy) does not covary with anxiety, the effects of anxiety on efficiency are
simply determined by differences in effort (brain activation). We hypothesized that anxiety would be negatively correlated with neural
efficiency, specifically during working memory manipulation. Only when attentional
control requirements come into play (as for the manipulation of working memory
contents, as opposed to mere maintenance; see Baddeley,  2003 ) is anxiety expected to result in compensatory increases in
effort and—not necessarily, but potentially also—in an impairment of performance
(Eysenck et al.,  2007 ). More
specifically, for high- as compared to low-anxious individuals, we predicted that we
would find compensatory increases in neural effort in regions of the brain that are
known to support cognitive control and executive processes in the context of working
memory manipulation. In our analyses, we focused on the bilateral DLPFC (Brodmann’s
areas [BAs] 46 and 9). These regions have most consistently been implicated in
executive-control processes, in general (Duncan & Owen,  2000 ; Miller & Cohen,  2001 ; Smith & Jonides,  1999 ), as well as in the manipulation (as opposed to
the maintenance) of working memory contents, in particular (D’Esposito, Postle,
Ballard, & Lease,  1999 ; D’Esposito,
Postle, & Rypma,  2000 ). So as not to
miss any effects of anxiety on brain activation outside our region of interest, we
will also report the results from whole-brain analyses. Finally, we predicted that
anxiety would affect not only the strength of activation in DLPFC, but also the
functional coupling of the DLPFC with other task-related regions. Even though in our sample anxiety was not significantly associated with a
behavioral outcome, we decided to statistically control for subtle variation in
performance accuracy. In addition, we controlled for variation in psychometric
intelligence. As differences in cognitive ability have previously been associated with
differences in neural effort and—consequently—in efficiency (Neubauer & Fink,
 2009a ), we considered it important to
assure that differences in neural measures that were attributed to anxiety could not
instead be explained by variation in intelligence. However, like performance,
intelligence was not significantly related to anxiety. Thus, statistically controlling
for the two variables by multiple regression procedures did not substantially
influence the anxiety predictor. Note, finally, that the delayed-response task that we
used for the present study could be split into different task periods addressing
different cognitive functions—that is, encoding, delay, and retrieval period
(D’Esposito et al.,  2000 ). For the
present research question, our main focus was on the delay period of the task, as only
this task period allowed for a comparison of manipulation-related neural activity with
maintenance-related activity. To provide a full picture of the neural processes
associated with the task as a whole, activation and the effects of anxiety for the
encoding and retrieval periods are reported in the  supplementary materials . Materials and method Participants The present study was conducted with 46 healthy volunteers who had previously
participated in our study on the effects of anxiety on inhibitory control in the
Stroop task (Basten et al.,  2011 ). All
were students of the University of Heidelberg, were right-handed, and had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, no structural brain abnormalities, and no history
of psychiatric or neurological diseases, according to self-report in a telephone
interview. Informed consent was obtained in conformity with the protocol approved
by the local ethics committee, and the participants were paid for participation in
the study. Of the 46 participants, 22 were female and 24 were male, and their ages
ranged from 19 to 27 years ( M  = 22.3,  SD  = 2.0). Trait anxiety was assessed with the
State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI: Spielberger, Gorsuch, & Lushene,
 1970 ; German: Laux, Glanzmann,
Schaffner, & Spielberger,  1981 )
approximately 6 weeks prior to the study. The raw scores on this measure ranged
from 24 to 46 ( M  = 33.3,  SD  = 5.7), which is comparable to the values of a
normative German sample of similar age and education ( M  = 34.7,  SD  = 8.4; Laux et al.,
 1981 ). For the analysis of variance
of the behavioral data and for the illustration of the imaging results in bar
plots (see Figs.  2d  and  3c  below), the sample was median-split into a
low-anxious and a high-anxious group, who differed significantly in trait anxiety
scores (low-anxious  M  = 28.6, high-anxious
 M  = 38.1),  t (44) = 10.3,  p <  .001, but
not in intelligence, as assessed using the Advanced Progressive Matrices (APM:
Raven, Raven, & Court,  1998 ),
 t (44) = 0.70,  p  = .50. Furthermore, trait anxiety did not significantly differ
between men ( M  = 33.0,  SD  = 6.2) and women ( M  = 33.7,
 SD  = 5.2),  t (44) = 0.389,  p  = .70.
Accordingly, there was no significant difference in the frequency of males versus
females in the groups of high-anxious (11 vs. 12) and low-anxious (13 vs. 10)
individuals [χ 2 (1) = 0.348,  p  = .56]. Experimental procedure The participants performed a modified delayed-response task (Fig.  1 ; D’Esposito et al.,  1999 ; Postle, Berger, & D’Esposito,  1999 ) including a maintenance and a manipulation
condition. The task consisted of three phases: encoding, delay (separated into an
early delay period and a task delay period), and recall. In the encoding phase,
four sequentially presented letters had to be encoded into working memory. In the
early delay phase, participants maintained the encoded set of letters in memory.
In the task delay phase, a written cue indicated which task to perform on the four
letters. In the maintenance condition (cued by the word “maintain,”  merke , in German), the participants continued to
maintain the letters in the order of presentation (upper stream in
Fig.  1 ). In the manipulation condition
(cued by the word “sort,”  sortiere , in German),
the participants mentally rearranged the letters into alphabetical order (lower
stream in Fig.  1 ). In neither of the two
conditions were new letters presented during the task delay phase. Instead, the
participants saw hash keys (#) that served as placeholders to ensure perceptual
equivalence with conditions not considered in the present analyses. In the recall
phase, a probe stimulus, consisting of a letter and a number (the latter
indicating the position of the letter in the memory set) required retrieval of
information from working memory. With the index and middle fingers of their right
hands, participants indicated via buttonpress whether or not the given letter was
in the indicated position in the four-letter memory set (response options: “yes”
or “no”). The probe “R-4,” for instance, asked participants to decide whether or
not the letter “R” was in the fourth position in the original (maintenance
condition) or alphabetized (manipulation condition) memory set. In the example
illustrated in Fig.  1 , the correct
response would be “yes” for the maintenance condition but “no” for the
manipulation condition. Timing information is included in the schematic of the
task procedure in Fig.  1 . Fig. 1 Schematic of the working memory manipulation task. The encoding
period comprised the presentation of two hash keys and four letter
stimuli. The task delay period comprised the presentation of a verbal task
cue followed by one, two, or three hash keys. ISI, interstimulus
interval 
 Preceding each trial, a fixation cross was presented for 1 s. The encoding
phase had a fixed duration of 4.2 s. In that time, six stimuli (two placeholders
followed by four letter stimuli) were presented for 0.5 s each, with an
interstimulus interval (ISI) of 0.2 s. In the early delay phase, a fixation cross
was displayed for 2, 3, or 4 s. The following task delay phase, during which
participants either manipulated or maintained the list of letters, was of variable
length (6, 10, or 14 s), depending on the number of hash keys presented (1, 2, or
3; see the dotted-line screen symbols in Fig.  1 ). Finally, in the recall phase, the probe stimulus was
presented for 2 s. Responses were registered during the presentation of the probe
stimulus. Each trial was followed by a variable intertrial interval (ITI) of 1.4
to 6.4 s. Participants were trained on the task prior to the fMRI session, and
during training they received feedback whenever a response was incorrect or too
slow. The participants were instructed to respond quickly and accurately. During
image acquisition in the scanner, they received no feedback on performance. The
presentation of the task in the scanner was split into four blocks. Across all
blocks, participants completed 24 trials of each condition. FMRI acquisition procedures The MRI data were acquired on a Siemens Trio 3 Tesla MRI scanner equipped with
a fast gradient system for echoplanar imaging (EPI) and a birdcage head coil.
Participants were stabilized with cushions to restrict their head motion
comfortably. A screen, attached to the end of the bore, was visible for
participants via a mirror in the head coil. The visual stimuli were presented on a
dark background in the center of the screen, using the Presentation software
(Neurobehavioral Systems,  www.neurobs.com ). The functional data were acquired using a T2*-weighted
BOLD-sensitive gradient-echo EPI sequence with 32 oblique axial slices of 3-mm
thickness, a 1-mm interslice gap, field of view (FOV) 192 mm, matrix size 64 × 64,
in-plane resolution 3 × 3 mm, repetition time (TR) 2,500 ms, echo time (TE) 30 ms,
and flip angle 80º. Four runs of 440 volumes were acquired. The experiment was set
up in an event-related design, jittered to improve the BOLD signal estimation
(Dale,  1999 ). The first six volumes
of all four runs were discarded to allow for stable magnetization. For
co-registration, a T1-weighed anatomical scan with slice prescription identical to
that of the functional scans was acquired. Three-dimensional high-resolution
structural data were obtained via a sagittal, T1-weighted magnetization-prepared
rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) scan with 192 slices of 1-mm thickness, FOV 256 mm,
matrix size 256 × 256, in-plane resolution 1 × 1 mm, TR 1,570 ms, TE 2.63 ms, and
flip angle 30º. fMRI data analyses All MRI data analyses were carried out using the Statistical Parametric
Mapping software package (SPM5; Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London,
U.K.,  www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm5 ). Preprocessing The acquired EPI time series were first slice-time and then motion
corrected. All functional volumes were spatially normalized into standard (MNI
152) space according to the normalization parameters resulting from the
segmentation of the high-resolution anatomies (voxels resampled to 2 × 2 ×
2 mm). Finally, spatial smoothing was applied (8-mm full-width-at-half-maximum
Gaussian kernel). Task-related brain activation To identify regions showing task-related activation for the two conditions
of interest (maintenance and manipulation), a general linear model (GLM)
accounting for serially autocorrelated data (Friston et al.,  1995 ) was set up for each participant,
applying a canonical hemodynamic response function and a temporal high-pass
filter (cutoff of 128 s). The functional runs were modeled as separate sessions.
The GLMs included separate regressors for all of the experimental conditions
(i.e., maintenance, manipulation, and four other conditions not evaluated for
the present research question) and task periods (i.e., encoding, early delay,
task delay, and recall; see Fig.  1 ). In
addition, the model included covariates of no interest for incorrectly answered
trials and the realignment parameters derived from the motion correction in the
data preprocessing. The results we subsequently report will focus on the task
delay period regressors—that is, the period of the task during which
participants actually manipulated (or maintained) information in working memory.
The results for the encoding and the retrieval periods are reported in the
 supplementary materials . For each
participant, we defined the following contrasts using the regressors for the
respective task periods: maintenance > baseline, manipulation > baseline,
and manipulation > maintenance. Results from the single-subject analyses were
integrated at the group level in a model treating participants as random effects
(Holmes & Friston,  1998 ). The
analyses of task-related brain activations included all voxels in the brain.
Given that the main effect of manipulation > maintenance in our large sample
produced very strong and extensive activations, we applied a rather conservative
statistical threshold to allow for a detailed characterization of peak
activations ( p  < .05 familywise error rate
[FWE] correction with Gaussian random field theory as implemented in SPM5, at
the voxel level, and  p  < .001 FWE
corrected, at the cluster level). Effects of anxiety on task-related activation To test for the effects of trait anxiety on the strength of
manipulation-related activation, multiple regression models were set up at the
level of the group analyses, including trait anxiety as a predictor for brain
activation (manipulation > maintenance). Model 1 included solely trait
anxiety (i.e., STAI trait scale scores; see the  Participants  section) as a predictor. Model 2 additionally
included performance accuracy as a predictor. We will focus on this model for
the display and interpretation of our results, as it provided the most direct
test of our hypotheses concerning processing efficiency—that is, activation
strength given a constant level of performance (see the introduction). This
model allowed us to test where trait anxiety explained brain activation above
and beyond what could also be explained by variation in performance. Model 3
contained psychometric intelligence (APM scores) as an additional predictor to
ensure that effects attributed to anxiety could not be explained by differences
in cognitive ability. In all three models, statistical tests were conducted for
the weight of the trait-anxiety regressor. As effects of anxiety on brain activation were specifically predicted for
the DLPFC (see the introduction), the main analyses of anxiety effects were
restricted to an anatomical mask comprising bilateral DLPFC. The mask was
generated on the basis of the Talairach Daemon database (TD; Lancaster,
Summerlin, Rainey, Freitas, & Fox,  1997 ; Lancaster et al.,  2000 ) using the WFU PickAtlas toolbox in SPM (Maldjian,
Laurienti, Kraft, & Burdette,  2003 ) and comprised BAs 46 and 9, extended 2 × 1 voxel in each
direction, and intersected with the TD template for the middle frontal gyrus.
Nonbrain voxels included after dilation were excluded by intersection with the
whole-brain mask generated during the group analysis in SPM. The resulting DLPFC
mask comprised 2,214 voxels. Group statistical parametric maps for the
modulation of task-related activation by trait anxiety within the region of
interest are reported after applying an overall threshold of  p  < .05 (corrected for multiple comparisons)
constituted by an individual-voxel probability threshold of  p  < .005 [uncorrected,  t (43) > 2.70], in combination with a minimum-cluster-size
threshold of  k  > 28 voxels, as determined
via Monte Carlo simulation using the AFNI routine AlphaSim (Ward,  2000 ; cf. Forman et al.,  1995 ). Taking into account the fact that the
power to detect between-subjects effects is typically much lower than the power
to detect within-subjects effects (Yarkoni,  2009 ; Yarkoni & Braver,  2010 ), this approach provides an FWE correction that at the
same time ensures sufficient sensitivity for between-groups effects (see also
Basten et al.,  2011 , for a critique
of correction methods leading to increased Type II errors—i.e., poor detection
of true effects in fMRI research; see Lieberman & Cunningham,  2009 ). In a second step, the test for anxiety
effects on brain activation was extended to consider the whole brain. This
analysis was also thresholded at  p  < .05,
corrected, with a voxel strength threshold of  p  < .005 [uncorrected,  t (43)
= 2.70] and a cluster size threshold of  k 
> 142 voxels (AlphaSim; Ward,  2000 ). Functional connectivity To explore the task-related functional connectivity of the DLPFC region
showing a modulation of task-related activation by anxiety with distal brain
regions, we conducted psychophysiological interaction analyses (PPI; Friston et
al.,  1997 ). The procedure, as
implemented in SPM5, models the contribution of a seed region to any voxel in
the brain by a linear regression model. As the primary seed region, we chose the
right DLPFC cluster showing an anxiety effect in the univariate activation
analysis within our a-priori-defined region of interest (see the  Results  section). This cluster fell within the
DLPFC cluster activated for working memory manipulation across all participants.
In addition to the PPI analysis using the seed within our DLPFC region of
interest, we performed two further PPI analyses using as a seed the regions in
the left inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) and the rostral-ventral part of the
anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) regions identified in the whole-brain analysis
of anxiety effects on manipulation-related activity. At the single-subject
level, the GLMs contained three regressors: a P regressor, representing the
psychological variable (i.e., the task condition, manipulation >
maintenance); a Y regressor, representing the physiological variable (i.e., the
mean time course of activation in the respective seed region); and a PPI
regressor, representing the interaction of the psychological and the
physiological regressor. To test for PPI effects across participants at the
group level (independent of trait anxiety), the single-subject contrast images
testing for an effect of the PPI regressor were entered into a second-level
random effects analysis for a  t  test. To test whether the parameter estimates of the interaction terms could be
predicted by trait anxiety, regression models were set up at the group level. As
in the analyses testing for anxiety effects on univariate activation strength,
three different regression models were set up. Model 1 comprised only trait
anxiety as a predictor. In Model 2 we added performance accuracy, and in Model 3
we added a further predictor, intelligence. For all three models, statistical
tests were conducted for the effect of the trait-anxiety regressor. Again, the
main focus was on Model 2 testing, where anxiety could explain functional
connectivity when variation in performance was statistically controlled for.
Results are reported for the whole brain, applying the same threshold used for
the analysis of anxiety effects on univariate activations—that is,  p  < .05 (corrected), here constituted by a voxel
probability threshold of  p  < .005
[uncorrected,  t (43) = 2.70], in combination
with a minimum-cluster-size threshold of  k 
> 142 voxels (AlphaSim; Ward,  2000 ). Offline illustration of brain activation and connectivity
estimates From the regions showing a significant effect of trait anxiety (on regional
activation or functional connectivity), individual contrast values were
extracted to illustrate the patterns of activation and connectivity as depending
on anxiety and task condition. No secondary inferential statistics were done on
the plotted data, to avoid problems with nonindependent testing (Poldrack &
Mumford,  2009 ; Vul, Harris,
Winkielman, & Pashler,  2009 ).
Scatterplots serve to illustrate that the correlations between the trait-anxiety
scores and contrast values were not driven by outliers. Bar plots disentangle
the effects of task condition (manipulation vs. maintenance) and anxiety (high
vs. low) on the neural measures, by additionally displaying the average
activations for the simple effect of maintenance (i.e., maintenance >
baseline) in the anxiety-sensitive clusters. Results Behavioral performance A significant effect of task condition on recall performance was observed for
error rates (maintenance, 6.97 %; manipulation, 14.67 %),  F (1, 44) = 29.56,  p  < .001, as
well as for response times (maintenance, 1,140.42 ms; manipulation, 1,164.89 ms),
 F (1, 44) = 5.412,  p  = .03, suggesting that the manipulation of working memory contents
was more difficult than mere maintenance. However, performance was not affected by
trait anxiety: Neither for error rates nor for response times were the main
effects of anxiety or the interaction effects of anxiety with condition
statistically significant (all  p s >
.25). Anxiety and regional brain activation Task-related brain activation across all participants During the task delay phase, across all participants—not taking into account
differences in trait anxiety—increased activation was observed for the
manipulation of working memory contents, as contrasted to mere maintenance, in
frontal, parietal, temporal, and subcortical areas of the brain ( p  < .05, corrected; see Fig.  2a ; for peak voxel coordinates,  t  values, and cluster sizes, see Table  1 ). In the lateral frontal cortex, activation
comprised bilateral foci in the frontopolar cortex, the DLPFC, the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (VLPFC, in the left hemisphere comprising the area of Broca),
the inferior frontal junction area (IFJ), and the superior frontal sulcus (SFS).
In the medial frontal cortex, activation was observed in dorsal ACC and
presupplementary motor area (preSMA). Furthermore, activation was significantly
increased in the anterior insula. In parietal cortex, an extensive cluster of
activation comprised bilateral foci in the intraparietal sulci (IPS) as well as
the precuneus, reaching from the lateral cortical surface into the medial wall.
Smaller clusters of activation were located in the inferior temporal gyrus
(ITG), bilaterally. Subcortical activation was observed bilaterally in the
thalamus. Finally, the activation maps showed strong activity increases in
superior parts of both cerebellar hemispheres. Brain activation observed for the
encoding and the retrieval periods of the task is reported in the supplementary
materials (Table S 1 , Fig.
S 1 ). Fig. 2 Brain activation during working memory manipulation
(manipulation > maintenance). The  x- ,  y- , and  z -coordinates refer to the Montreal
Neurological Institute template brain included in the SPM5 software
package. ( a ) Activation across all
participants, illustrated at a voxel-level threshold of  p  < .05 and a cluster-level threshold of
 p  < .001, both corrected for
familywise error rates. ( b ,  c , and  d )
Effects of trait anxiety on brain activation during working memory
manipulation in the DLPFC region of interest—controlling for
(nonsignificant) variations in performance. Trait anxiety predicts BOLD
signal strength for an area in the right DLPFC. ( b ) For illustration purposes, statistical parametric maps
are shown at a voxel-level threshold of  p  < .01. ( c ,  d ) Percent signal change extracted from the
right DLPFC region where anxiety significantly predicted task
activation. ( c ) Percent signal change
for manipulation > maintenance, plotted against
anxiety.performance—that is, the residual of trait anxiety from the
regression on behavioral performance. ( d ) Comparison of mean percent signal change for the task
(MP: manipulation > zero, dark gray) and the reference condition (MT:
maintenance > zero, light gray) by the trait anxiety group (median
split). Error bars show the standard errors of the means. dACC, dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; IFJ,
inferior frontal junction; IPS, intraparietal sulcus; ITG, inferior
temporal gyrus; Precun, Precuneus; preSMA, presupplementary motor area;
SFS, superior frontal sulcus; L, left; R, right 
 Table 1 Effects of task on brain activation       MNI     Brain Region BA Hem 
 x 
 
 y 
 
 z 
 
 t 
 max 
 
 k 
 
 Task Delay Phase  (Manipulation >
Maintenance) Voxel height threshold  t  = 5.46, Cluster extend threshold:  k  = 25 voxels Frontopolar cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal junction, superior
frontal sulcus, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, presupplementary
motor area, anterior insula, thalamus, midbrain 6/8/9/10/32/44/46 L/R 4 12 50 14.78 14372 Frontopolar cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
inferior frontal junction anterior insula 6/8/9/10/44/46 R 42 38 28 11.80 3570 Intraparietal sulcus, precuneus 7/40 R/L 40 −44 44 16.15 6346 Postcentral gyrus 1 L −62 −18 24 6.80 44 Cuneus 17 L −16 −76 6 6.12 38 17 R 14 −76 10 6.19 34 Inferior temporal gyrus 37 R 56 −50 −12 6.69 32 37 L −50 −54 −12 7.79 187 Cerebellum R/L 28 −68 −28 15.78 7619 BA, approximate Brodmann’s area; Hem, hemisphere; L, left; R,
right; MNI, coordinates referring to the Montreal Neurological Institute
template brain included in the SPM5 software package;  t 
 max , maximum  t 
statistic in the cluster;  k , cluster
size in voxels. Activation is reported for a voxel-level threshold of
 p <  .05 and a cluster-level
threshold of  p <  .001, both
corrected for familywise error rate. 
 Effects of trait anxiety on brain activation during working memory
manipulation Our main analyses concerning the effects of anxiety focused on the bilateral
DLPFC, our region of interest for effects of anxiety on neural correlates of
attentional-control processes. During the delay period of the task, trait
anxiety predicted the strength of manipulation-related activation for a
subregion of the right DLPFC (result from Regression Model 1, including only
trait anxiety as a predictor; peak MNI coordinates 44, 44, 20, cluster size
 k  = 39 voxels,  t 
 max  = 4.20,  p <  .05
corrected for multiple comparisons). In this part of the DLPFC, high-anxious
participants showed a stronger increase in brain activation for manipulation as
compared to maintenance than did low-anxious individuals. Crucially, trait
anxiety explained variation in activation strength that could not be accounted
for by variation in behavioral performance (result from Regression Model 2,
including trait anxiety and performance accuracy as predictors; MNI coordinates
and  p  as for Model 1, cluster size  k  = 36 voxels,  t 
 max  = 4.11; this effect is illustrated in
Fig.  2 ). The scatterplot in
Fig.  2c  illustrates the positive
association between anxiety and brain activation and demonstrates that the
effect showing up in the statistic parametric group map was not driven by
outliers. Furthermore, we ensured that the effect of anxiety was specific to the task
condition of interest (manipulation) and not attributable to a reverse effect in
the reference condition (maintenance). The bar plot in Fig.  2d  illustrates that for the reference condition
(i.e., for the simple effect of maintenance > baseline), the high- and the
low-anxious groups did not differ in their levels of activation [ t (44) = 0.35,  p  =
.73]. In fact, the high-anxious group showed a significantly greater increase
from the reference condition (maintenance) to the task condition of interest
(manipulation). When including intelligence in the prediction of brain activation
(Regression Model 3), the peak coordinates of the cluster where anxiety
contributed significantly in explaining task-related activation remained
unchanged, and cluster size changed only slightly, to  k  = 30 voxels ( t 
 max  = 4.91,  p < 
.05, corrected). Thus, the incremental contribution of anxiety in explaining
activation strength—beyond what could be explained by performance and
intelligence—remained significant. No region within the bilateral DLPFC showed
the opposite pattern—that is, a negative correlation between anxiety and
activation. In a second step, we extended our search volume beyond our theoretically
derived region of interest to test for effects of anxiety in other parts of the
brain. A whole-brain analysis revealed that anxiety predicted
manipulation-related activation increases also in three other regions. Here, we
focus on the effects of anxiety when controlling for behavioral performance
(Regression Model 2). A positive correlation between trait anxiety and
task-related activation was observed for a region in the depth of the left IFS
and a region in the left brainstem ( p  <
.05, corrected; see Table  2A ;
illustrated for left IFS in Fig.  3a ,
top). These two regions showed an effect equivalent to that found in the right
DLPFC (illustrated for left IFS in Fig.  3b and
c , top). The cluster showing an effect in the left IFS was
situated rather deep in the sulcus, so that it did not fall within our region of
interest defined for bilateral DLPFC. Table 2 Effects of trait anxiety on brain activation (manipulation
> maintenance)         MNI     Brain Region BA Hem Model 
 x 
 
 y 
 
 z 
 
 T 
 max 
 
 k 
 
 (A) Task Delay Phase  (Positive
Correlation) Voxel height threshold  t  = 2.70, Cluster extend threshold:  k  = 142 voxels Inferior frontal sulcus 46 L Model 1: −32 24 26 3.66 n.s. (111) Model 2: −32 24 26 3.80 145 Model 3: −32 24 26 3.57 n.s. (103) Brainstem (pons, midbrain) L Model 1: −8 −26 −18 3.75 n.s. (115) Model 2: −10 −26 −24 4.03 156 Model 3: −16 −28 −34 3.98 n.s. (139) 
 (B) Task Delay Phase  (Negative
Correlation) Voxel height threshold  t  = 2.70, Cluster extend threshold:  k  = 142 voxels Rostral–ventral anterior cingulate cortex Model 1: 0 18 −4 4.18 600 Model 2: 6 22 8 4.15 584 Model 3: 6 22 8 4.20 854 BA, approximate Brodmann’s area; Hem, hemisphere; L, left; R,
right; MNI, coordinates referring to the Montreal Neurological Institute
template brain included in the SPM5 software package;  t 
 max , maximum  t 
statistic in the cluster;  k , cluster
size in voxels; n.s., not significant. Model 1, regression of PPI on trait
anxiety. Model 2, regression of PPI on trait anxiety and performance.
Model 3, regression of PPI on trait anxiety, performance, and
intelligence. 
 Fig. 3 Effects of trait anxiety on brain activation during working
memory manipulation in the whole-brain analysis, controlling for
(nonsignificant) variation in performance. Trait anxiety predicts BOLD
signal strength in the left inferior frontal sulcus (IFS; upper row) and
in the rostral–ventral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC; lower row).
( a ) Statistical parametric maps are
shown at a voxel-level threshold of  p 
< .005. The  x -coordinates refer to
the Montreal Neurological Institute template brain included in the SPM5
software package. ( b ,  c ) Percent signal change extracted from the two
regions illustrated in panel A. ( b )
Percent signal change for manipulation > maintenance, plotted against
anxiety.performance—that is, the residual of trait anxiety from the
regression on behavioral performance. ( c ) Comparison of mean percent signal change for the task
(MP: manipulation > zero, dark gray) and the reference condition (MT:
maintenance > zero, light gray) by the trait-anxiety group (median
split). Error bars show the standard errors of the means 
 For the third region, in the rACC, we observed a negative correlation
between anxiety and brain activation ( p  <
.05, corrected; see Table  2B  and
Fig.  3a , bottom). Plotting the percent
signal change for this region (see the bar plot in Fig.  3c , bottom) revealed that the effect was
attributable to high-anxious participants showing stronger deactivation for
manipulation as contrasted to maintenance than did low-anxious participants.
Note that the rACC, a region typically assigned to the task-negative (or
default) network (Raichle et al.,  2001 ), also was part of the task-negative network in the
present study. It showed deactivation for both task conditions (maintenance and
manipulation) as contrasted to baseline ( p 
< .05, corrected; for a full description of the task-negative network for the
present task, see the supplement, Table S 3  and Fig. S 3 ). For reasons explicated in the introduction, our main interest was in the
effects of anxiety on brain activation during the actual manipulation of
information in working memory—that is, during the delay period of the task. In
the  supplementary materials , we
provide equivalent analyses for the encoding and retrieval periods (but note
that anxiety effects on brain activation during encoding cannot be analyzed
separately for manipulation and maintenance conditions, as participants were
cued as to the specific task condition after encoding). Whereas during the
encoding period trait anxiety did not affect brain activation, during the
retrieval period we observed an interaction of task condition and trait anxiety
on activation strength, with a focus on parietal regions (see Table
S 2 , Fig. S 2 ). Anxiety and functional brain network connectivity Task-related functional connectivity of DLPFC Across participants—not taking into account differences in trait anxiety—a
subset of the areas identified as activated during working memory manipulation
(see above and in Fig.  2 ) showed
increased functional connectivity with the right DLPFC seed region
(Fig.  4a ) during the task delay
period. For the experimental condition of interest (i.e., manipulation), as
contrasted to the control condition (maintenance), activity in the right DLPFC
seed region showed enhanced coupling with activity in the left DLPFC (including
medial frontal gyrus and the adjacent inferior and superior frontal gyrus), the
dorsal ACC, the posterior part of the SFS bilaterally, left IPS, medial parts of
the precuneus bilaterally, and superior parts of the right cerebellum ( p  < .05, corrected; see Table  3  and Fig.  4b ). Functional connectivity across participants for left IFS
and rACC is reported in the supplementary materials (Table S 4 ). Fig. 4 Functional connectivity of the right DLPFC in the working
memory manipulation task. The  x-  and
 z -coordinates refer to the Montreal
Neurological Institute template brain included in the SPM5 software
package, and the statistical parametric maps in panels B and C are shown
at a voxel-level threshold of  p  <
.005. ( a ) Seed region in right DLPFC.
( b ) Functional connectivity of the
right DLPFC across participants, clusters show enhanced coupling with
right DLPFC for manipulation > maintenance. ( c ) Positive association of anxiety and functional
connectivity, controlling for (nonsignificant) variation in performance.
The clusters show stronger PPI with DLPFC in high- as compared to
low-anxious participants. ( d )
Individual strength of PPI with DLPFC, plotted against
anxiety.performance—that is, the residual of trait anxiety from
regression on behavioral performance. The PPI estimates derive from the
contrast value of the interaction regressor in the PPI model. The scale
of the ordinate given in the plot to the left is valid for both plots.
DACC, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex; IPS, intraparietal sulcus; Precun, precuneus; SFS, superior
frontal sulcus; VLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; L, left; R,
right.  * Note that seed connectivity with left
VLPFC was significantly modulated by anxiety only in the regression
model including intelligence 
 Table 3 Functional connectivity of the right DLPFC seed region during
working memory manipulation       MNI     Brain Region BA Hem 
 x 
 
 y 
 
 z 
 
 t 
 max 
 
 k 
 
 Task Delay Phase  (Manipulation >
Maintenance) Voxel height threshold  t  = 2.70, Cluster extend threshold:  k  = 142 voxels Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, middle frontal gyrus,
inferior frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex, superior frontal sulcus 6/8/9/32/44/45/46 L/R −30 10 58 6.94 4035 Intraparietal sulcus, Precuneus 7/19/39 L −34 −80 40 4.46 297 Precuneus, Posteriorer cingulate cortex 23/31 L/R −18 −58 18 4.11 442 Precuneus 7 L/R −8 −56 46 3.74 149 Occipital lobe 17/18 L/R −10 −92 −10 6.83 1257 Cerebellum L/R 4 −42 −34 3.68 164 R 32 −68 −30 4.26 189 BA, approximate Brodmann’s area; Hem, hemisphere; L, left; R,
right; MNI, coordinates referring to the Montreal Neurological Institute
template brain included in the SPM5 software package;  t 
 max , maximum  t 
statistic in the cluster;  k , cluster
size in voxels. 
 Trait anxiety and functional connectivity Trait anxiety significantly modulated the functional connectivity of the
right DLPFC seed region with the right VLPFC. Higher-anxious individuals showed
stronger task-specific increases in functional coupling than did lower-anxious
individuals ( p  < .05, corrected; see
Table  4 : Model 1 results) also when
controlling for variation in performance ( p 
< .05, corrected; see Table  4 : Model
2 results, illustrated for right VLPFC in Fig.  4c ). When including intelligence in the regression model,
connectivity to the left VLPFC was also significantly modulated by trait anxiety
( p  < .05, corrected; see
Table  4 : Model 3 results; see also
Fig.  4c ). In addition to bilateral
VLPFC, superior parts of both cerebellar hemispheres showed stronger coupling
with the right DLPFC in higher-anxious participants. Finally, no region was
identified where higher anxiety would have been associated with weaker coupling
to the DLPFC seed region. Focusing on effects that were significant in all three
models tested, the additional connectivity analyses for the two seed regions
outside the DLPFC region of interest revealed that while left IFS did not show
differential connectivity depending on trait anxiety, connectivity to rACC was
positively correlated with anxiety for two regions in the rACC directly adjacent
to the seed region, extending into orbitofrontal cortex and a region situated
around the central sulcus, extending from pre- to postcentral gyrus (for
details, see the supplement, Table S 5 ). Table 4 Regions showing increased functional connectivity of the right
DLPFC seed region in high-anxious participants during working memory
manipulation         MNI     Brain Region BA Hem Model 
 x 
 
 y 
 
 z 
 
 t 
 max 
 
 k 
 
 Task Delay Phase  (Manipulation >
Maintenance) Voxel height threshold  t  = 2.70, Cluster extend threshold:  k  = 142 voxels Ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 44/45/47 R Model 1: 44 32 2 4.35 221 Model 2: 44 32 2 4.30 200 Model 3: 44 32 2 4.12 183 47 L Model 1: −30 8 −16 3.19 n.s. (91) Model 2: −30 8 −16 2.94 n.s. (67) Model 3: −30 8 −16 3.54 154 Superior cerebellum, Occipital lobe, Fusiform gyrus,
Lingual gyrus 17/18/19 L Model 1: −32 −76 −18 3.96 202 Model 2: −32 −76 −18 3.91 339 Model 3: −32 −76 −18 3.89 336 Superior cerebellum 18/19 R Model 1: 20 −78 −20 3.65 240 Model 2: 20 −78 −20 3.70 240 Model 3: 20 −78 −20 3.59 358 BA, approximate Brodmann’s area; Hem, hemisphere; L, left; R,
right; MNI, coordinates referring to the Montreal Neurological Institute
template brain included in the SPM5 software package;  t 
 max , maximum  t 
statistic in the cluster;  k , cluster
size in voxels; n.s., not significant. Model 1, regression of PPI on trait
anxiety; Model 2, regression of PPI on trait anxiety and performance;
Model 3, regression of PPI on trait anxiety, performance, and
intelligence. 
 Discussion In the present study, we investigated how the neural efficiency of cognitive
processing during working memory maintenance and manipulation is influenced by
differences in trait anxiety. Within the a-priori-defined region of interest—that
is, bilateral DLPFC—high-anxious participants showed stronger activation increases
in a region of right DLPFC for working memory manipulation, as opposed to
maintenance, than did low-anxious participants. Additional whole-brain analyses
revealed that the high-anxious also showed stronger activation increases in a region
in the left IFS as well as stronger decreases in rACC. The fact that, at the same
time, high- and low-anxious participants did not differ in performance effectiveness
supports the assumption of less-efficient neural task processing in anxious
individuals. Crucially, the effects were observed only for the manipulation of working memory
contents—not for the mere maintenance of information in working memory. While simple
maintenance primarily requires the short-term storage of information, the
goal-directed manipulation of this information places additional demands on the
top-down control of attention to sequentially refocus attention on different objects
within the memory set and to rearrange them in a goal-directed manner (Eysenck et
al.,  2007 ; Oberauer,  2010 ; Oberauer & Bialkova,  2009 ). Furthermore, the effects were observed in
brain regions that have most consistently been associated with executive-control
processes. In addition, the observation of differences in DLPFC connectivity in
association with anxiety suggests an important role for functional integration
between brain regions in determining neural efficiency. Task effects across all participants: Manipulation versus
maintenance Across participants—not taking into account individual differences in trait
anxiety—we observed an increase in response times, error rates, brain activation,
and functional connectivity for the manipulation as contrasted to the maintenance
of working memory contents that was in accordance with previous reports (e.g.,
Champod & Petrides,  2007 ;
D’Esposito et al.,  1999 ; D’Esposito
et al.,  2000 ; Postle et al.,
 1999 ; Van Hecke et al.,
 2010 ; Wager & Smith,
 2003 ). Reduced neural efficiency in anxious participants While trait anxiety did not affect performance in the working memory task, it
did show a positive correlation with an increase in the neural effort expended for
manipulation as compared to maintenance in a subregion of the a-priori-defined
region of interest—that is, in the midportion of right DLPFC. When we extended our
analysis to the whole brain, an equivalent effect was observed in left IFS
(situated inferior to and slightly deeper than the effect in right DLPFC) and in a
region in the brainstem. The positive correlations between anxiety and the
strength of task-related brain activation in DLPFC and IFS most directly support
the prediction that higher levels of trait anxiety are associated with reduced
neural efficiency. The fact that, for the same level of behavioral performance,
higher-anxious individuals expended more neural effort on task processing renders
their processing less efficient. Our results are consistent with the transient effects of trait anxiety on
brain activation during working memory performance in a broader network of
cognitive-control regions reported by Fales et al. ( 2008 ). These authors observed a positive correlation between
anxiety and working-memory-related activation of a cognitive-control network
comprising bilateral DLPFC, while anxiety—as in our study—did not affect
performance. Whereas the  n -back paradigm used
to study working-memory-related brain activation by Fales et al. did not allow for
distinguishing between maintenance- and manipulation-related changes in the fMRI
signal, our results suggest that anxiety specifically affects the component
function of manipulation. This is consistent with the assumption that anxiety
impairs neural efficiency specifically for those cognitive functions that require
the executive control of attention (Eysenck et al.,  2007 ). In a broader sense, the present finding of stronger DLPFC activation in
high-anxious participants is also consistent with studies reporting effects of
trait anxiety on neural efficiency for different cognitive tasks (i.e., other than
working memory) that also require the top-down control of attention. For
inhibitory control during Stroop performance (Basten et al.,  2011 ) and for task switching in an antisaccade
paradigm (Ansari & Derakshan,  2011a ), trait anxiety was also associated with stronger,
supposedly compensatory activation—along with equal (Ansari & Derakshan,
 2011a ) or worse (Basten et al.,
 2011 ) performance effectiveness,
both of which would indicate reduced neural efficiency. However, other studies
have used tasks that require attentional control for the purpose of inhibition,
where trait anxiety was associated with decreased, supposedly insufficient
activation—along with equally accurate but slower performance (Ansari &
Derakshan,  2011b ; Bishop,  2009 ), which does not allow for an unequivocal
interpretation with respect to neural efficiency (see the introduction). As outlined above, Basten et al. ( 2011 ), using fMRI, found stronger activation of the right DLPFC
in high-anxious participants during the exertion of inhibitory control in the
Stroop task, along with impairments of performance accuracy—which also remained
when statistically controlling for variation in performance accuracy. Ansari and
Derakshan ( 2011a ), using EEG to study
preparation-related neural activity for a task requiring switches between pro- and
antisaccades, reported that high-anxious participants showed increased levels of
neural effort, indicated by greater contingent negative variation amplitudes at
frontal cortical sites, while their switching performance was comparable to that
of low-anxious participants. On the other hand, on the basis of an fMRI study,
Bishop ( 2009 ) reported weaker
activation of the left DLPFC for high-anxious participants during distractor
inhibition in a letter search task, along with equally accurate but slower
responses. Ansari and Derakshan ( 2011b ), using EEG, reported weaker neural activity in high- than in
low-anxious participants during the exertion of inhibitory control in an
antisaccade task, indicated by lower event-related potential activity at
frontocentral cortical sites. Also in this study, high- and low-anxious
participants did not differ in performance accuracy, yet the high-anxious were
slower in performing correct antisaccades. Only recently has a discussion evolved within the framework of attentional
control theory about the idea that whether high-anxious individuals show weaker
(supposedly insufficient) or stronger (supposedly compensatory) neural activation
in brain regions supporting cognitive control may depend on task demands,
motivational factors, and the opportunity to prepare for task performance (Ansari
& Derakshan,  2011b ; Eysenck &
Derakshan,  2010 ). Studies that
systematically manipulate the attentional-control demands of tasks, the
motivational states of participants, and the preparation allowed by the context
are needed to determine the conditions under which trait anxiety is indeed
associated with compensatory increases in neural effort—and, in constrast, when
anxious individuals are not able or not motivated to mobilize additional
resources. Note, however, that while there are heterogeneous findings with respect
to the executive function of inhibition (see the preceding paragraph), so far,
empirical evidence is consistent with respect to working memory, where both the
study of Fales et al. ( 2008 ) and our
present findings point to compensatory increases in neural effort and reduced
neural efficiency in high-anxious individuals. Apart from stronger activation increases in DLPFC and IFS, the high-anxious
participants in the present study also showed stronger deactivation—that is,
decreases in fMRI signal in rACC. This region, also referred to as the  affective subdivision  of the ACC (Bush, Luu, &
Posner,  2000 ), is part of the
so-called  task-negative  or  default-mode  network, a set of functionally connected
brain regions that typically show a decrease in fMRI signal during the
goal-directed processing of cognitive tasks (Drevets & Raichle,  1998 ; Raichle et al.,  2001 ). The findings that deactivation of the
default network increases with task difficulty (McKiernan, Kaufman,
Kučera-Thompson, & Binder,  2003 ;
Singh & Fawcett,  2008 ) and that
the extent of this deactivation is positively related to performance on cognitive
tasks (Eichele et al.,  2008 ; Li, Yan,
Bergquist, & Sinha,  2007 ;
Weissman, Roberts, Visscher, & Woldorff,  2006 ) suggest that deactivation in the default network reflects
cognitive effort expended on task processing, and that deactivation is necessary
for successful task performance. Thus, we interpret our finding of stronger rACC
deactivation in the high-anxious as reflecting greater effort expended on the
suppression of the brain’s default activity in order to support task
performance. Notably, our observation of anxiety effects on deactivation in the default
network also supports a finding reported by Fales et al. ( 2008 ). For their verbal three-back task, Fales
et al. observed greater sustained deactivation for high- as compared to
low-anxious participants in the default network as a whole. Taken together, both
of our findings strongly support the view that, for attention-demanding cognitive
tasks, anxiety modulates both the up-regulation of cognitive control (associated
with increased activity in the task-positive network) and the down-regulation of
default-mode processes (associated with decreased activity in the task-negative,
or default-mode, network). In as far as both task-related up- and down-regulation
plausibly reflect cognitive effort, both support the prediction derived from
attentional control theory (Eysenck et al.,  2007 ) that anxiety is associated with greater neural effort—and
thus with reduced neural efficiency. Enhanced functional connectivity in anxious participants To further elucidate the characteristics of neural processing as depending on
trait anxiety, in addition to differences in regional activation strength, we
investigated interregional coupling within the task-relevant—that is, working
memory manipulation specific—network. As generally cognitive processing is assumed
to rely on neuronal communication among the different brain regions involved in
task processing (Bressler,  1995 ;
Bressler & Menon,  2010 ; Friston,
 2002 ; Tononi, Edelman, &
Sporns,  1998 ), it is reasonable to
assume that the strength and nature of functional coupling within task-relevant
networks in the brain codetermines the efficiency of cognitive processing. For the
manipulation of working memory contents, high- as compared to low-anxious
individuals showed stronger functional coupling of the right DLPFC seed region
with regions in the right and—when adding intelligence as a predictor of no
interest in the regression model—left VLPFC. Furthermore, enhanced coupling was
observed with superior parts of the left and right cerebellum. A separate analysis
using rACC as the seed revealed stronger coupling to adjacent parts of the rACC
and to a region enclosing the central sulcus. In particular, for the right DLPFC,
functional connectivity could reflect inhibitory or excitatory influences of a
control region on the slave systems of working memory (Baddeley,  1986 ). Although, due to the correlational nature
of the PPI analysis (see Friston et al.,  1997 ), the present work does not support conclusions on the
direction of the influences between regions showing a correlation in activation,
in the present task context it is highly plausible that DLPFC connectivity would
reflect top-down effects. The enhanced connectivity observed in high-anxious participants may be
disadvantageous, and thereby constitute a potential cause for compensatory
activation increases in the right DLPFC. This interpretation would be in line with
the interpretation adopted in our previous study on anxiety and alterations in
functional connectivity during inhibitory control in the Stroop task, where the
weaker connectivity shown by high-anxious individuals was interpreted as
suboptimal (see Basten et al.,  2011 ).
Yet the enhanced connectivity observed in the present study could as well be
advantageous, reflecting a compensatory increase in network connectivity in the
high-anxious, enabling these participants to avoid detriments of performance,
possibly triggered by enhanced control-related activation in DLPFC. In activation studies, the VLPFC has been associated with the maintenance of
information in working memory (D’Esposito et al.,  1999 ; D’Esposito et al.,  2000 ; Petrides,  2005 ; Postle et al.,  1999 ), with the shielding of contents in working memory by
inhibiting distracting information (Dolcos, Kragel, Wang, & McCarthy,
 2006 ; Dolcos, Miller, Kragel, Jha,
& McCarthy,  2007 ; Jha, Fabian,
& Aguirre,  2004 ), and, more
generally, with inhibitory processes supporting cognitive and action control
(where, in particular, the right VLPFC has been associated with response
inhibition; Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack,  2004 ). Cerebellar activation during verbal working memory tasks
has predominantly been attributed to subvocal articulatory rehearsal processes
(Ackermann, Mathiak, & Riecker,  2007 ; Ben-Yehudah & Fiez,  2008 ; Ben-Yehudah, Guediche, & Fiez,  2007 ; Chiricozzi, Clausi, Molinari, &
Leggio,  2008 ; Hayter, Langdon, &
Ramnani,  2007 ; Stoodley &
Schmahmann,  2009 ). More specifically,
activation in lateral portions of the superior cerebellum—the region displaying
higher functional connectivity with our anxiety-modulated DLPFC region—has been
implicated in covert speech, a strategy that is important for maintenance of
verbal information, but very plausibly also contributes to working memory
manipulation (Durisko & Fiez,  2010 ; Marvel & Desmond,  2010 ). From the functions assigned to VLPFC and to lateral parts of the superior
cerebellum in verbal working memory, it can be speculated that higher functional
coupling of the DLPFC with bilateral VLPFC and cerebellum reflects stronger
control of maintenance and rehearsal of information held in working memory. From
previous research on individual differences in functional connectivity, we know
that more connectivity is not always better: It depends on the task at hand and
the brain regions involved, whether or not a particular increase or decrease in
connectivity will be beneficial. In some cases, an increase in connectivity
(coupling) has been beneficial, in the sense that it was associated with better
performance (Meda, Stevens, Folley, Calhoun, & Pearlson,  2009 ; Neubauer & Fink,  2009b ; Schlösser et al.,  2003 ; Spoletini et al.,  2009 ); in other cases, a decrease in
connectivity (decoupling) was associated with better behavioral outcomes
(Meyer-Lindenberg et al.,  2005 ; Rypma
et al.,  2006 ; Stelzel, Basten,
Montag, Reuter, & Fiebach,  2010 ).
As in the present study the differences in connectivity were not associated with
differences in behavioral performance measures (for correlations between PPI
estimates and performance, see Table S 6 
in the supplementary materials), we cannot conclusively decide whether the
observed alterations in functional connectivity are of a compensatory nature and
support task performance, or whether they are dysfunctional and thus hinder task
performance. Future research must strive to elucidate the specific functional
significance of differences in the strength of functional connectivity between
DLPFC and VLPFC as well as cerebellum in the context of working memory
manipulation—for instance, by parametrically increasing task difficulty and
analyzing the effects on functional connectivity in association with behavioral
performance. Notwithstanding the need to further investigate the functional significance of
the observed differences in connectivity, the present findings underscore our
hypothesis that the quality of functional integration of distributed,
task-relevant brain networks varies between individuals and should be considered
as a variable codetermining neural efficiency when studying the effects of trait
anxiety on cognitive processing (cf. Basten et al.,  2011 ). Alterations in functional connectivity may provide the key
for understanding the reductions in processing efficiency observable in
high-anxious participants. Conclusions The present study has provided most stringent support for the assumptions of
attentional control theory—that in tasks requiring attentional control, anxiety
impairs processing efficiency more than performance effectiveness (cf. Eysenck et
al.,  2007 ). In the working memory
manipulation task that we investigated, anxiety did not affect behavioral
performance, yet it was positively associated with task-related activation
increases in regions centrally involved in cognitive control—that is, right DLPFC
and left IFS—and with decreases in a region of the default-mode network—that is,
rACC. We interpret both results as reflecting the reduced neural efficiency of
attentional-control processes in high-anxious participants. For effective
compensation of a general deficit in the goal-directed control of attention, the
down-regulation of default-mode processes may be just as important as the
up-regulation of cognitive control (see also Eichele et al.,  2008 ; Fales et al.,  2008 ; Li et al.,  2007 ; Weissman et al.,  2006 ). Anxiety also was associated with a stronger coupling of
right DLPFC with bilateral VLPFC and superior cerebellum. The finding of
anxiety-dependent alterations in the functional coupling of distributed
task-related networks is in line with previous reports (Basten et al.,
 2011 ) and demonstrates the
importance of considering measures of functional integration in combination with
measures of regional activation strength when investigating individual differences
in neural processing efficiency. Electronic supplementary material Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. ESM 1 (PDF 478 kb) 
 Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.3758/s13415-012-0100-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users. Author note This work was supported by an Emmy Noether Program Grant to C.J.F. (FI
848/3-1) from the German Research Foundation and by the German Excellence
Initiative. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited. References Ackermann H Mathiak K Riecker A The contribution of the cerebellum to speech
production and speech perception: Clinical and functional imaging
data Cerebellum 2007 6 202 213 10.1080/14734220701266742 17786816 Ansari TL Derakshan N Anxiety impairs inhibitory control but not volitional
action control Cognition and Emotion 2010 24 241 254 10.1080/02699930903381531 Ansari TL Derakshan N The neural correlates of cognitive effort in anxiety:
Effects on processing efficiency Biological Psychology 2011 86 337 348 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.12.013 21277934 Ansari TL Derakshan N The neural correlates of impaired inhibitory control
in anxiety Neuropsychologia 2011 49 1146 1153 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.01.019 21241717 Ansari TL Derakshan N Richards A Effects of anxiety on task switching: Evidence from
the mixed antisaccade task Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2008 8 229 238 10.3758/CABN.8.3.229 Aron AR Robbins TW Poldrack RA Inhibition and the right inferior frontal
cortex Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2004 8 170 177 10.1016/j.tics.2004.02.010 15050513 Baddeley A Working memory 1986 Oxford, U.K. Oxford University Press, Clarendon Press Baddeley A Working memory: Looking back and looking
forward Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2003 4 829 839 10.1038/nrn1201 14523382 Basten U Stelzel C Fiebach CJ Trait anxiety modulates the neural efficiency of
inhibitory control Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2011 23 3132 3145 10.1162/jocn_a_00003 21391763 Ben-Yehudah G Fiez JA Impact of cerebellar lesions on reading and
phonological processing Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 2008 1145 260 274 10.1196/annals.1416.015 19076402 Ben-Yehudah G Guediche S Fiez JA Cerebellar contributions to verbal working memory:
Beyond cognitive theory Cerebellum 2007 6 193 201 10.1080/14734220701286195 17786815 Bishop SJ Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: An integrative
account Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2007 11 307 316 10.1016/j.tics.2007.05.008 17553730 Bishop SJ Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of
attention Nature Neuroscience 2009 12 92 98 10.1038/nn.2242 19079249 Braver TS Cohen JD Nystrom LE Jonides J Smith EE Noll DC A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in
human working memory NeuroImage 1997 5 49 62 10.1006/nimg.1996.0247 9038284 Bressler SL Large-scale cortical networks and
cognition Brain Research Reviews 1995 20 288 304 10.1016/0165-0173(94)00016-I 7550362 Bressler SL Menon V Large-scale brain networks in cognition: Emerging
methods and principles Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2010 5 26 36 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01564-3 Bush G Luu P Posner MI Cognitive and emotional influences in anterior
cingulate cortex Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2000 4 215 222 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01483-2 10827444 Callicott J. H. Mattay V. S. Bertolino A. Finn K. Coppola R. Frank J. A. Weinberger D. R. Physiological characteristics of capacity constraints
in working memory as revealed by functional MRI Cerebral Cortex 1999 9 20 26 10022492 Champod AS Petrides M Dissociable roles of the posterior parietal and the
prefrontal cortex in manipulation and monitoring processes Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2007 104 14837 14842 10.1073/pnas.0607101104 Chiricozzi FR Clausi S Molinari M Leggio MG Phonological short-term store impairment after
cerebellar lesion: A single case study Neuropsychologia 2008 46 1940 1953 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.01.024 18342342 D’Esposito M Postle BR Ballard D Lease J Maintenance versus manipulation of information held in
working memory: An event-related fMRI study Brain and Cognition 1999 41 66 86 10.1006/brcg.1999.1096 10536086 D’Esposito M Postle BR Rypma B Prefrontal cortical contributions to working memory:
Evidence from event-related fMRI studies Experimental Brain Research 2000 133 3 11 10.1007/s002210000395 10933205 Dale AM Optimal experimental design for event-related
fMRI Human Brain Mapping 1999 8 109 114 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1999)8:2/3<109::AID-HBM7>3.0.CO;2-W 10524601 Derakshan N Ansari TL Hansard M Shoker L Eysenck MW Anxiety, inhibition, efficiency, and effectiveness. An
investigation using antisaccade task Experimental Psychology 2009 56 48 55 10.1027/1618-3169.56.1.48 19261578 Derakshan N Eysenck MW Anxiety, processing efficiency, and cognitive
performance: New developments from attentional control theory European Psychologist 2009 14 168 176 10.1027/1016-9040.14.2.168 Derakshan N Smyth S Eysenck MW Effects of state anxiety on performance using a
task-switching paradigm: An investigation of attentional control
theory Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2009 16 1112 1117 10.3758/PBR.16.6.1112 19966264 Dolcos F Kragel P Wang L McCarthy G Role of the inferior frontal cortex in coping with
distracting emotions Neuroreport 2006 17 1591 1594 10.1097/01.wnr.0000236860.24081.be 17001274 Dolcos F Miller B Kragel P Jha A McCarthy G Regional brain differences in the effect of
distraction during the delay interval of a working memory task Brain Research 2007 1152 171 181 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.03.059 17459348 Drevets WC Raichle ME Reciprocal suppression of regional cerebral blood flow
during emotional versus higher cognitive processes: Implications for
interactions between emotion and cognition Cognition and Emotion 1998 12 353 385 10.1080/026999398379646 Duncan J Owen AM Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by
diverse cognitive demands Trends in Neurosciences 2000 23 475 483 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)01633-7 11006464 Durisko C Fiez JA Functional activation in the cerebellum during working
memory and simple speech tasks Cortex 2010 46 896 906 10.1016/j.cortex.2009.09.009 19853247 Eichele, T., Debener, S., Calhoun, V. D., Specht, K., Engel, A. K.,
Hugdahl, K., . . . Ullsperger, M. (2008). Prediction of human errors by
maladaptive changes in event-related brain networks.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  105 , 6173–6178. Eysenck MW Derakshan N New perspectives in attentional control
theory Personality and Individual Differences 2010 7 955 960 Eysenck MW Derakshan N Santos R Calvo MG Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control
theory Emotion 2007 7 336 353 10.1037/1528-3542.7.2.336 17516812 Fales CL Barch DM Burgess GC Schaefer A Mennin DS Gray JR Braver TS Anxiety and cognitive efficiency: Differential
modulation of transient and sustained neural activity during a working memory
task Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2008 8 239 253 10.3758/CABN.8.3.239 Forman SD Cohen JD Fitzgerald M Eddy WF Mintun MA Noll DC Improved assessment of significant activation in
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): Use of a cluster-size
threshold Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 1995 33 636 647 10.1002/mrm.1910330508 7596267 Friston K Beyond phrenology: What can neuroimaging tell us about
distributed circuitry? Annual Review of Neuroscience 2002 25 221 250 10.1146/annurev.neuro.25.112701.142846 12052909 Friston KJ Buechel C Fink GR Morris J Rolls E Dolan RJ Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in
neuroimaging NeuroImage 1997 6 218 229 10.1006/nimg.1997.0291 9344826 Friston K Holmes A Worsley K Poline J Frith C Frackowiak R Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: A
general linear approach Human Brain Mapping 1995 2 189 210 10.1002/hbm.460020402 Hayter AL Langdon DW Ramnani N Cerebellar contributions to working
memory NeuroImage 2007 36 943 954 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.03.011 17468013 Holmes A Friston K Generalisability, random effects and population
inference NeuroImage 1998 7 754 Jha AP Fabian SA Aguirre GK The role of prefrontal cortex in resolving distractor
interference Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2004 4 517 527 10.3758/CABN.4.4.517 Jonides J Schumacher EH Smith EE Lauber EJ Awh E Minoshima S Koeppe RA Verbal working memory load affects regional brain
activation as measured by PET Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1997 9 462 475 10.1162/jocn.1997.9.4.462 23968211 Lancaster J Summerlin J Rainey L Freitas C Fox P The Talairach daemon, a database server for Talairach
atlas labels NeuroImage 1997 5 S633 Lancaster J. L. Woldorff M. G. Parsons L. M. Liotti M. Freitas C. S. Rainey L. Fox P. T. Automated Talairach atlas labels for functional brain
mapping Human Brain Mapping 2000 10 120 131 10912591 Laux L Glanzmann P Schaffner P Spielberger CD Das State-Trait-Angstinventar, Theoretische Grundlagen und
Handanweisung 1981 Weinheim Beltz Testgesellschaft Li CS Yan P Bergquist KL Sinha R Greater activation of the “default” brain regions
predicts stop signal errors NeuroImage 2007 38 640 648 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.021 17884586 Lieberman MD Cunningham WA Type I and Type II error concerns in fMRI research:
Re-balancing the scale Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 2009 4 423 428 10.1093/scan/nsp052 20035017 Linden D. E. J. Bittner R. A. Muckli L. Waltz J. A. Kriegeskorte N. Goebel R. Munk M. H. J. Cortical capacity constraints for visual working
memory: Dissociation of fMRI load effects in a fronto-parietal
network NeuroImage 2003 20 1518 1530 14642464 Logothetis NK Pauls J Augath M Trinath T Oeltermann A Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the
fMRI signal Nature 2001 412 150 157 10.1038/35084005 11449264 Logothetis NK Wandell BA Interpreting the BOLD signal Annual Review of Physiology 2004 66 735 769 10.1146/annurev.physiol.66.082602.092845 14977420 Maldjian JA Laurienti PJ Kraft RA Burdette JH An automated method for neuroanatomic and
cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets NeuroImage 2003 19 1233 1239 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00169-1 12880848 Manoach, D. S., Schlaug, G., Siewert, B., Darby, D. G., Bly, B. M.,
Benfield, A., . . . Warach, S. (1997). Prefrontal cortex fMRI signal changes are
correlated with working memory load.  Neuroreport ,  8 ,
545–549. Marvel CL Desmond JE Functional topography of the cerebellum in verbal
working memory Neuropsychology Review 2010 20 271 279 10.1007/s11065-010-9137-7 20563894 Mathews A Mackintosh B A cognitive model of selective processing in
anxiety Cognitive Therapy and Research 1998 22 539 560 10.1023/A:1018738019346 McKiernan KA Kaufman JN Kučera-Thompson J Binder JR A parametric manipulation of factors affecting
task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2003 15 394 408 10.1162/089892903321593117 12729491 Meda SA Stevens MC Folley BS Calhoun VD Pearlson GD Evidence for anomalous network connectivity during
working memory encoding in schizophrenia: An ICA based analysis PLoS One 2009 4 e7911 10.1371/journal.pone.0007911 19936244 Meyer-Lindenberg AS Olsen RK Kohn PD Brown T Egan MF Weinberger DR Berman KF Regionally specific disturbance of dorsolateral
prefrontal–hippocampal functional connectivity in schizophrenia Archives of General Psychiatry 2005 62 379 386 10.1001/archpsyc.62.4.379 15809405 Miller EK Cohen JD An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex
function Annual Review of Neuroscience 2001 24 167 202 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167 11283309 Neubauer AC Fink A Intelligence and neural efficiency Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2009 33 1004 1023 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.04.001 19580915 Neubauer AC Fink A Intelligence and neural efficiency: Measures of brain
activation versus measures of functional connectivity in the
brain Intelligence 2009 37 223 229 10.1016/j.intell.2008.10.008 Oberauer K Ross BH Design for a working memory The psychology of learning and motivation 2010 San Diego, CA Elsevier Academic Press 45 100 Oberauer K Bialkova S Accessing information in working memory: Can the focus
of attention grasp two elements at the same time? Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 2009 138 64 87 10.1037/a0014738 19203170 Petrides M Lateral prefrontal cortex: Architectonic and
functional organization Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2005 360 781 10.1098/rstb.2005.1631 Poldrack RA Mumford JA Independence in ROI analysis: Where is the
voodoo? Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 2009 4 208 213 10.1093/scan/nsp011 19470529 Postle BR Berger JS D’Esposito M Functional neuroanatomical double dissociation of
mnemonic and executive control processes contributing to working memory
performance Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 1999 96 12959 12964 10.1073/pnas.96.22.12959 Raichle ME MacLeod AM Snyder AZ Powers WJ Gusnard DA Shulman GL A default mode of brain function Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2001 98 676 682 10.1073/pnas.98.2.676 Raven J Raven JC Court JH Manual for Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary
scales 1998 Oxford, U.K. Oxford Psychologists Press Rypma B Berger JS Prabhakaran V Bly BM Kimberg DY Biswal BB D’Esposito M Neural correlates of cognitive
efficiency NeuroImage 2006 33 969 979 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.05.065 17010646 Rypma B Prabhakaran V Desmond JE Glover GH Gabrieli JDE Load-dependent roles of frontal brain regions in the
maintenance of working memory NeuroImage 1999 9 216 226 10.1006/nimg.1998.0404 9927550 Schlösser R Gesierich T Kaufmann B Vucurevic G Hunsche S Gawehn J Stoeter P Altered effective connectivity during working memory
performance in schizophrenia: A study with fMRI and structural equation
modeling NeuroImage 2003 19 751 763 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00106-X 12880804 Singh KD Fawcett IP Transient and linearly graded deactivation of the
human default-mode network by a visual detection task NeuroImage 2008 41 100 112 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.051 18375149 Smith EE Jonides J Storage and executive processes in the frontal
lobes Science 1999 283 1657 1661 10.1126/science.283.5408.1657 10073923 Spielberger CD Gorsuch RL Lushene R Manual for the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory 1970 Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press Spoletini I. Cherubini A. Paola M. Banfi G. Rüsch N. Martinotti G. Spalletta G. Reduced fronto-temporal connectivity is associated
with frontal gray matter density reduction and neuropsychological deficit in
schizophrenia Schizophrenia Research 2009 108 1-3 57 68 19097861 Stelzel C Basten U Montag C Reuter M Fiebach CJ Frontostriatal involvement in task switching depends
on genetic differences in d2 receptor density Journal of Neuroscience 2010 30 14205 14212 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-10.2010 20962241 Stoodley CJ Schmahmann JD Functional topography in the human cerebellum: A
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies NeuroImage 2009 44 489 501 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.08.039 18835452 Todd JJ Marois R Posterior parietal cortex activity predicts individual
differences in visual short-term memory capacity Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2005 5 144 155 10.3758/CABN.5.2.144 Tononi G Edelman G Sporns O Complexity and coherency: Integrating information in
the brain Trends in Cognitive Sciences 1998 2 474 484 10.1016/S1364-6613(98)01259-5 21227298 Van Hecke J Gladwin TE Coremans J Destoop M Hulstijn W Sabbe B Prefrontal, parietal and basal activation associated
with the reordering of a two-element list held in working memory Biological Psychology 2010 85 143 148 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.06.005 20542080 Vul E Harris C Winkielman P Pashler H Puzzlingly high correlations in fMRI studies of
emotion, personality, and social cognition Perspectives on Psychological Science 2009 4 274 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01125.x 26158964 Wager TD Smith EE Neuroimaging studies of working memory: A
meta-analysis Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2003 3 255 274 10.3758/CABN.3.4.255 Ward, B. D. (2000).  Simultaneous inference
for FMRI data . Retrieved from  http://stuff.mit.edu/afs/sipb.mit.edu/project/seven/doc/AFNI/AlphaSim.ps Weissman DH Roberts KC Visscher KM Woldorff MG The neural bases of momentary lapses in
attention Nature Neuroscience 2006 9 971 978 10.1038/nn1727 16767087 Windmann S Panic disorder from a monistic perspective:
Integrating neurobiological and psychological approaches Journal of Anxiety Disorders 1998 12 485 507 10.1016/S0887-6185(98)00029-2 9801965 Yarkoni T Big correlations in little studies: Inflated fMRI
correlations reflect low statistical power—Commentary on Vul et al.
(2009) Perspectives on Psychological Science 2009 4 294 298 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01127.x 26158966 Yarkoni T Braver TS Gruszka A Matthews G Szymura B Cognitive neuroscience approaches to individual
differences in working memory and executive control: Conceptual and
methodological issues Handbook of individual differences in cognition: Attention, memory, and
executive control 2010 New York, NY Springer 87 108