
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 22705442 
 3400137 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.05.030 
 NIHMS386741 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Memory monitoring performance and PFC activity are associated with 5-HTTLPR genotype in older adults 
 
 
 
 
 Pacheco 
 Jennifer 
 
 a 
 b 
 * 
 
 
 
 Beevers 
 Christopher G. 
 
 beevers@psy.utexas.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 McGeary 
 John E. 
 
 John_McGeary@brown.edu 
 c 
 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 David M. 
 
 schnyer@psy.utexas.edu 
 a 
 
 
 a Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station, A8000, Austin, TX 78712 
 b Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, NIH, 251 Bayview Blvd., Baltimore, MD 21224-6825 
 c Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Division of Behavioral Genetics, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Providence Rhode Island 
 
 * Please address all correspondence to: Jennifer Pacheco, Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, 251 Bayview Blvd., Baltimore, MD 21224-6825, Phone: 410.558.8539,  jenni.pacheco@nih.gov 
 
 
 26 
 6 
 2012 
 
 
 13 
 6 
 2012 
 
 
 7 
 2012 
 
 
 01 
 7 
 2013 
 
 50 
 9 
 2257 
 2270 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Older adults show extensive variability in cognitive performance, including episodic memory. A portion of this variability could potentially be explained by genetic factors. Recent literature shows that the neurotransmitter serotonin plays an important role in memory processes, as enhancements of brain serotonin have led to memory improvement. Here, we have begun to explore genetic contributions to the performance and underlying brain activity associated with source memory monitoring. Using a source recognition memory task during fMRI scanning, this study offers evidence that older adults who carry a short allele (S-car) of the serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) in the  SLC6A4  gene show specific deficits in source memory monitoring relative to older adults who are homozygous for the long allele (LL). These deficits are accompanied by less neural activity in regions of prefrontal cortex that have been shown to support accurate memory monitoring. Moreover, while the older adult LL group’s behavioral performance does not differ from younger adults, their brain activation reveals evidence of compensatory activation that likely supports their higher performance level. These results provide preliminary evidence that the long-allele homozygous profile is cognitively beneficial to older adults, particularly for memory functioning. 
 
 
 5-HTTLPR 
 aging 
 fMRI 
 memory monitoring 
 metamemory 
 prefrontal cortex 
 serotonin 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Aging : NIA 
 Z99 AG999999 || AG 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Older adults have consistently shown performance declines in specific aspects of memory compared to younger adults. For instance, older adults are less effective in learning new episodic information, and new associations ( Naveh-Benjamin, Guez, Kilb, & Reedy, 2004 ), and in identifying the source of newly learned episodic information ( Glisky, Polster, & Routhieaux, 1995 ). Not all aspects of memory decline in performance with age, for instance, short term memory for newly learned items remains relatively intact (for a review,  Balota, Dolan, & Duchek, 2000 ). However, source memory, or the memory for contextual information associated with an episode, is one domain that has consistently been shown to be impaired in older adults ( K. J. Mitchell & Johnson, 2009 ). 
 Another domain of memory that has shown changes associated with age is the monitoring of memory performance ( Isingrini, Perrotin, & Souchay, 2008 ). Memory monitoring assesses the potential accuracy of memory retrieval and is important for guiding and directing the retrieval process. The accuracy of memory monitoring can be examined from many angles, and the results often show differing age-related effects, as outlined by  Halamish  et al.  (2011) . For example, methods using judgments of learning at encoding have sometimes shown that older adults are overconfident when compared to younger adults ( Bunnell, Baken, & Richards-Ward, 1999 ;  Connor, Dunlosky, & Hertzog, 1997 ), but in other studies older adults show no age-related differences ( Hertzog, Kidder, Powell-Moman, & Dunlosky, 2002 ;  Rast & Zimprich, 2009 ). Additionally, one form of predictive retrieval judgments, the feeling-of-knowing tests, have generally shown no age-related differences ( Allen-Burge & Storandt, 2000 ;  Bunnell et al., 1999 ;  Hertzog, Sinclair, & Dunlosky, 2010 ;  Marquié & Huet, 2000 ). However, studies using output monitoring or confidence judgments at the time of retrieval have both uncovered age-related differences in memory monitoring ( Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ;  Kelley & Sahakyan, 2003 ;  Marsh, Hicks, Cook, & Mayhorn, 2007 ;  Pansky, Goldsmith, Koriat, & Pearlman-Avnion, 2009 ). Our current study focuses on age-related changes in both source memory and source memory monitoring at retrieval, which can be impaired in older adults ( Hashtroudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, 1989 ;  Kelley & Sahakyan, 2003 ;  McIntyre & Craik, 1987 ;  Norman & Schacter, 1997 ;  Schacter, Koutstaal, Johnson, Gross, & Angell, 1997 ;  Simons, Dodson, Bell, & Schacter, 2004 ). 
 
 1.1 Source Memory, Monitoring and Aging 
 In a study of source memory in aging,  Dodson and colleagues (2007a)  directly demonstrated a dissociation between simple recognition memory for newly learned information and recognition memory for the source associated with that information. In this task, participants were given sentences associated with a particular speaker (either a male or female voice) and were asked in a subsequent recognition phase to identify first, whether the sentence was previously heard, and second, who the reader of the sentence had been. For both queries, participants were asked to monitor their performance by providing a confidence rating with their response. Elderly participants were equivalent to young participants on the first old/new memory judgment, but were less accurate in indicating the source of the sentence. In addition to this dissociation in recognition memory performance, there was a parallel dissociation in older adults’ ability to monitor their performance. While their confidence rating accuracy for recognition memory was equivalent to that of younger participants, their confidence rating accuracy for the source memory component was impaired. 
 The parallel declines in both memory and confidence rating performance might suggest that they represent the same underlying changes in the aging process, but a second experiment using a group of younger adults whose source memory was tested after a 24-hour delay offers evidence that they are two separate processes. The delay equated the younger and older groups’ source memory performance, however the ‘impaired’ young adults continued to show higher confidence rating accuracy for their source memory decisions and this accuracy was equivalent to the shorter delay (‘unimpaired’) young group ( Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ). This study suggests that source memory monitoring performance can be dissociated from actual memory performance and that the declines associated with aging could reflect additional aspects of the cognitive aging process, not solely a decline of source memory ability. 
 One possible explanation offered for these findings is the “misrecollection account”, whereby elderly individuals incorrectly combine features from separate events that occurred in close proximity resulting in high confidence source memory errors ( Kroll, Knight, Metcalfe, Wolf, & Tulving, 1996 ). Older adults may not simply be remembering less, but might be misremembering more ( Dodson & Krueger, 2006 ;  Dodson, Bawa, & Slotnick, 2007b ). This view is supported by the performance of young participants whose memory was impaired by the 24-hour delay. Even though they are remembering less, the young adults are nevertheless aware of the lack of source information and are not confused by irrelevant information that comes to mind. Therefore, successful source memory monitoring relies heavily on the ability to focus attention away from information that might be irrelevant to the current test probe, a function that has been shown to be impaired in older adults ( Badre & Wagner, 2004 ;  Gazzaley, Cooney, Rissman, & D'Esposito, 2005 ;  Park et al., 2002 ). 
 
 
 1.2 Neural mechanisms of source monitoring 
 A number of studies have examined the neural architecture involved in episodic memory monitoring and have consistently demonstrated that regions in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) play several strategic roles in mediating and monitoring the memory retrieval process ( Chua, Schacter, & Sperling, 2009 ;  Chua, Schacter, Rand-Giovannetti, & Sperling, 2006 ;  Kikyo, Ohki, & Miyashita, 2002 ;  Maril, Simons, Mitchell, Schwartz, & Schacter, 2003 ;  Schnyer, Nicholls, & Verfaellie, 2005 ;  Schnyer et al., 2004 ;  Wagner, Maril, Bjork, & Schacter, 2001a ). For instance, the ventral lateral PFC, including portions of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), supports the identification, selection and inhibition of contextual details of episodic memory, which are all critical elements for accurate source memory monitoring ( Buckner, 2003 ;  Dobbins, Foley, Schacter, & Wagner, 2002 ;  Moscovitch et al., 2005 ;  Schnyer et al., 2005 ;  Wagner, Maril, Bjork, & Schacter, 2001b ). Not surprisingly, these same regions of the PFC have also been found to be subject to age-related functional changes. Age-related under-recruitment of these lateral prefrontal regions has been linked to declines in post-retrieval monitoring abilities ( Dulas & Duarte, 2011 ). These results support the frontal aging hypothesis, which suggests that the PFC is disproportionally affected by aging ( Raz, 2000 ;  West, 1996 ) and that alterations in its functioning likely underlie the changes in memory monitoring that have been observed. 
 Regions of the PFC showing functional variations associated with aging have sometimes revealed evidence of compensatory activity that may work to counteract performance declines. For example, a general pattern of increased bilateral activation for a variety of functional tasks has been observed for older adults in prefrontal and parietal regions. This is thought to help counteract age-related neurocognitive deficits through the engagement of additional neural resources to maintain task performance ( Cabeza, 2002 ;  2004 ;  Cabeza et al., 1997 ). Little is understood about individual differences in the ability to engage more bilateral regions of the PFC to support task performance, but one potential source of these differences is genetics. 
 
 
 1.3 Genetic contributions to source memory performance 
 Studies have linked genetic variation within the serotonin system (i.e., the serotonin receptor 2A gene, HTR2A) to memory performance, showing that subjects with genetically blunted receptor responses demonstrate poorer performance on long delay (30 min or more) memory recall tasks ( de Quervain et al., 2003 ;  Koppel & Goldberg, 2009 ). Additionally, positron emission tomography indicates that older adults have a reduced number of 5-HT2A serotonin receptors in the prefrontal cortex ( Sheline, Mintun, Moerlein, & Snyder, 2002 ). Serotonergic systems have also been a recent target for treatment of memory disorders, including both amnesia and Alzheimer’s disease ( Perez-Garcia & Meneses, 2008 ), offering additional evidence for a potential mediating relationship between serotonin levels and memory functioning. These studies highlight the possible relationship between serotonin function and memory performance and reveal important implications for cognitive functioning in older adults. 
 One potential target of study is the serotonin transporter gene ( SLC6A4 ), which is responsible for determining the duration and intensity of serotonin communication with postsynaptic receptors and targets by controlling the reuptake of serotonin. Importantly, the efficiency with which the serotonin (5-HTT) system returns serotonin to the presynaptic neuron appears to be influenced by a polymorphism in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter linked region (5-HTTLPR) of the  SLC6A4  gene. This common insertion/deletion polymorphism results in 2 variants: a short (S) allele and a long (L) allele. The presence of one or two S alleles, rather than two copies of the L allele, is associated with reduced transcriptional efficiency of the target gene that results in a significant decreas (approximately 50%) in serotonin reuptake ( Caspi et al., 2003 ;  Hu et al., 2005 ). 
 While the 5-HTTLPR genotype has typically been studied in relation to mood disorders in humans, previous work has demonstrated interesting associations between 5-HTTLPR and differences in brain structure in regions that have been shown to be critical for memory and memory monitoring. For instance, the white matter microarchitecture along a tract connecting important memory related regions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) to regions of ventral medial and ventral lateral PFC has been shown to be significantly affected by the 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter genotype. Genetic analysis combined with diffusion tensor MRI revealed an inverse association between fractional anisotropy values (a measure of white matter microarchitecture) and the number of short alleles ( Pacheco et al., 2009 ). Further, the 5-HTTLPR genotype has been shown to modulate the association of lateral PFC volume with biased attention to emotional cues ( Beevers, Pacheco, Clasen, McGeary, & Schnyer, 2010 ). In short allele carriers, there is an inverse correlation between lateral PFC volume and the ability to effectively shift attention away from emotionally salient, but irrelevant stimuli. As mentioned previously, the process of focusing attention away from irrelevant stimuli has been shown to be crucial for successful source memory retrieval and source memory retrieval monitoring. Given that the regions revealed here are associated with memory performance changes in aging, one hypothesis that emerges from this is that 5-HTTLPR status may be associated with individual differences in memory and memory monitoring performance in elderly individuals. 
 
 
 1.4 Present Study 
 In the current study, we examine the influence of the 5-HTTLPR genotype on source memory and source memory monitoring in older adults by taking advantage of a well established paradigm that demonstrates dissociations between memory types (item and source recognition) as well as between source memory accuracy and source memory monitoring ( Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ). It is expected that older adults will show decreased performance for source memory and source memory monitoring, when compared with younger adults. Most importantly, we expect that individual differences in performance will be moderated by 5-HTTLPR allele status, with the lowest performance expected from short 5-HTTLPR allele carriers. 
 While this paradigm has not yet been examined using functional neuroimaging, it is expected that source memory and source memory monitoring will rely heavily on prefrontal regions that aid in the inhibition and selection of information. There are two potential patterns of brain activation that we might expect to see as a result of 5-HTTLPR allele status. Older adult short allele carriers (S-car) may show decreased activation in key PFC regions compared to their long allele homozygote (LL) counterparts and young adults. Alternatively, it is possible that the LL group may engage compensatory mechanisms that bring online greater PFC activation (either unilaterally, bilaterally or both) when compared to short allele carriers and younger adults. Most importantly, this greater engagement of critical PFC regions will be accompanied by enhanced source memory and source memory monitoring performance. 
 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Seventeen younger adults from the University of Texas at Austin community (YA; 5 male, mean age = 23.3 ± 3.4 years, age range = 19–30 years) and twenty-three older adults (OA; 12 male, mean age = 66.8 ± 6.3 years, age range = 60–81 years) were included in the final analyses. Participants were recruited from the greater Austin community, were all right-handed, healthy individuals and were paid $25 per hour for participating in the imaging session. All participants were free from psychological and neurological illness, none were taking medications with known central nervous system effects, and all were screened for contraindications to MRI. Each subject provided written informed consent approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Texas at Austin. Individuals enrolled in the older group underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological battery during an initial visit, separate from the imaging session. All older adults included in the study were consistently within 1 SD of normal performance across each neuropsychological domain. In each group, three subjects were excluded from the final analysis: one subject in each group for extreme head motion during scanning, and two others for failure to respond during a significant portion of the source memory task. 
 While DNA samples from the younger adults were unavailable, the older participants were characterized by the number of short 5-HTTLPR alleles present: 0, 1, or 2. Of the 22 older adults successfully genotyped, 6 were long allele homozygotes (L/L), 15 were heterozygotes (L/S) and 1 was a short allele homozygote (S/S). These groups were further collapsed into two based on whether they were short-allele carriers (S-car; n = 16, 9 male, mean age = 67.1 ± 6.5 years, age range = 60–79 years) or long-allele homozygotes (LL; n=6, 3 male, mean age = 66.5 ± 6.7 years, age range = 61–81 years). There were no significant group differences between the S-car and LL groups on age, education, verbal IQ or gender (all  p  > 0.50). 
 
 
 2.2 Genotyping 
 Saliva samples were collected from all of the older adults, however one sample did not produce reliable information. DNA collection was initiated after the YA group was run through the task, and thus genetic information was not available for this group. Genomic DNA was isolated from buccal cells using a modification of published methods ( Freeman et al., 1997 ;  Lench, Stanier, & Williamson, 1988 ;  Meulenbelt, Droog, Trommelen, Boomsma, & Slagboom, 1995 ;  Spitz et al., 1996 ). The cheeks and gums were rubbed for 20 seconds with three sterile, cotton-tipped wooden swabs. The swabs were placed in a 50-ml capped polypropylene tube containing lysis buffer (500 µl of 1 M Tris-HCl; 200 mM disodium ethylene diaminetetracetic acid (EDTA), pH 8.0; 500 µl of 10% sodium docecyl sulfate; and 100 µl of 5 M sodium chloride). The subjects then rinsed out the mouth vigorously with 10 ml of bottled water for 20 seconds, and added this to the 50-ml tube. The tubes were stored at 4°C or less until the DNA was extracted. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used for DNA amplification using established primers ( Pacheco et al., 2009 ) and the resulting fragments were used to identify the presence of a long or short allele of the 5-HTTLPR gene. 
 
 
 2.3 Image acquisition 
 All scanning was performed at The University of Texas at Austin Imaging Research Center using a whole body 3T GE MRI scanner with an 8-channel phase array head coil. Head motion was minimized with foam inserts and a forehead strap. Stimuli were viewed utilizing a back projection screen and a mirror mounted on the top of the head coil. MRI compatible audio headphones were used for presentation of auditory stimuli, and prior to the scan all subjects confirmed adequate hearing to a test recording. Additionally, MR safe glasses were provided as needed to correct vision to normal levels. Responses were collected with a single 4-button MR compatible optical transmission device, held in the participants’ right hand. 
 
 2.2.1 Functional image acquisition 
 Functional EPI images using a parallel imaging approach with GRAPPA reconstruction were collected utilizing whole head coverage with slice orientation to reduce artifact (approx. 20 degrees off the AC-PC plane, TR = 2 sec., TE = 30 msec., 31 axial slices oriented for best whole head coverage, acquisition voxel size = 3.125 × 3.125 × 3 mm with a 0.3 mm inter-slice gap). The first four EPI volumes were discarded to allow scans to reach equilibrium. 
 
 
 2.2.2 Structural image acquisition 
 At least one high-resolution T1-weighted SPGR structural image data set (TR = 9.7, TE = 4, flip angle = 10 degrees, slice thickness = 1.4 mm, 134 slices, FOV = 25cm and matrix size = 256×256 mm) was collected on each participant for the anatomical coregistration with functional imaging datasets. The SPGR scans have been empirically optimized for high contrast between gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM), and GM and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). For some subjects two SPGR scans were collected, and in these cases the two T1 scans were motion corrected and averaged to create a single high signal, high contrast volume. 
 
 
 
 2.4 Source Memory task 
 A two-part memory task was used to assess memory monitoring for both item and source recognition (see  Figure 1  for a schematic, based on a task by  Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ). Part one was a study phase that was performed while the subject was in the scanner. Images were not collected during study in order to minimize the interference of scanner noise with the auditory presentation of task stimuli. Each individual study phase consisted of a series of 24 sentences displayed visually in the center of the screen, progressing in a self-paced manner. Simultaneously, the sentence was presented aurally through headphones, read aloud by either a male (Dan) or female (Kim) speaker, with a photograph of the speaker and their name presented above each sentence. The two speakers, Dan and Kim, alternated randomly and were presented an equal number of times. Subjects were asked to provide a plausibility judgment during this phase, as proof that the sentences were being read and encoded. The sentences, which were all true, were selected from the trivia book  Salted Peanuts  ( McKenzie, 1976 ). They were chosen pseudorandomly to be topically unique and are similar to the following example:
 Eighty four percent of a raw apple is water. 
 
 A test phase immediately followed the study phase and incorporated twenty of the original sentences seen at study, excluding the first and last two sentences to account for primacy and recency effects. Additionally, 10 sentences that were not seen previously were intermixed as recognition foils. The test phase was also self-paced, with a time limit of 10 seconds. During this phase, participants read a sentence on the screen and were asked whether this sentence was presented during the study phase (“old”) or if it was a new sentence (“new”). Participants responded with one of four choices in order to indicate their old/new decision and an associated confidence level:  Certainly Old, Probably Old, Probably New,  and  Certainly New . Subjects were trained prior to the task to use  Certainly  only when the answer came to mind easily, and  Probably  on items of which they were less confident. Once the item recognition question was answered, the same sentence appeared again with prompts asking which speaker had delivered the sentence. Again, there were four answer choices that reflected the participant’s response and associated confidence level:  Certainly Dan, Probably Dan, Probably Kim,  and  Certainly Kim . A black visual fixation cross was presented between every trial (item and source recognition of one sentence, as well as source recognition and item recognition of the next sentence), jittered randomly for 3, 5, or 7 seconds. Also intermixed randomly throughout the entire run were 10 control conditions that consisted of a string of x’s where one x appeared in red and the participants were instructed to indicate if the red x was on the  left  or  right  of the screen. This control involves a visual search through a string of text and a response, but lacks any verbal, memory or memory monitoring component. 
 A total of four study/test runs were administered per subject, however some runs were excluded for reasons of excessive head motion or less than acceptable response levels during the run. In the younger group, there were 10 subjects with a complete set of four runs, 5 subjects with three useable runs, and 2 subjects with only two usable runs. For the older group, there were 16 subjects with a complete set of four runs, 6 subjects with three useable runs, and 1 subject with two useable runs. 
 
 
 2.5 Behavioral analysis 
 Responses from the source memory task were used to calculate a score of recognition success (correct new/old distinction, correct source identification) as well as monitoring accuracy (correct determination of retrieval success). For each subject, all runs of the task were combined for analysis of behavioral responses. Each item recognition response was classified as either a true hit, true miss, false alarm or correct rejection, and a corrected memory accuracy score was calculated as: (True Hit – False Alarm) / Total Items. Each source recognition response was classified as either correct or incorrect, and source memory accuracy was calculated for each subject as the proportion of items correctly recognized as old and attributed to the correct source. 
 To characterize memory monitoring accuracy, we used the percentage correct for all responses given a  Certainly  distinction. This reflects items where subjects had both good memory performance and good monitoring performance. Because subjects were not allowed to skip a response, the lower-confidence answers likely contain a fair amount of guessing. In contrast, the higher-confidence responses should reflect only those responses that participants were fully confident in. For any individual subject, if they are accurately monitoring their memory performance, the percentage correct for the higher-confidence responses should be elevated. Finally, previous studies have shown that a higher proportion of monitoring errors in aging are high confidence errors ( Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ) and therefore this rating is likely to best reflect differences in monitoring abilities. 
 
 
 2.6 fMRI data analysis 
 Functional data analysis was accomplished using tools available through the software package FSL v 4.1 (FMRIB’s Software Library,  http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/ ). Images were first motion corrected and then a high pass filter of 60 seconds was used to remove low frequency drift components. Data were resampled and spatially smoothed with a 5mm full width half maximum Gaussian kernel and rescaled to a mean signal value of 100. Finally, mean functional images for each subject were spatially normalized to fit the MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) standard brain template in order to obtain conversion matrices to apply for higher-level statistical analysis. Responses were collapsed across confidence level and categorized based on their monitoring accuracy. For example, the “Accurate Source” condition contains responses to the source memory question that were rated as high confidence and answered correctly, as well as responses that were rated with low-confidence and answered incorrectly. Also modeled were the fixation periods (FIX), the visual-motor control (CONT) task conditions and finally, the remaining confidence responses and the motion parameters as nuisance variables. 
 Individual events were modeled as a canonical hemodynamic response and its first-order temporal derivative. The resulting least squares parameter estimates, reflecting mainly the height of the modeled hemodynamic response for each condition, were then contrasted for each subject. Contrasts from individual subject runs were then combined into a second level analysis for each subject using a fixed effects model. Finally, spatially normalized contrast maps were combined and tested at the third level to examine group effects. All higher-level analysis utilized the FLAME (FMRIB's Local Analysis of Mixed Effects) approach in FSL with cluster corrections for multiple comparisons. The more general omnibus contrasts (e.g., Source Memory versus CONT) were corrected for multiple comparisons using a clustering approach where clusters were determined by  z  > 2.3 and a corrected cluster significance threshold of  p  < 0.05 ( Worsley, 2001 ). A small volume correction was used for specific contrasts examining the effects of genotype, where the data were masked with the clustered map from the omnibus contrast before thresholding to  p  < 0.05. To avoid circularity, the cluster-corrected map of the younger adults (shown in  Figure 3 , summarized in  Table 2 ) was used in subsequent analyses as a small-volume correction mask to correct for multiple comparisons in contrasts using only the older adults. Similarly the cluster-corrected map of the older adults was used as a small volume correction for contrasts involving only the younger adults ( Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan, & Baker, 2009 ). 
 
 
 2.7 Functional region of interest analysis 
 Five functional regions of interest (ROIs) were generated from the activation map of accurate monitoring ( Figure 5 , peak voxels described in  Table 3 ) by masking this activation with binarized anatomical ROIs, using the Harvard-Oxford cortical atlas found in FSL. Percent signal change values were extracted from each ROI for the contrast of accurate monitoring compared to the visual search control task using a baseline-to-max scale factor (as described in  http://mumford.fmripower.org/perchange_guide.pdf ). Using the percent signal change values from the ROIs, the signals for each of the three groups (YA, LL, and S-car) were compared directly using one-way ANOVA models. The functional activation map primarily reflected activation in the left hemisphere, however, in order to examine the response in homologous region, the ROIs showing a significant group difference were reversed to the right hemisphere. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral results 
 
 3.1.1 Younger adults versus older adults 
 The behavioral results for all runs were combined into a mean value for each subject, and analyses were done to examine memory performance for item memory and source memory. Across the entire group, previous patterns of behavioral results were replicated for memory performance ( Chua et al., 2009 ;  Dodson & Krueger, 2006 ;  Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ;  Dodson, Bawa, & Slotnick, 2007b ;  Kelley & Sahakyan, 2003 ;  Norman & Schacter, 1997 ), and are summarized in  Figure 2 . A repeated measures ANOVA (see  Table 1  for ANOVA results) was used to explore performance for memory type (item or source) between the two groups (YA and OA). This revealed a significant main effect of memory type ( F (1,37)=247.54,  p <0.001) as well as a significant interaction between memory type and group ( F (2,37)=13.01,  p <0.001). There were no deficits for OA during sentence recognition, but they performed significantly worse on the source memory question; two-tailed, two-sample t-tests showed significant overall reduction in source memory performance for OA as compared to their younger counterparts (OA=64.9%, YA=75.5%, p=0.004,  Figure 2a ). A similar analysis was done for memory monitoring accuracy, which revealed a significant main effect of monitoring type ( F (1,37)=63.70,  p <0.001) as well as a significant interaction between monitoring type and group ( F (2,37)=7.76,  p <0.01). Confirmed by subsequent t-tests, OA showed a significant decline in source memory monitoring when compared to the YA (OA=73.7% YA=84.7% p=0.017,  Figure 2b ,  Table 1 ). In summary, while OA showed equivalent recognition memory and recognition memory monitoring performance as YA, they were significantly impaired in their source recognition and source monitoring abilities 
 
 
 3.1.2 Older adult 5-HTTLPR short-allele carriers versus long-allele homozygotes 
 Age-effects were explored within the OA group alone. Age was not found to correlate significantly with older adult performance on this task (all  r(23)  between −0.13 and 0). In order to assess the effect of having one or more copies of the short 5-HTTLPR allele on memory performance, the older adult group was divided into those who carried the 5-HTTLPR short allele (S-car) and those who did not (LL). A repeated measures ANOVA with memory type as a within subjects factor and genotype as a between subjects factor (summarized in  Table 1 ) was used to explore performance for memory type (item or source) between the two groups (LL and S-car). This revealed a significant main effect of memory type ( F (1,22)=202.7,  p <0.001), however there was no significant interaction between memory type and genotype group (shown in barplots in  Figure 2a ). 
 The same analysis was done for memory monitoring accuracy using accuracy on high confidence judgments, which revealed a significant interaction between genotype group (LL and S-car) and monitoring type (item, source) ( F (2,20)=12.38,  p =0.002,  Figure 2b ). Subsequent t-tests indicated that having a short allele resulted in greater impairment for source monitoring (LL: 89.1%; S-car: 66.2%,  p  < 0.001) with no differences in recognition monitoring. Given the higher level of performance in the older adult LL group, they were compared directly to the YA, revealing no significant differences in source memory performance (YA: 74.7% LL: 72.9%,  p  = 0.38) or source monitoring (YA: 84.7% LL: 87.3%,  p  = 0.44) of these two groups; older adult LL homozygotes have behavior rates equivalent to the YA. In contrast, there were significant differences between the YA and S-car group for both source memory (YA: 74.7% S-car: 60.3%,  p  < 0.001) and source monitoring (YA: 84.7% S-car: 66.2%,  p  < 0.001; shown in,  Figure 2b ). 
 To ensure specificity of these genetic effects, confirmatory post-hoc analyses were done using two other commonly assessed genotypes, COMT and BDNF. Subjects were split into two groups, for each gene, based on their genetic status; Val-carriers (n = 16) were compared to Met homozygotes (n = 6) for COMT, and Met-carriers (n = 9) were compared to Val homozygotes (n = 13) for BDNF. Using the same repeated measures ANOVA models for memory and monitoring, we found the same main effect of memory or monitoring type, as reported above, and no further interaction with either COMT or BDNF (Memory × Gene:  F(2,20)  = 1.24,  p  = 0.28;  F(2,20)  = 0.011,  p  = 0.75 Monitoring × Gene:  F(2,20)  = 1.52,  p  = 0.23;  F(2,20)  = 0.45,  p  = 0.51 for COMT and BDNF respectively). These results indicated that neither memory nor monitoring performance within the OA were accounted for by either COMT or BDNF genetic status. 
 
 
 
 3.2 Imaging results 
 
 3.2.1 Source memory network 
 Whole brain fMRI were collected during the test phase of the memory task in order to explore the regions that are involved in memory monitoring. Initially, a test of source memory versus the visual search control task was performed to reveal the functional neural network involved in source memory. These maps were generated both for all subjects combined (YA and OA) and separately for each younger and older adult group. This initial contrast revealed a network of regions previously shown to be involved in source memory processes - areas of the lateral and medial PFC ( Shimamura, 1994 ;  Stuss, 1984 ), MTL ( Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993 ;  Squire, 1992 ), and parietal cortex ( Buckner & Wheeler, 2001 ;  Rugg, Otten, & Henson, 2002 ;  Wagner, Shannon, Kahn, & Buckner, 2005 ). 
 
 
 3.2.2 Accurate memory monitoring 
 In order to examine the regions involved in memory monitoring and their differences between groups, an analysis contrasting accurate memory monitoring responses to the control task was performed. Initial comparisons between the YA and OA groups revealed no regions of significant difference. When each group was analyzed separately, significant activation was observed in regions of the left lateral IFG (BA 44 and 45), the left dorsolateral PFC (BA 9), and the paracingulate gyrus. Additionally, examining these maps indicated a great degree of overlap between the YA and OA groups (shown in  Figure 4 ). 
 Since behavioral analyses revealed important differences associated with genotype, namely the older adult S-car performed worse than the LL group, an analysis was conducted within the older group, contrasting LL and S-car for accurate memory monitoring responses relative to the control condition. The resulting network included regions of the left inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus and anterior paracingulate cortex (shown in  Figure 5 , summarized in  Table 3 ). This network appeared similar to regions revealed in the YA group ( Figure 6 ), suggesting that both YA and LL groups were recruiting the lateral PFC and paracingulate more than the S-car older adults are when making accurate monitoring judgments. This observation was tested statistically using functionally defined regions of interest. 
 For the reverse contrast, we found no significant regions where S-car showed greater activation than the LL group. Further comparisons were made between the YA group and the S-car group, and showed greater activation for the YA in smaller regions of the lateral IFG (MNI coordinates: 69 71 37). 
 
 
 3.2.3 ROI analysis 
 Five ROIs were constructed from the map of accurate memory monitoring (shown in  Figure 5 ) and the percent signal change was extracted from the contrast of accurate monitoring compared to the control task for each group (YA, LL and S-car). One-way ANOVAs were used, comparing the signal change for each group within each ROI, and indicated that there were significant differences in the operculum (BA 44) and the pars triangularis (BA 45). The ROIs for these two regions were then reversed to the right hemisphere, and percent signal change was extracted in the same manner. Subsequent independent t-tests ( Figure 7 ) comparing the two older adult genotype groups revealed a greater percent signal change in both the left and right operculum for LL as compared to the S-car (left:  t(21)=2.195, p=0.040 ; right:  t(21)=2.076, p=0.050)  and YA (left:  t(21)=2.335, p=0.030 ; right:  t(21)=2.097, p=0.048) . 
 Examining the differences between the older adult groups and the younger group directly, the LL group showed significantly greater percent signal change when compared to the YA group in the left pars triangularis ( t(21)=2.487, p=0.021) , but there were no significant differences seen in the right triangularis, or with the S-car group. No other regions showed significant older and younger group differences. Bar graphs showing the pattern of these effects ( Figure 7 ) show a consistently greater signal change in the older adult LL group when looking within these bilateral regions of the IFG during accurate memory monitoring. While the older adult LL group did not differ in their behavioral performance from the YA, they appear to have activated a critical region of the PFC to a greater extent than either the young or older S-car groups. 
 One critical question is whether activation in these ROIs is associated directly with source monitoring. To explore this hypothesis, activity was correlated with task performance, using the measure of source memory accuracy. For the entire older adult group (both LL and S-car combined), significant correlations were seen in the right operculum ( r(19)=0.438, p=0.047 ) and bilaterally in the triangularis (left:  r(19)=0.572, p=0.007 ; right:  r(19)=0.483, p=0.027 ). Within the YA, no significant correlations were seen between PFC activation and source memory monitoring accuracy. These findings suggest that there is a relationship between amount of prefrontal activity and source monitoring accuracy for older adults. 
 In summary, older adults were, as a whole, impaired in source memory and source monitoring performance. However, there was a significant divide within the older adults, and when separated by 5-HTTLPR status, the LL group resembled the YA in performance. The LL group displayed differential neural function, compared to both the younger and S-car groups, showing greater PFC activation associated with accurate source memory monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 This study had two main goals. First, we wanted to investigate whether the genotype of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism could account for individual differences in older adults’ source memory and source memory monitoring performance. Second, we wished to examine whether individual differences in performance were associated with corresponding differences in brain activation. Using a task previously employed in behavioral examinations of memory monitoring in aging ( Dodson, Bawa, & Krueger, 2007a ), we replicated the overall expected behavioral results with older adults performing worse relative to YA at source memory and source monitoring, but with no deficit for item memory or monitoring. However, by splitting the older subjects into groups based on their genotype for the serotonin transporter polymorphism (5HTTLPR), we uncovered important differences in performance that correspond to specific genotypes. Older adults who carry at least one copy of the short 5-HTTLPR allele performed worse than older adults who are homozygous for the long allele. Perhaps more interestingly, the older adult LL homozygotes perform at behavioral levels no different from that of younger adults. 
 Given the level of behavioral performance, we examined the functional neural network associated with this task in order to determine if there were corresponding changes in this network associated with age or genotype status. Results of the fMRI analysis revealed portions of the PFC, including the lateral and inferior regions, which play an important role during accurate source memory monitoring on this task. Further, subdividing the older adults into the two genotype groups revealed that these regions of the PFC were activated to a greater extent by LL older adult than for either older adult S-car or young adults. Taken together, the behavioral and functional results point to an interesting relationship between the 5-HTTLPR genotype and age-related deficits in source memory monitoring. Older adults homozygous for the long 5-HTTLPR allele performed behaviorally like younger adults and showed higher levels of activation in PFC regions associated with accurate monitoring. 
 
 4.1 5-HTTLPR effects on source memory monitoring performance 
 These results suggest an important association between the 5-HTTLPR gene and memory performance in elderly adults. Prior work has uncovered associations between 5-HTT genetics and cognitive processing, though many reports have failed to find any significant relationships between 5-HTTLPR genotype and performance on tests of attention or working memory ( Canli et al., 2005 ;  Hariri, 2002 ). More recently, a few studies have uncovered associations between the 5-HTTLPR genotype and long delayed memory recall ( O'Hara et al., 2007 ), as well as complex memory recall ( Marini et al., 2011 ).  Marini  et al. , (2011)  compared performance of older adult (mean age = 64.5 ± 8.2 years) S-carriers and LL homozygotes on a variety of neuropsychological and personality tests. The S-carriers showed significantly lower performance on the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure, a test of visuo-spatial long-term memory. A similar study by  O’Hara  et al. , (2007)  demonstrated that S-carriers showed decreased performance on the delayed recall portion of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Task in a sample of older adults (mean age = 71.1 ± 8.8 years). Taken together, these two studies implicate the S allele in poorer performance for complex aspects of memory, both visual and verbal. 
 Both of these studies, however, used samples consisting of only older adults and did not compare the performance of either genotype group to younger individuals. In the current work, we compared both groups of older adults (short-allele carriers and long-allele homozygotes) to a group of younger adults. These comparisons revealed important additional information, namely, no significant differences between younger adults and the older adult long-allele homozygotes. Given that there were no differences between the LL group and the S-car group in age, gender, IQ or education, and that all of our subjects were cognitively normal, this result has some striking implications for older adults. Instead of the short-allele carriers being more susceptible to cognitive decline, the homozygous long-allele genetic profile may help older adults delay the normally observed age-related decline. A larger, longitudinal study of aging would be needed to resolve this hypothesis. 
 
 
 4.2 Neuroanatomical underpinnings of accurate source memory monitoring in older adults 
 Results from our functional task have highlighted regions of the prefrontal cortex, particularly the inferior frontal gyrus, as important for maintaining high behavioral performance. These regions were known to play critical roles in inhibitory control including inhibition of irrelevant details ( Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack, 2004 ;  Nee, Wager, & Jonides, 2007 ), cue specification ( Buckner, 2003 ;  Dobbins & Han, 2006 ;  Kirchhoff & Buckner, 2006 ) and making choices between competing options ( Eakin & Hertzog, 2006 ;  Hirshorn & Thompson-Schill, 2006 ). During memory retrieval, two distinct roles of the ventral lateral prefrontal cortex have been identified ( Badre & Wagner, 2007 ); the anterior regions (pars orbitalis, BA47) subserve a more controlled retrieval of semantic information ( Badre & Wagner, 2005 ;  Poldrack et al., 1999 ;  Wagner, Maril, Bjork, & Schacter, 2001b ), whereas the posterior regions (pars triangularis, BA45) are responsible for selection of task relevant information ( Buckner, 2003 ;  Thompson-Schill, Bedny, & Goldberg, 2005 ). In the latter, participants rely on post-retrieval monitoring to resolve conflicts that arise from multiple retrieval products. For our task, engagement of this selection process is beneficial to older adults when excessive irrelevant information is retrieved in error ( Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007 ;  Velanova, Lustig, Jacoby, & Buckner, 2006 ). The inhibitory and selection functions associated with these regions would be critical to overcome misremembering during source memory monitoring, and those older adults who are able to more accurately assess their retrieval products are likely able to make accurate judgments about their memory responses. 
 Wais  et al. , ( Wais, Kim, & Gazzaley, 2011 ) explored the role of the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, specifically the pars triangularis, during distracted episodic retrieval using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. During episodic retrieval of complex visual stimuli participants were shown to be susceptible to external visual distraction as evidenced by performance decreases in the presence of irrelevant visual distractors. Subsequent to perturbation of the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, susceptibility to distraction by external cues increased. In the absence of external distractors, under an eyes closed condition, perturbation by rTMS resulted in no change in episodic retrieval. Similar fMRI studies have shown a positive correlation between the activation of this region and proactive interference during short-term memory retrieval ( Nee & Jonides, 2008 ). Taken together, these studies are consistent with a crucial role for the posterior ventrolateral PFC in monitoring and inhibition of competing retrieval cues required for successful memory monitoring. 
 In our study, a subset of older adults demonstrated equivalent task performance when compared to younger adults, along with increased functional activation of regions that are important for task performance. This suggests that these older adults are utilizing compensatory mechanisms. The scaffolding theory of aging and cognition (STAC;  Park & Reuter-Lorenz, 2009 ) suggests that as older adults face more challenges, primarily due to degradation of cortical regions and connections, they rely on secondary scaffolding structures. These “scaffolds” involve strengthened existing connections, newly generated connections, and retirement of faulty connections ( Goh & Park, 2009 ;  Park & Reuter-Lorenz, 2009 ). STAC implicates the PFC as a flexible structure in which scaffolding can occur, as opposed to more dedicated cortical structures. Physical evidence of scaffolding is seen in older adults as bilateral activation, increases in prefrontal activation, distributed processing, and neurogenesis ( Park & Reuter-Lorenz, 2009 ). Numerous studies, using both PET and fMRI data, have suggested that older adults typically show more bilateral activation for tasks that are primarily unilateral in younger adults ( Cabeza, 2002 ;  Cabeza, Anderson, Locantore, & McIntosh, 2002 ;  Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008 ). This over-activation and recruitment of homologous regions is often viewed as neural compensation, particularly when it is associated with preserved task performance, as it was with our sample of LL older adults. 
 Our work is also consistent with this view. Elderly adults who were LL-homozygous for the 5HTTLPR gene showed greater activity in these regions bilaterally, and this increased activation was directly associated with better performance on the task. So, while behavioral performance was equivalent to young adults, it is clear that this level of performance is achieved through the ability to engage regions of PFC to a greater extent than either the YA or the S-car. Finally, their ability to do this may be directly tied to genetic differences in the serotonin system. 
 
 
 4.3 Effects of 5-HTTLPR genotype on memory monitoring 
 While some research has begun to reveal important relationships between cognition, aging and the 5-HTTLPR gene using behavioral methods ( O’Hara, 2007 ;  Marini, 2011 ), none have used neuroimaging to better understand the neural basis of any demonstrated differences. One of the main goals of this study was to examine 5-HTTLPR effects on the functional regions critical for accurate memory monitoring. Our results indicated that those older adults who have an LL profile for the 5-HTTLPR genotype perform at levels equivalent to younger adults on source memory and source monitoring tasks, which are typically declined for older adults. These older adults recruited more prefrontal structures to facilitate their performance on the task. 
 The effects of serotonin levels on inhibitory control have been explored using acute tryptophan depletion (ATD), a noninvasive technique resulting in global depletion of brain serotonin ( Young, Ervin, Pihl, & Finn, 1989 ). Behavioral studies have shown that ATD impairs inhibition and cognitive control across a variety of tasks in younger adults ( Murphy, Smith, Cowen, Robbins, & Sahakian, 2002 ;  Walderhaug et al., 2002 ) and older adults ( Porter, Lunn, & O'Brien, 2003 ). More recently, the effects of ATD on brain function in older adults has been explored using fMRI and an inhibitory control task ( Lamar et al., 2009 ). Compared to sham ATD, older adults show decreased activation in the ventrolateral prefrontal regions associated with inhibitory control when their global serotonin levels are depleted. Conversely, fMRI studies using serotonin agonists report enhancing effects on prefrontal regions during inhibition ( Evers et al., 2006 ;  Rubia et al., 2005 ). These results suggest a strong influence on the amount of serotonin available throughout the brain and the degree of activation within the prefrontal cortex during tasks that require inhibitory control. These studies provide a direct linkage between the brain regions revealed in the current study, serotonin, and inhibitory control of cognitive processes. In light of our findings, we propose that the LL-homozygotes are more readily engaging inhibitory control over the memory retrieval products, as evidenced by better performance on a source memory task. In addition, greater activation in prefrontal regions previously associated with inhibitory control, and more recently shown to be influenced by serotonin level, is correlated with task performance. 
 
 
 4.4 Limitations 
 There are a number of important limitations to our current study, including the low number of LL homozygotes within our older adults group. Although we see some robust behavioral differences, there is room for more exploration with a larger sample. However, even with the small sample size in this study, we believe this result is novel and exciting, and introduces a role for the 5-HTTLPR genotype in mediating neural functioning on complex memory processes. Secondarily, the presented work is purely cross-sectional and, as such, it is hard to resolve whether the sample of LL older adults began with high cognitive performance or if, as proposed, they are not declining in a similar fashion as their S-car counterparts. 
 Genetic information was unavailable for the younger adult sample in the current study. A future study that includes genotypes from the younger group, as well as following the older group in a longitudinal fashion, would be beneficial in tracking the putative cognitive decline associated with 5-HTTLPR status. We would expect to see similar involvement of the 5-HTTLPR genotype in younger adults as our previous work has shown an association between 5-HTTLPR and changes in PFC/MTL pathways ( Pacheco et al., 2009 ), as well as left inferior PFC differences related to cognitive control in younger adults ( Beevers et al., 2010 ). 
 Lastly, there is the possibility of a third variable driving the genetic association, such as other genetic variants in linkage disequilibrium, population stratification, epigenetics, or unmeasured variables. However, if the association is driven by a third variable that covaries with 5-HTTLPR status, we would not expect that findings from the ATD studies ( Lamar et al., 2009 ) to be complementary to ours. Additionally, there is at least one report ( Langenecker et al., 2007 ) showing that activation during an inhibitory control task predicts success of Major Depressive Disorder treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Our results, along with these two studies, converge on a relationship between cognition, functional activation and serotonergic modification. 
 
 
 4.5 Summary 
 In summary, this study provides preliminary evidence that the 5-HTTLPR genotype is associated with cognition in older adults. Specifically, the lack of a short allele may alter the trajectory of age-related decline for memory monitoring processes in older adults. Prior work has implicated a crucial role for the PFC in memory monitoring, and our current work agrees. Regions of the left IFG and lateral PFC were shown to be involved in accurate memory monitoring for the entire group of older adults in this study. These regions are crucial for resolving competition of memory representations post-retrieval, which is a necessary strategy for success on our task. Better engagement of these regions for the long-allele homozygous adults allows for more accurate assessment of their memory retrieval. While the benefit of the long-allele homozygous genotype may not be limited to this process, this study indicates that there is a benefit for older adults who lack a short allele of the serotonin transporter gene during complex memory tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 Work was supported by The University of Texas at Austin (D.M. Schnyer), and grant 1S10RR023457-01A1 and Shared equipment grants (ShEEP) from the Medical Research Service of the Department of Veteran Affairs (J. E. McGeary). This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Institute on Aging. The authors also would like to thank the Fellows Editorial Board at the NIH for their editing assistance. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Allen-Burge 
 R 
 
 
 Storandt 
 M 
 
 
 Age equivalence in feeling-of-knowing experiences 
 The journals of gerontology Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences 
 2000 
 55 
 4 
 P214 
 P223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex 
 Trends in cognitive sciences 
 2004 
 8 
 4 
 170 
 177 
 15050513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Selection, integration, and conflict monitoring; assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal cognitive control mechanisms 
 Neuron 
 2004 
 41 
 3 
 473 
 487 
 14766185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Frontal lobe mechanisms that resolve proactive interference 
 Cerebral cortex (New York, NY: 1991) 
 2005 
 15 
 12 
 2003 
 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 13 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balota 
 D 
 
 
 Dolan 
 P 
 
 
 Duchek 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Memory changes in healthy older adults 
 Handbook of Memory 
 2000 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beevers 
 CG 
 
 
 Pacheco 
 J 
 
 
 Clasen 
 P 
 
 
 McGeary 
 JE 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 DM 
 
 
 Prefrontal morphology, 5- HTTLPR polymorphism and biased attention for emotional stimuli 
 Genes 
 2010 
 9 
 224 
 233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Burgess 
 GC 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 ARA 
 
 
 Jarrold 
 C 
 
 
 Kane 
 MJ 
 
 
 Miyake 
 A 
 
 
 Towse 
 JN 
 
 
 Explaining the many varieties of working memory variation: Dual mechanisms of cognitive control 
 Variation in working memory 
 2007 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional–Anatomic Correlates of Control Processes in Memory 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 2003 
 23 
 10 
 3999 
 4004 
 12764084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 The cognitive neuroscience of remembering 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2001 
 2 
 624 
 634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunnell 
 JK 
 
 
 Baken 
 DM 
 
 
 Richards-Ward 
 LA 
 
 
 The Effect Of Age On Metamemory For Working Memory 
 New Zealand Journal of Psychology 
 1999 
 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Hemispheric asymmetry reduction in older adults: The HAROLD model 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 1 
 85 
 100 
 11931290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Task-independent and Task-specific Age Effects on Brain Activity during Working Memory, Visual Attention and Episodic Retrieval 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 4 
 364 
 375 
 15028641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Anderson 
 ND 
 
 
 Locantore 
 JK 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Aging Gracefully: Compensatory Brain Activity in High-Performing Older Adults 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 17 
 3 
 1394 
 1402 
 12414279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Kapur 
 S 
 
 
 Jennings 
 JM 
 
 
 
 Age-related differences in neural activity during memory encoding and retrieval: a positron emission tomography study 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 1 
 Society for Neuroscience 
 391 
 400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Omura 
 K 
 
 
 Haas 
 BW 
 
 
 Fallgatter 
 A 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Lesch 
 KP 
 
 
 Beyond affect: a role for genetic variation of the serotonin transporter in neural activation during a cognitive attention task 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2005 
 102 
 34 
 National Acad Sciences 
 12224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caspi 
 A 
 
 
 Sugden 
 K 
 
 
 Moffitt 
 TE 
 
 
 Taylor 
 A 
 
 
 Craig 
 IW 
 
 
 Harrington 
 H 
 
 
 McClay 
 J 
 
 
 
 Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene 
 Science 
 2003 
 301 
 5631 
 386 
 389 
 12869766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Neural basis for recognition confidence in younger and older adults 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2009 
 24 
 1 
 139 
 153 
 19290745 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Understanding metamemory: neural correlates of the cognitive process and subjective level of confidence in recognition memory 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 29 
 4 
 1150 
 1160 
 16303318 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Memory, Amnesia, and the Hippocampal System 
 1993 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Connor 
 LT 
 
 
 Dunlosky 
 J 
 
 
 Hertzog 
 C 
 
 
 Age-related differences in absolute but not relative metamemory accuracy 
 Psychology and Aging 
 1997 
 12 
 1 
 50 
 71 
 9100268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Quervain 
 DJ-F 
 
 
 Henke 
 K 
 
 
 Aerni 
 A 
 
 
 Coluccia 
 D 
 
 
 Wollmer 
 MA 
 
 
 Hock 
 C 
 
 
 Nitsch 
 RM 
 
 
 
 A functional genetic variation of the 5-HT2a receptor affects human memory 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2003 
 6 
 11 
 1141 
 1142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dobbins 
 IG 
 
 
 Han 
 S 
 
 
 Cue-versus probe-dependent prefrontal cortex activity during contextual remembering 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dobbins 
 IG 
 
 
 Foley 
 H 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Executive control during episodic retrieval: multiple prefrontal processes subserve source memory 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 35 
 5 
 989 
 996 
 12372291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dodson 
 CS 
 
 
 Krueger 
 LE 
 
 
 I misremember it well: why older adults are unreliable eyewitnesses 
 Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 
 2006 
 13 
 5 
 770 
 775 
 17328371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dodson 
 CS 
 
 
 Bawa 
 S 
 
 
 Krueger 
 LE 
 
 
 Aging, Metamemory, and High-Confidence Errors: A Misrecollection Account 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2007a 
 22 
 1 
 122 
 133 
 17385989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dodson 
 CS 
 
 
 Bawa 
 S 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Aging, source memory, and misrecollections 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 
 2007b 
 33 
 1 
 169 
 181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dulas 
 MR 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 The Effects of Aging on Material-Independent and Material- Dependent Neural Correlates of Source Memory Retrieval 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2011 
 22 
 1 
 37 
 50 
 21616984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eakin 
 DK 
 
 
 Hertzog 
 C 
 
 
 Release from implicit interference in memory and metamemory: older adults know that they can't let go 
 The journals of gerontology Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences 
 2006 
 61 
 6 
 P340 
 P347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evers 
 EAT 
 
 
 Veen 
 FM 
 
 
 Deursen 
 JA 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 JAJ 
 
 
 Deutz 
 NEP 
 
 
 Jolles 
 J 
 
 
 The effect of acute tryptophan depletion on the BOLD response during performance monitoring and response inhibition in healthy male volunteers 
 Psychopharmacology 
 2006 
 187 
 2 
 200 
 208 
 16710715 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freeman 
 B 
 
 
 Powell 
 J 
 
 
 Ball 
 D 
 
 
 Hill 
 L 
 
 
 Craig 
 I 
 
 
 Plomin 
 R 
 
 
 DNA by mail: An inexpensive and noninvasive method for collecting DNA samples from widely dispersed populations 
 Behavior Genetics 
 1997 
 27 
 3 
 251 
 257 
 9210796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Cooney 
 JW 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Top-down suppression deficit underlies working memory impairment in normal aging 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2005 
 8 
 10 
 1298 
 1300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glisky 
 EL 
 
 
 Polster 
 MR 
 
 
 Routhieaux 
 BC 
 
 
 Double dissociation between item and source memory 
 Neuropsychology 
 1995 
 9 
 2 
 229 
 235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goh 
 JO 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Neuroplasticity and cognitive aging: The scaffolding theory of aging and cognition 
 Restorative neurology and neuroscience 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Halamish 
 V 
 
 
 McGillivray 
 S 
 
 
 Castel 
 AD 
 
 
 Monitoring one's own forgetting in younger and older adults 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2011 
 26 
 3 
 631 
 635 
 21463057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Serotonin Transporter Genetic Variation and the Response of the Human Amygdala 
 Science 
 2002 
 297 
 5580 
 400 
 403 
 12130784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hashtroudi 
 S 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Chrosniak 
 LD 
 
 
 Aging and source monitoring 
 Psychology and Aging 
 1989 
 4 
 1 
 106 
 112 
 2803603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hertzog 
 C 
 
 
 Kidder 
 DP 
 
 
 Powell-Moman 
 A 
 
 
 Dunlosky 
 J 
 
 
 Aging and monitoring associative learning: Is monitoring accuracy spared or impaired? 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 2 
 209 
 225 
 12061407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hertzog 
 C 
 
 
 Sinclair 
 SM 
 
 
 Dunlosky 
 J 
 
 
 Age differences in the monitoring of learning: Cross-sectional evidence of spared resolution across the adult life span 
 Developmental Psychology 
 2010 
 46 
 4 
 939 
 948 
 20604613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hirshorn 
 EA 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Role of the left inferior frontal gyrus in covert word retrieval: Neural correlates of switching during verbal fluency 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 12 
 2547 
 2557 
 16725162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hu 
 X 
 
 
 Oroszi 
 G 
 
 
 Chun 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 TL 
 
 
 Goldman 
 D 
 
 
 Schuckit 
 MA 
 
 
 An expanded evaluation of the relationship of four alleles to the level of response to alcohol and the alcoholism risk 
 Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research 
 2005 
 29 
 1 
 Wiley Online Library 
 8 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isingrini 
 M 
 
 
 Perrotin 
 A 
 
 
 Souchay 
 C 
 
 
 Aging, metamemory regulation and executive functioning 
 Progress in brain research 
 2008 
 169 
 377 
 392 
 18394488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelley 
 CM 
 
 
 Sahakyan 
 L 
 
 
 Memory, monitoring, and control in the attainment of memory accuracy 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2003 
 48 
 4 
 704 
 721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kikyo 
 H 
 
 
 Ohki 
 K 
 
 
 Miyashita 
 Y 
 
 
 Neural Correlates for Feeling-of-Knowing: An fMRI Parametric Analysis 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 35 
 177 
 185 
 12367516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirchhoff 
 BA 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional-Anatomic Correlates of Individual Differences in Memory 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 51 
 2 
 263 
 274 
 16846860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koppel 
 J 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 T 
 
 
 The genetics of episodic memory 
 Cognitive neuropsychiatry 
 2009 
 14 
 4 
 356 
 376 
 19634035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2009 
 12 
 5 
 535 
 540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kroll 
 NEA 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Metcalfe 
 J 
 
 
 Wolf 
 ES 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Cohesion failure as a source of memory illusions 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1996 
 35 
 176 
 196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lamar 
 M 
 
 
 Cutter 
 WJ 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Daly 
 EM 
 
 
 Craig 
 MC 
 
 
 Cleare 
 AJ 
 
 
 
 5-HT, prefrontal function and aging: fMRI of inhibition and acute tryptophan depletion 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 2009 
 30 
 7 
 1135 
 1146 
 18061310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Langenecker 
 SA 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 SE 
 
 
 Guidotti 
 LM 
 
 
 Briceno 
 EM 
 
 
 Own 
 LS 
 
 
 Hooven 
 T 
 
 
 Young 
 EA 
 
 
 
 Frontal and limbic activation during inhibitory control predicts treatment response in major depressive disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2007 
 62 
 11 
 1272 
 1280 
 17585888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lench 
 N 
 
 
 Stanier 
 P 
 
 
 Williamson 
 R 
 
 
 Simple Non-Invasive Method to Obtain Dna for Gene Analysis 
 Lancet 
 1988 
 1 
 8599 
 1356 
 1358 
 2898042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 BL 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Feeling-of-knowing in episodic memory: an event-related fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 18 
 827 
 836 
 12725759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marini 
 S 
 
 
 Bagnoli 
 S 
 
 
 Bessi 
 V 
 
 
 Tedde 
 A 
 
 
 Bracco 
 L 
 
 
 Sorbi 
 S 
 
 
 Nacmias 
 B 
 
 
 Implication of serotonin-transporter (5-HTT) gene polymorphism in subjective memory complaints and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
 Archives of gerontology and geriatrics 
 2011 
 52 
 2 
 e71 
 e74 
 20599283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marquié 
 JC 
 
 
 Huet 
 N 
 
 
 Age differences in feeling-of-knowing and confidence judgments as a function of knowledge domain 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2000 
 15 
 3 
 American Psychological Association 
 451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marsh 
 RL 
 
 
 Hicks 
 JL 
 
 
 Cook 
 GI 
 
 
 Mayhorn 
 CB 
 
 
 Comparing Older and Younger Adults in an Event-Based Prospective Memory Paradigm Containing an Output Monitoring Component 
 Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition 
 2007 
 14 
 2 
 168 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntyre 
 JS 
 
 
 Craik 
 FI 
 
 
 Age differences in memory for item and source information 
 Canadian Journal of Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie 
 1987 
 41 
 2 
 175 
 192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKenzie 
 EC 
 
 
 Salted Peanuts: 1800 Little Known Facts 
 1976 
 New York 
 Signet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meulenbelt 
 I 
 
 
 Droog 
 S 
 
 
 Trommelen 
 G 
 
 
 Boomsma 
 D 
 
 
 Slagboom 
 P 
 
 
 High-Yield Noninvasive Human Genomic Dna Isolation Method for Genetic-Studies in Geographically Dispersed Families and Populations 
 American Journal of Human Genetics 
 1995 
 57 
 5 
 1252 
 1254 
 7485180 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 KJ 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Source monitoring 15 years later: what have we learned from fMRI about the neural mechanisms of source memory? 
 Psychological bulletin 
 2009 
 135 
 4 
 638 
 677 
 19586165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Rosenbaum 
 RS 
 
 
 Gilboa 
 A 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Westmacott 
 R 
 
 
 Grady 
 C 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory: a unified account based on multiple trace theory 
 Journal of anatomy 
 2005 
 207 
 1 
 35 
 66 
 16011544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 FC 
 
 
 Smith 
 KA 
 
 
 Cowen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 BJ 
 
 
 The effects of tryptophan depletion on cognitive and affective processing in healthy volunteers 
 Psychopharmacology 
 2002 
 163 
 1 
 Springer 
 42 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Naveh-Benjamin 
 M 
 
 
 Guez 
 J 
 
 
 Kilb 
 A 
 
 
 Reedy 
 S 
 
 
 The associative memory deficit of older adults: further support using face-name associations 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2004 
 19 
 3 
 541 
 546 
 15383004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Neural correlates of access to short-term memory 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2008 
 105 
 37 
 14228 
 14233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Interference resolution: Insights from a meta-analysis of neuroimaging tasks 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2007 
 7 
 1 
 1 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 False recognition in younger and older adults: Exploring the characteristics of illusory memories 
 Memory and Cognition 
 1997 
 25 
 6 
 Springer 
 838 
 848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Hara 
 R 
 
 
 Schröder 
 CM 
 
 
 Mahadevan 
 R 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Lindley 
 S 
 
 
 Fox 
 S 
 
 
 Weiner 
 M 
 
 
 
 Serotonin transporter polymorphism, memory and hippocampal volume in the elderly: association and interaction with cortisol 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 2007 
 12 
 6 
 544 
 555 
 17353910 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pacheco 
 J 
 
 
 Beevers 
 CG 
 
 
 Benavides 
 C 
 
 
 McGeary 
 J 
 
 
 Stice 
 E 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 DM 
 
 
 Frontal-limbic white matter pathway associations with the serotonin transporter gene promoter region (5-HTTLPR) polymorphism 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 19 
 6229 
 6233 
 19439600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pansky 
 A 
 
 
 Goldsmith 
 M 
 
 
 Koriat 
 A 
 
 
 Pearlman-Avnion 
 S 
 
 
 Memory accuracy in old age: Cognitive, metacognitive, and neurocognitive determinants 
 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 
 2009 
 21 
 2–3 
 303 
 329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 P 
 
 
 The Adaptive Brain: Aging and Neurocognitive Scaffolding 
 Annual review of psychology 
 2009 
 60 
 1 
 173 
 196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Lautenschlager 
 G 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Davidson 
 NS 
 
 
 Smith 
 AD 
 
 
 Smith 
 PK 
 
 
 Models of visuospatial and verbal memory across the adult life span 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 2 
 299 
 320 
 12061414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perez-Garcia 
 G 
 
 
 Meneses 
 A 
 
 
 Memory formation, amnesia, improved memory and reversed amnesia: 5-HT role 
 Behavioural brain research 
 2008 
 195 
 1 
 17 
 29 
 18221797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Functional Specialization for Semantic and Phonological Processing in the Left Inferior Prefrontal Cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 10 
 1 
 15 
 35 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Porter 
 RJ 
 
 
 Lunn 
 BS 
 
 
 O'Brien 
 JT 
 
 
 Effects of acute tryptophan depletion on cognitive function in Alzheimer's disease and in the healthy elderly 
 Psychological medicine 
 2003 
 33 
 1 
 41 
 49 
 12537035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rast 
 P 
 
 
 Zimprich 
 D 
 
 
 Age Differences in the Underconfidence-With-Practice Effect 
 Experimental aging research 
 2009 
 35 
 4 
 400 
 431 
 20183099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 N 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Aging of the brain and its impact on Cognitive Performance: Integration of structural and functional fidnings 
 The Handbook of aging and cognition 
 2000 
 The handbook of aging and cognition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 Cappell 
 KA 
 
 
 Neurocognitive Aging and the Compensation Hypothesis 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 2008 
 17 
 3 
 177 
 182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Lee 
 F 
 
 
 Cleare 
 AJ 
 
 
 Tunstall 
 N 
 
 
 Fu 
 CHY 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 McGuire 
 P 
 
 
 Tryptophan depletion reduces right inferior prefrontal activation during response inhibition in fast, event-related fMRI 
 Psychopharmacology 
 2005 
 179 
 4 
 791 
 803 
 15887056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Henson 
 RNA 
 
 
 The neural basis of episodic memory: evidence from functional neuroimaging 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
 2002 
 357 
 1424 
 1097 
 1110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Gross 
 MS 
 
 
 Angell 
 KE 
 
 
 False recollection induced by photographs: A comparison of older and younger adults 
 Psychology and Aging 
 1997 
 12 
 2 
 American Psychological Association 
 203 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 DM 
 
 
 Nicholls 
 L 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 The role of VMPC in metamemorial judgments of content retrievability 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 2005 
 17 
 5 
 832 
 846 
 15904549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 DM 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 Alexander 
 MP 
 
 
 LaFleche 
 G 
 
 
 Nicholls 
 L 
 
 
 Kaszniak 
 AW 
 
 
 A role for right medial prefontal cortex in accurate feeling-of-knowing judgements: evidence from patients with lesions to frontal cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2004 
 42 
 7 
 957 
 966 
 14998710 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheline 
 YI 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Moerlein 
 SM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Greater Loss of 5-HT2A Receptors in Midlife Than in Late Life 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 2002 
 159 
 3 
 Am Psychiatric Assoc. 
 430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shimamura 
 A 
 
 
 Neuropsychological perspectives on memory and cognitive decline in normal human aging 
 Seminars in the Neurosciences 
 1994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Dodson 
 CS 
 
 
 Bell 
 D 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Specific- and Partial-Source Memory: Effects of Aging 
 Psychology and Aging 
 2004 
 19 
 4 
 689 
 694 
 15584793 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitz 
 E 
 
 
 Moutier 
 R 
 
 
 Reed 
 T 
 
 
 Busnel 
 M 
 
 
 Marchaland 
 C 
 
 
 Roubertoux 
 P 
 
 
 Carlier 
 M 
 
 
 Comparative diagnoses of twin zygosity by SSLP variant analysis, questionnaire, and dermatoglyphic analysis 
 Behavior Genetics 
 1996 
 26 
 1 
 55 
 63 
 8852732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans 
 Psychological Review 
 1992 
 99 
 2 
 195 
 231 
 1594723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuss 
 D 
 
 
 Neuropsychological studies of the frontal lobes 
 Psychological bulletin 
 1984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 RF 
 
 
 The frontal lobes and the regulation of mental activity 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2005 
 15 
 2 
 219 
 224 
 15831406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Jacoby 
 LL 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Evidence for Frontally Mediated Controlled Processing Differences in Older Adults 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2006 
 17 
 5 
 1033 
 1046 
 16774962 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Bjork 
 RA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Prefrontal contributions to executive control: fMRI evidence for functional distinctions within lateral prefrontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2001a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Bjork 
 RA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Prefrontal Contributions to Executive Control: fMRI Evidence for Functional Distinctions within Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2001b 
 14 
 6 
 1337 
 1347 
 11707089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Parietal lobe contributions to episodic memory retrieval 
 Trends in cognitive sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 9 
 445 
 453 
 16054861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wais 
 PE 
 
 
 Kim 
 OY 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Distractibility during Episodic Retrieval Is Exacerbated by Perturbation of Left Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Walderhaug 
 E 
 
 
 Lunde 
 H 
 
 
 Nordvik 
 JE 
 
 
 Landrø 
 N 
 
 
 Refsum 
 H 
 
 
 Magnusson 
 A 
 
 
 Lowering of serotonin by rapid tryptophan depletion increases impulsiveness in normal individuals 
 Psychopharmacology 
 2002 
 164 
 4 
 385 
 391 
 12457268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West 
 RL 
 
 
 An application of prefrontal cortex function theory to cognitive aging 
 Psychological bulletin 
 1996 
 120 
 2 
 American Psychological Association 
 272 
 292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Worsley 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 Jezzard 
 P 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Functional MRI: An introduction to methods 
 Statistical analysis of activation images 
 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young 
 SN 
 
 
 Ervin 
 FR 
 
 
 Pihl 
 RO 
 
 
 Finn 
 P 
 
 
 Biochemical aspects of tryptophan depletion in primates 
 Psychopharmacology 
 1989 
 98 
 4 
 508 
 511 
 2505291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic of the source memory task 
 Panel  a.  depicts the study phase, during which the scanner was not running. Subjects saw a total of 24 unique sentences per study run, each separated by a variable fixation cross (3, 5, or 7 seconds). Responses to this phase were only used to ensure encoding of the sentences. Panel  b . depicts the test phase, when fMRI scans were collected. Subjects saw 20 of the previous sentences and 10 new sentences, presented in random order. Included in this phase were 10 control trials, distributed randomly, where the subjects were asked to indicate on which side (right or left) a red x appears. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Accuracy rates for item and source memory and memory monitoring 
 Panel  a  shows accuracy rates for item and source memory – younger adults (YA; shown in light gray), older adult (OA) long allele homozygotes (LL; shown in dark gray), and older adult s-allele carriers (S-car; shown in stripes). Between the two OA groups, a significant interaction exists between memory and group, showing the OA S-car are significantly worse at source memory. Similarly, panel  b  shows the accuracy rates for item and source memory monitoring. Again, a significant interaction exists between memory and group. It should be noted that in panels  a  and  b  there is no significant differences between YA and OA L/L groups. Error bars represent the standard error. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Source memory neural network for younger adults 
 Using an omnibus contrast to look at all the source memory questions (regardless of whether they were answered accurately or not) compared to the control task reveals a network of regions known to be involved in source memory. Regions include: medial and lateral portions of the PFC, and parietal lobe. Images are corrected for multiple comparison using a clustering approach where clusters were determined by  z  > 2.3 with a corrected cluster significance threshold of  p  < 0.05. This map of source memory was used in subsequent analyses, to constrain the statistical search. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Overlap of accurate memory monitoring neural network in younger and older adults 
 A contrast of accurate memory monitoring responses verses the control task was run separately for younger and older adults; both revealed regions of significant activation in the inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, and anterior paracingulate cortex. There is a great deal of overlap, shown in yellow, between the younger and older adults and the map shows that the older adult (OA) activation is completely within the boundaries of the younger adult (YA) activation. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Cortical regions of significantly greater activation for LL compared to S-car during accurate memory monitoring 
 Allele differences in activation in the older group were analyzed within the source memory network (analysis was constrained with the source memory mask). The resulting contrast revealed regions of the left lateral IFG (BA 44 and 45), the left dorsolateral PFC (BA 9), and the paracingulate gyrus that show significantly more activation for the LL group during accurate monitoring responses than for the S-car group. It should be noted that accurate monitoring is irrespective of memory success; accurate monitoring includes both times when the subject felt highly confident and got the source correct as well as times when the subject felt less confident and got the source incorrect. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Neural  r egions of overlap between younger adults and older adult LL homozygotes during accurate memory monitoring 
 Whole brain analysis within the younger group (shown in red) was done to uncover regions of significant activation for accurate memory monitoring. The regions revealed a great deal of overlap (shown in yellow) with the regions revealed for analyses comparing long-allele homozygotes (LL) to short-allele carriers (S-car) for accurate monitoring responses (shown in blue). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Neural responses in functionally defined PFC ROIs 
 Out of a total of 5 functionally defined bilateral ROIs that were examined, 2 regions of PFC showed differences in the level of activation during accurate memory monitoring as compared to the control task. Bar graphs show percent signal change for correct high confidence source monitoring judgments in all three groups for regions of the left and right inferior frontal gyrus and pars triangularis. Bilaterally for the inferior frontal gyrus, the LL group shows a significantly greater percent signal increases when compared to the S-car and YA groups ( p < 0.05 ). In the left pars triangularis, the LL group has a significantly greater percent signal increase than the YA group ( p < 0.05 ). The data are consistent with the view that the LL group may be recruiting homologous right hemisphere regions along with greater recruitment of the left hemisphere to aide in task success. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Repeated Measures ANOVA results for OA vs. YA and LL vs. S-car 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OA vs. YA 
 LL vs. S-car 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean Square 
 F(37) 
 Mean Square 
 F(22) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Memory Performance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Memory Type 
 1.094 
 247.54  ‡ 
 0.903 
 202.795  ‡ 
 
 
   Memory Type × Group 
 0.058 
 13.01  ‡ 
 0.016 
 3.696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monitoring Performance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Memory Type 
 0.537 
 63.70  ‡ 
 0.344 
 50.30  ‡ 
 
 
   Memory Type × Group 
 0.065 
 7.76 * 
 0.085 
 12.38 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 p <0.01; 
 
 
 ** 
 p <0.005; 
 
 
 ‡ 
 p <0.001 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Clusters of YA Source Memory Network 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Regions 
 Hemisphere 
 Voxels 
 Max Z-stat 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal Pole 
 L 
 536 
 5.27 
 −32 
 58 
 12 
 
 
 Paracingulate/Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 midline 
 463 
 4.8 
 −6 
 14 
 50 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus - operculum/triangularis 
 L 
 162 
 4.15 
 −48 
 18 
 14 
 
 
 Frontal Orbital Cortex/Insula 
 L 
 117 
 4.07 
 −36 
 24 
 −6 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex/Angular Gyrus 
 L 
 40 
 4.2 
 −30 
 −66 
 56 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus/Precentral Gyrus 
 L 
 25 
 3.65 
 −48 
 −4 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels: number of activated voxels per cluster; Max Z-stat: maximum z statistic for each cluster; x, y, z are MNI coordinates for the peak of each cluster 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Clusters of LL verses S-car for Accurate Memory Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Regions 
 Hemisphere 
 Voxels 
 Max Z-stat 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Paracingulate/Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 midline 
 278 
 3.04 
 47 
 75 
 55 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus - triangularis 
 L 
 123 
 2.83 
 68 
 76 
 40 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus/Precentral Gyrus 
 L 
 25 
 2.55 
 65 
 64 
 61 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus - operculum 
 L 
 19 
 2.47 
 64 
 71 
 46 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus - triangularis 
 L 
 11 
 2.45 
 62 
 90 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels: number of activated voxels per cluster; Max Z-stat: maximum z statistic for each cluster; x, y, z are MNI coordinates for the peak of each cluster 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 5-HTTLPR genotype potentially beneficial to source memory monitoring in older adults. 
 
 
 Older adults with L/L profile perform similarly to younger adults on task. 
 
 
 Activation of key PFC regions is also related with increased task performance. 
 
 
 The short allele is associated with lower performance and less PFC recruitment. 
 
 
 
 
