
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8102140 
 5035 
 J Neurosci 
 J. Neurosci. 
 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 
 0270-6474 
 1529-2401 
 
 
 22745498 
 3392686 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0536-12.2012 
 NIHMS389573 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Global connectivity of prefrontal cortex predicts cognitive control and intelligence 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 Michael W. 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 Tal 
 
 
 
 
 Repovs 
 Grega 
 
 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 Alan 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 Todd S. 
 
 
 
 
 Author contact info:  Michael W. Cole,  mwcole@mwcole.net , Washington University, One Brookings Dr., Campus Box 1125, St. Louis, MO 63130 
 
 
 28 
 6 
 2012 
 
 
 27 
 6 
 2012 
 
 
 27 
 12 
 2012 
 
 32 
 26 
 8988 
 8999 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Control of thought and behavior is fundamental to human intelligence. Evidence suggests a fronto-parietal brain network implements such cognitive control across diverse contexts. We identify a mechanism – global connectivity – by which components of this network might coordinate control of other networks. A lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) region’s activity was found to predict performance in a high control demand working memory task, and also to exhibit high global connectivity. Critically, global connectivity in this LPFC region, involving connections both within and outside the fronto-parietal network, showed a highly selective relationship with individual differences in fluid intelligence. These findings suggest LPFC is a global hub with a brain-wide influence that facilitates the ability to implement control processes central to human intelligence. 
 
 
 prefrontal cortex 
 global connectivity 
 cognitive control 
 graph theory 
 functional connectivity 
 intelligence 
 fluid reasoning 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH066078 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Solving the problems of everyday life requires effective control of thought and behavior. This is most evident when such cognitive control breaks down. For instance, individuals with brain lesions in lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) have difficulty with common tasks such as planning and executing grocery shopping trips ( Shallice and Burgess, 1991 ). Even healthy individuals are limited in their capacity for cognitive control, as measured by indices such as working memory capacity and general fluid intelligence (gF) ( Conway et al., 2002 ). This ‘cognitive control capacity’ appears to be highly general and life-relevant, predicting important outcomes such as academic and vocational success ( Engle et al., 1999 ;  Gottfredson and Saklofske, 2009 ). 
 Recent evidence suggests cognitive control capacity may be supported by whole-brain network properties. For instance,  van den Heuvel et al. (2009a)  found that individuals with higher intelligence had more efficient  whole-brain  network organization. More recently, we found that a  specific  fronto-parietal brain network thought to underlie cognitive control capacity ( Cole and Schneider, 2007 ;  Duncan, 2010 ) has especially high global connectivity ( Cole et al., 2010a ). In contrast to the whole-brain network property account (and accounts that emphasize specific connections among regions), this suggests  global  connectivity of  specific  control regions may be important for cognitive control capacity. This would allow for a mechanism by which specific control regions can access and influence other relevant networks (such as sensory-motor networks involved in task-relevant processing) to adaptively monitor and regulate ongoing behavior ( Dehaene et al., 1998 ;  Miller and Cohen, 2001 ). 
 In the current study we utilized a recently developed graph theoretic approach to neuroimaging data sometimes referred to as global brain connectivity (GBC) or weighted degree centrality ( Cole et al., 2010a ;  Cole et al., 2011 ;  Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ). This approach enabled consideration and characterization of specific regions’ full range of connectivity – including connections outside the canonical fronto-parietal control network – allowing us to comprehensively examine the role of each region’s global connectivity in human cognitive control and intelligence. 
 We tested our hypothesis – that cognitive control capacity is supported by the global connectivity of specific control network regions – using a convergent approach involving analyses of both task-related and resting-state functional MRI data. First, we identified regions meeting stringent criteria for involvement in cognitive control using the N-back task – a benchmark probe of working memory and cognitive control ( Braver et al., 1997 ). Second, we used resting-state functional MRI data to test if these regions had high GBC relative to the rest of the brain. Finally, we determined if the GBC in any of these regions predicted individuals’ intelligence and cognitive control abilities. This final test is critical, because a demonstration that a given brain region has both reliable involvement in control and high GBC does not necessitate that the global connectivity of such a region has a functional role in supporting cognitive control capacity. Indeed, we found that the GBC of most regions meeting these criteria could not reliably predict intelligence. This suggests that there may be a unique set of brain regions that utilize brain-wide connectivity as a central mechanism for supporting cognitive control and intelligence. 
 
 
 MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
 Participants 
 The data presented here were collected as part of a larger, multifaceted study. Individuals participated in three separate sessions, spaced a few days to a few weeks apart, to complete personality tests, mood questionnaires, neuropsychological tests, and the N-back fMRI scanner task. The first session was 3 hours long and involved answering several standard paper-and-pencil questionnaires; the second was 2 hours long and involved answering computerized questionnaires and cognitive tasks; the third was 2.5 hours long, and involved an fMRI scan of the N-back task. The Raven Advanced Progressive Matrices – Set II ( Raven et al., 1998 ) and The Cattell Culture Fair Test ( Cattell et al., 1973 ) were included in the first session as measures of gF. The standard scoring procedures for each test were used to compute measures from these tests. Data from these participants have been used in other articles to address questions distinct from those in the current study ( Fales et al., 2008 ;  Shamosh et al., 2008 ;  DeYoung et al., 2009 ;  DeYoung et al., 2010 ;  Burgess et al., 2011 ). 
 121 participants (70 female; mean age = 23, range = 18 – 40) were recruited from the undergraduate population at Washington University (n = 60) or surrounding communities and received financial remuneration for their participation. The experiment was approved by the Washington University Institutional Review Board. 
 Participants were eliminated from N-back task-based analyses if they showed unusually poor performance, as indicated by multivariate analysis (Mahalanobis distance; indexed across 6 variables that coded the proportion of incorrect responses and response omissions for each type of trial). Five participants were eliminated on the basis of this criterion (Mahalanobis distance of greater than 22.46, reflecting the corresponding Chi-square value at p < .001, with 6 degrees of freedom). A further 13 participants were eliminated due to at least one incomplete or missing BOLD scan, or due to computer failure resulting in a loss of behavioral data. Finally, because the task analysis required that at least one error be committed on each type of 3-back trial, 10 participants who performed perfectly on novel trials were excluded. All results in the task analyses are therefore reported for 93 participants. 
 For the resting-state functional connectivity analyses, 13 participants were removed from analysis because they had one or more incomplete or missing BOLD scan. Further, because a Freesurfer gray matter mask was used for computing GBC for each participant, 14 participants with poor quality anatomical images (and resulting poor quality gray matter masks) were removed. We included 94 participants for the reported connectivity analyses. The different exclusion criteria for task-based and rest-based analyses resulted in 78 participants overlapping across analyses. The lack of complete overlap in the two samples might be considered statistically beneficial, as this increased statistical independence between the task-based activity and the rest-based connectivity results. In-house software was used for task activation analyses, while AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ) and R ( R Development Core Team, 2009 ) were used for connectivity analyses. In the sample of 94 participants used for most of the analyses, the mean age was 22, with standard deviation 4.7, and range 18–39. 
 
 
 3-back Task 
 The 3-back task was administered using PsyScope (Cohen et al., 1993) on a Macintosh G3 (Apple Computer, Cupertino, CA, USA). Participants performed a standard version of the task that has been used in several previous studies of working memory ( Gray and Braver, 2002 ;  Gray et al., 2002 ;  Gray et al., 2003 ;  Gray et al., 2005 ;  Schaefer et al., 2006 ;  Yarkoni et al., 2009 ). Stimuli (either words or faces) were displayed sequentially on a screen. Participants were instructed to respond with their right index finger if the current stimulus matched the stimulus presented 3 trials back (target response), and with their right middle finger if the current stimulus was different (nontarget response). 3-back trials were classified into 3 types: novel, target, and lure. Each participant’s behavioral performance was assessed by computing their mean accuracy rate separately for each trial type. 
 On  Novel  trials (52% of all trials), the presented item was completely novel to the participant, and had not been previously presented. On  Target  trials (32%), the presented item was the same as the one presented 3 trials previously. On  Lure  trials (16%), the current item had been presented at least once before, but had not been presented exactly 3 trials back. The tension between targets and lures presented the main source of difficulty in the task. In theory, the inclusion of lure trials should prevent participants from simply using a recognition-based strategy and classifying any previously seen item as a target. In practice, however, participants performing the N-back often use a heuristic approach that allows for a combination of familiarity-based and control-based responding (cf.  Kane et al., 2007 ), implying that the results of many N-back studies may reflect the aggregate action of several very different cognitive processes. 
 For a given scanning run, stimuli were either all faces (unfamiliar, attractive males and females intermixed, either neutral or smiling) or all words (concrete English nouns with neutral content, e.g. rooster, elbow, steel, fence, ball, tooth). These stimuli were used in a number of previous studies ( Braver et al., 2001 ;  Gray et al., 2002 ;  Gray et al., 2003 ). Each stimulus was presented individually for 2.0s, with a fixation point (cross-hair) shown between stimuli. The task was presented in 6 scanning runs, each consisting of 2 blocks of 32 task trials randomly interspersed with 18 variable inter-trial intervals (ITIs) included in order to facilitate deconvolution of event-related responses. Task blocks were also preceded and followed by 15-frame blocks of resting fixation, for a total of 45 fixation frames per run. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Acquisition and Preprocessing 
 Whole-brain images were acquired on a 3 Tesla Allegra System (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Structural images were acquired using a magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-echo (MP-RAGE) T1-weighted sequence. Functional images were acquired using an asymmetric spin-echo echo-planar sequence sensitive to blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) magnetic susceptibility (TR = 2360 ms., TE = 50 ms., flip = 90°). Each scanning run gave 149 sets of brain volumes (32 contiguous, 4 mm thick axial images, 4 × 4 mm in-plane resolution). 
 Preprocessing was conducted separately for the general linear model (GLM) and functional connectivity (fcMRI) analyses. For the GLM analysis, functional images were corrected for movement, normalized within each scanning run, and temporally aligned within each brain volume. Next, images were then transformed into atlas space ( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ) and smoothed with a Gaussian filter (6 mm FWHM) before statistical analysis. 
 For the resting-state fcMRI analysis, functional images were extracted from the rest periods between task blocks using a previously validated method ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Although there are some criticisms of using signal between task blocks as rest ( Barnes et al., 2009 ), we minimized these concerns in the following way (see Discussion for further consideration of this issue): We used rest images that were 14.16 seconds (6 frames) or more past the end of every task block and 4.72 seconds (2 frames) or fewer into the start of every task block. Further, mean signal amplitude for each rest block was subtracted for each voxel prior to rest block concatenation. There were 3 rest blocks per run, resulting in 35 rest frames per run (after removing the first 5 frames of each run). There were 8.26 minutes of rest total (across the 6 runs) per participant. 
 These resting-state functional images were further preprocessed with the following steps: 1) slice-time correction, 2) removal of first five images from each run to reach steady state, 3) rigid body motion correction, 4) bandpass filtering (0.009< f(t) <0.08), 5) removal of a set of nuisance regressors including signals from the ventricles, deep white matter, whole brain average, motion correction parameters, and first derivatives of these regressors, 6) additional removal of local white matter (using 16 mm radii spheres) nuisance regressors on a voxel-wise basis (ANATICOR) ( Jo et al., 2010 ), and 7) smoothing with a 6-mm spherical dilation of gray matter voxels (to avoid averaging non-brain voxel noise with the gray matter). These steps helped to ensure that spurious signal confounds did not impact our results. Finally, following GBC processing but prior to group analysis, the images were transformed into atlas space ( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ). 
 
 
 fMRI GLM Analysis 
 The regions of interest (ROIs) were identified using a GLM data analysis approach ( Friston et al., 1995 ). Because the experiment was designed for a mixed blocked/event-related analysis ( Visscher et al., 2003 ;  Dosenbach et al., 2006 ), separate regressors were used to estimate sustained (i.e., blocked) and transient (i.e., event-related) activation. Sustained activation during task blocks relative to fixation periods was modeled with an assumed response shape by convolving a boxcar with a model hemodynamic response function. Event-related effects were estimated empirically using a basis set of finite impulse response (FIR) regressors. Each event-related effect was modeled using a set of 7 staggered regressors spanning a total epoch duration of 16.52s. All analyses were conducted on summary magnitude estimates obtained by averaging the signal at the 3 rd , 4 th , and 5 th  time points of each time course (i.e., the expected peak of activation). 
 Six different event-related effects of interest were modeled in the GLM, representing separate coding of correct and incorrect responses for each of the three different trial types (i.e., correct novel trials, incorrect novel trials, correct target trials, etc.). This approach enabled us to analyze the data using a 3 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with trial type and accuracy as factors. In addition to the six effects of interest, each GLM contained a number of covariates of no interest, including (i) six covariates coding for experimental condition at the block level (reflecting a 2 × 3 factorial combination of stimulus type and mood induction valence); (ii) a parametric covariate coding for trial-by-trial differences in reaction time, in order to control for time-on-task effects ( Yarkoni et al., 2009 ); (iii) a covariate coding all trials with omitted response separately (mean = 3.1% of all trials, sd = 3.2%); (iv) onset and offset covariates that modeled the initiation and termination of each block of trials in order to control for reliable task-independent activation that occurs at the start and end of task blocks ( Dosenbach et al., 2006 ); and (v) nuisance regressors modeling separate intercepts and linear trends for each BOLD run. 
 For all within-subject analyses, brain regions were identified using whole-brain paired t-tests that compared activation at each voxel between conditions of interest. For individual differences in N-back performance, we conducted a whole-brain correlation analysis between mean response accuracy and task-related activation. Because individual differences analyses typically have substantially lower power to detect effects than within-subject analyses ( Braver et al., 2010a ;  Yarkoni et al., 2010 ), we sought to improve signal-to-noise by averaging both response accuracy and brain activation across all trial types (i.e., Novel, Target, and Lure) prior to analysis. 
 Statistical maps were corrected for multiple comparisons using a whole-brain false discovery rate (FDR;  Nichols and Hayasaka, 2003 ) threshold of .05, and a cluster-wise (extent) threshold of 9 or more contiguous statistically significant voxels. For the subsequent conjunction analysis that sought to identify regions common to multiple contrasts, all maps included in each conjunction were individually corrected for multiple comparisons prior to masking ( Nichols et al., 2005 ). 
 For visualization purposes, statistical maps were mapped onto a three-dimensional representation of the cortical surface (the PALS atlas;  Van Essen, 2005 ) using Caret software ( Van Essen et al., 2001 ;  http://brainmap.wustl.edu/caret ). 
 
 
 GBC Analyses 
 A region’s GBC was computed as the average connectivity of that region with the rest of the brain (equivalent to unthresholded weighted degree centrality) ( Cole et al., 2010a ). Several studies have used unthresholded weighted degree centrality in the past as well (e.g.,  Cole and Schneider, 2007 ;  Langer et al., 2011 ;  Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ). Analyses were restricted to each subject’s individual gray matter mask (dilated by one functional voxel to accommodate spatial smoothing of functional data), obtained using Freesurfer ( Fischl et al., 2002 ). The brain-wide GBC analyses were performed in the following steps for each volume of interest (either a region or voxel): 1) A correlation was obtained with each voxel’s resting-state time series (excluding itself), 2) The correlations were transformed to Fisher z (Fz) values, and 3) All (positive, negative, or absolute value) correlations were averaged together to produce a GBC value. Voxel-wise GBC maps were computed using AFNI’s 3dTcorrMap, while GBC with an ROI was computed using custom scripts running AFNI’s 3dDeconvolve, 3dcalc, and 3dmaskave ( Cox, 1996 ). For the ROI analyses, connectivity was based on correlations with the average of the time series from all within-region voxels. 
 Importantly, we never averaged positive and negative connections, given that mixed positive and negative values could cancel each other (e.g., averaging .2 and −.2). Instead, for analyses using positive connections each subject’s negative connections were excluded. Similarly, for analyses using negative connections each subject’s positive connections were excluded. All voxels were included for analyses using absolute values. Note that the main GBC analysis ( Figure 2 ) used positive connections only, given the current controversy regarding negative connections ( Fox et al., 2009 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ), though the LPFC ROI effects were also significant for the negative-only and absolute value analyses. 
 The ‘top 10% GBC’ analyses were conducted by identifying the voxels with GBC higher than 90% of the gray matter voxels ( Cole et al., 2010a ;  Lynall et al., 2010 ;  Fornito et al., 2011 ). Top percentages were calculated as the number of voxels with higher GBC than the region, divided by the total number of voxels in the brain. 
 For individual differences correlations, each volume’s (either a region’s or voxel’s) GBC was extracted for each subject and a correlation was computed based on individual variability in this measure and in the composite gF behavioral measure (using AFNI’s 3dRegAna). For the whole-brain GBC analyses, the statistical map was thresholded at p<0.01 uncorrected, then corrected for multiple comparisons (family-wise error) to p<0.05 using a cluster threshold. AFNI’s AlphaSim ( Cox, 1996 ) was used to compute a cluster size threshold of 16 voxels based on 10,000 Monte Carlo simulations. These simulations used a group gray matter mask (gray matter mask voxels with overlap across at least 50% of subjects), and image smoothness for the simulations was estimated using AFNI’s 3dFWHMx. 
 
 
 Restricted GBC Analyses 
 We assessed the origin of the LPFC connectivity-gF correlation by re-calculating this correlation for each in a series of connectivity strength ranges. LPFC’s group average connectivity map (excluding voxels within LPFC itself) was used to define the across-voxel strength ranges, starting at an Fz of 0 and going up and down in increments of .05 until only a small number of voxels remained. Note that these are subsets of the full absolute value LPFC GBC-gF analysis (p=.002), such that multiple comparisons are controlled for using the logic of the protected Fisher’s least significant difference approach. The same procedure used for calculating GBC was used here (i.e., calculating LPFC’s time series correlation with each voxel then averaging), but restricted to each group average map strength range. 
 The strength range analysis indicated that LPFC’s connectivity could be roughly separated into three broad functional systems based on connectivity strengths. The cognitive control network had strong positive connectivity (Fz>.2), the default mode network had relatively strong negative connectivity (Fz<−.05), and sensory-motor networks had relatively weak positive and negative connectivity (−.15<Fz<.2). We used these group average strength ranges, along with independently identified voxel masks, to define the three systems. 
 The cognitive control and default mode networks were defined using NeuroSynth ( Yarkoni et al., 2011 ), which identifies locations with a high probability of being reported in studies using specific terms. The cognitive control network locations are based on 93 studies (forward inference) using the term ‘cognitive control’. The default mode network locations are based on 77 studies using the term 'default mode'. Locations for both cognitive control and default mode networks were downloaded 2011-08-14, with p<0.05 thresholds and false discovery rate corrections for multiple comparisons. The sensory-motor locations were based on probabilistic cytoarchitecture obtained using AFNI’s ‘TT_N27_CA_EZ_PMaps’, which is derived from the SPM Anatomy toolbox ( Eickhoff et al., 2005 ). All voxels in the primary visual, primary auditory, primary motor, and somatosensory cortices were included. Any voxels that overlapped between any two of the three system masks were excluded from the analysis. 
 The LPFC connectivity-gF correlations were computed for each functional system separately. In order to better ensure separation of the systems, the group average strength ranges indicated above were used to restrict the voxels contributing to each system’s average LPFC connectivity. Also, only positive connections were used (selected separately for each subject) for control network voxels and only negative connections were used for default mode network voxels, based on previous activation-based and connectivity-based studies demonstrating anti-correlations between these systems ( Fox et al., 2005 ). The absolute value of each connection was taken prior to averaging for the sensory-motor networks in order to avoid averaging of positive and negative connections (which could cancel out individual difference effects). 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Identifying Core Cognitive Control Regions 
 Brain regions were identified as being important for cognitive control based on their activation profile in a group of 93 participants scanned during performance of the N-back task of working memory and executive control. First, these regions had to show increased activation for lure/interference trials, which had high control demands relative to other N-back trials ( Gray et al., 2003 ). Second, they had to demonstrate increased activation on correct relative to error N-back trials, indicating a trial-by-trial contribution to successful performance. Last, average N-back trial-related activity had to correlate with task accuracy across participants, indicating a role in performance-related individual differences. Three regions within the fronto-parietal control network were identified that met these strict criteria: left LPFC, right pre-motor cortex (PMC), and right medial posterior parietal cortex (mPPC) ( Figure 1 ,  Table 1A ). 
 
 
 Identifying Cognitive Control Regions With High GBC 
 We next tested the hypothesis that these three regions might be central to cognitive control because they serve as global hubs – regions highly connected to many other brain regions, as indexed by the GBC measure. In prior work, we demonstrated that regions within the fronto-parietal control network tend to have the highest GBC within the brain ( Cole et al., 2010a ). In the present study, GBC was assessed using standard resting-state functional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) measures from ~8 min of resting state data acquired in each participant from interspersed rest blocks occurring between task blocks – an approach validated in prior work ( Fair et al., 2007 ). Note that rs-fcMRI is widely viewed as a useful brain connectivity measure because it: (i) is correlated with known structural connectivity ( Honey et al., 2009 ;  Van Den Heuvel et al., 2009b ) (though it likely reflects functional/‘Hebbian’ connectivity as well ( Lewis et al., 2009 )); (ii) is highly consistent with well-established functional networks ( Smith et al., 2009 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2010 ); (iii) likely reflects intrinsic connectivity as it is present even under anesthesia ( Vincent et al., 2007 ); and (iv) is highly replicable (within individuals, between individuals, across scanners, across parameters, etc. ( Shehzad et al., 2009 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2010 )). Each region’s GBC was computed as its average positive rs-fcMRI connectivity with the rest of the brain. Based on previously defined criteria for what constitutes a hub region ( Cole et al., 2010a ), we found that all three regions could be considered global connectivity hubs, as their GBC was in the top 10% compared across the whole brain. 
 
 
 Using GBC to Predict Cognitive Control and Intelligence 
 We next tested for a relationship between these regions’ GBC and cognitive control capacity. Importantly, gF was used rather than N-back performance in order to assess cognitive control capacity with an independent and more robust measure of stable, trait-like and domain-general individual differences. gF is a domain-general measure of the fluid aspects (those aspects independent of knowledge and culture) of general intelligence, which has been used in psychometric research for over a century of studies involving thousands of participants ( Gottfredson, 1997 ). Robust findings demonstrate its relevance to a wide variety of both psychometric and real-life tasks ( Gottfredson, 2002 ), providing good reason to expect that results based on gF will generalize to a wide variety of other tasks (especially those in which cognitive control demands are high ( Gottfredson, 1997 )). We quantified gF as the z-normalized average of two well-established measures of gF collected outside the scanner: The Raven Advanced Progressive Matrices – Set II ( Raven et al., 1998 ) and The Cattell Culture Fair Test ( Cattell et al., 1973 ). 
 Individual differences correlations between positive-connectivity GBC (computed using positive connections only) and gF were statistically significant for LPFC (r=.32, p=.0015) but not for mPPC (r=.08, p=.42) or PMC (r=.13, p=.22) ( Figure 2A ). This LPFC GBC-gF correlation remained statistically significant after controlling for the effect of age (r=.24, p=.018). These results demonstrate that individuals with higher GBC in LPFC have greater cognitive control capacity, suggesting brain-wide connectivity with a specific control region helps support cognitive control abilities. Further, these results converge with results from previous N-back studies ( Gray et al., 2003 ;  Burgess et al., 2011 ) – based on both brain (resting-state connectivity) and behavior (fluid intelligence) measures – to suggest that left LPFC is central to the implementation of cognitive control. 
 The main GBC analyses used positive connections only, given the current controversy regarding negative connections ( Fox et al., 2009 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ). However, the LPFC region effects were also significant for the negative-only (r= −.29, p=.004) and absolute value (r=.31, p=.002) analyses. This suggests that negative connectivity might be functionally relevant with regard to gF. 
 We also examined the predictive power of GBC with a second independent measure of cognitive control – working memory capacity – as indexed by the well-established operation span task ( Conway and Engle, 1996 ). Convergent with the gF results, a significant relationship was only observed for GBC in LPFC: r=.24, p=.019 (for mPPC and PMC, p > .15). In subsequent analyses, we focus primarily on gF given the well-established generality and life-relevance of this cognitive construct ( Gottfredson and Saklofske, 2009 ). 
 In order to assess specificity to fluid (as opposed to crystallized) intelligence, we determined whether LPFC GBC was also correlated with a measure of crystallized intelligence: the vocabulary subtest of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale – Third Edition (WAIS) test ( Wechsler, 2005 ). We found no significant correlation between crystallized intelligence and LPFC GBC (r=.12, p=.25), despite there being a significant correlation between crystallized intelligence and gF (r=.43, p=.00001). Further, the LPFC GBC-gF correlation was (marginally) significantly higher than the LPFC GBC-crystallized intelligence correlation (z=1.87, p=.06). These results suggest that the relationship between LPFC GBC and intelligence was specific to fluid aspects of intelligence, consistent with our interpretation that this relationship reflects cognitive control processes underlying intelligence. 
 
 
 Assessing The Relative Specificity Of The LPFC GBC-gF Effect 
 The primary goals of previous work investigating the neural basis of intelligence have been to identify 1) whole-brain network contributions to intelligence ( Van Den Heuvel et al., 2009a ), 2) region-specific activity contributions to intelligence ( Duncan, 2000 ), or 3) connection-specific contributions to intelligence ( Song et al., 2008 ). In contrast, due to our hypothesized mechanism of cognitive control, our primary goal was to identify how  specific  regions’  global  connectivity might contribute to intelligence. As a critical aspect of this goal, we next sought to assess the relative specificity of the observed LPFC GBC-gF effect. We did this by examining GBC-gF correlations separately in all brain voxels. Remarkably, only a single significant region was identified (p<0.05, family-wise error corrected for multiple comparisons) despite the relatively large sample size, with its location closely overlapping the LPFC region identified in the task-based analysis ( Figure 2B ,  Table 1B ). This suggests the GBC-gF effect was specific to LPFC. 
 Still, it remains possible that there were effects just below the statistical threshold used in this analysis. In order to assess this possibility and further evaluate the robustness of the LPFC GBC-gF effect, we compared the LPFC GBC-gF correlation with the GBC-gF correlation of every voxel in the brain ( Figure 3A ). We accomplished this using a standard approach for comparing dependent correlations ( Meng et al., 1992 ). Supporting the specificity of LPFC, we found that much of the brain had a lower GBC-gF correlation (p<0.05, family-wise error corrected for multiple comparisons). 
 We might expect, based on previous activity studies showing strong relationships with intelligence ( Gray et al., 2003 ), that control network regions such as anterior PFC and anterior cingulate cortex would show strong GBC-gF correlations. Further supporting this possibility, these regions also have among the highest GBC in the brain ( Cole et al., 2010a ). Surprisingly, these were among the many regions showing significantly smaller GBC-gF effects than LPFC (see highlights in  Figure 3A ). 
 It still remains possible that other control network regions, especially those with activity correlating with gF, might also show significant GBC-gF correlations, reducing the specificity of the LPFC effect. We increased our ability to detect such correlations (relative to the previous voxel-wise analysis) using a region-of-interest approach with a larger set of control network regions, identified by  Burgess et al. (2011)  with the same large dataset as here ( Figure 3B ). Burgess et al. identified these regions using criteria similar (but less conservative) to our own (see  Figure 1 ), but with one key difference: the activity in all 10 regions (the 3 we had identified, plus an additional 7) correlated with gF. We found that nine of the 10 regions had voxels in the top 10% of GBC, further suggesting they might show GBC-gF correlations. 
 Nevertheless, we again found a remarkable degree of specificity in the GBC-gF effect, since the correlation was significant only in the left LPFC region (r=.29, p=.005 for left LPFC; p>.19 for all other regions). Note that several regions had outlier subjects (GBC further than two standard deviations from the group mean); however, the results were similar when including or excluding them. This left LPFC region overlapped with the LPFC regions identified in the first analysis ( Figure 1 ) and the whole-brain search analysis ( Figure 2B ), such that results from all three analyses overlapped in a common set of voxels ( Table 1C ). These results demonstrate that regions showing activity-gF correlations and high GBC are not guaranteed to show GBC-gF correlations. In other words, the results suggest GBC-gF effects may be mechanistically distinct from activity-gF effects (e.g., activity reflects within-region processing, while GBC reflects access to a wide variety of task-relevant regions for implementing control). 
 It remains possible that the GBC-gF effect was actually distributed throughout the control network, and that – despite the highly statistically significant effect in left LPFC – the GBC metric was not sensitive enough to identify the effect in each region individually. We therefore averaged the GBC values across all of the control regions (excluding left LPFC) to look for a network-wide effect, and found that the resulting GBC-gF correlation was still not significant (r=.06, p=.59). Moreover, this network-wide correlation was significantly lower than the left LPFC GBC-gF correlation (z=2.0, p=.046). 
 Finally, we ruled out a network-wide effect using partial regression, testing whether the left LPFC GBC-gF correlation was statistically independent of the other nine control regions ( Figure 3C ). First, in order to remain conservative, subjects were removed from this analysis if they were outliers for any of the 10 regions (this removed 17 subjects), which reduced the LPFC GBC-gF correlation slightly (r=.29, p=.01). Next, GBC values from each of the regions (excluding left LPFC) were included in a multiple regression model with the gF values. The residuals from this model (i.e., with gF-correlating individual differences variance from the nine regions removed) were then correlated with the original left LPFC region’s GBC values. The left LPFC GBC-gF correlation was almost identical and remained statistically significant (r=.26, p=.03), suggesting that the left LPFC effect was statistically independent from the other regions. This effect remained even when restricting the nine regions to the voxels in the top 10% GBC (r=.25, p=.04). Taken together, all of these analyses further support the conclusion that the GBC-gF effect was highly selective to left LPFC, and moreover, was independent of other cognitive control regions despite their high GBC and gF-correlating activity. 
 
 
 Ruling Out Effects of Motion 
 A recent study by  Power et al. (2012)  established that even subtle movement can alter rs-fcMRI estimates, such that group or individual differences in motion might lead to false conclusions regarding differences in rs-fcMRI estimates. This appears unlikely to be able to explain the observed GBC-gF correlation, given its apparent specificity to LPFC (motion likely affects the entire brain, or at least more than just a single region). In order to remain conservative, however, we tested if motion could explain the observed LPFC GBC-gF correlation. 
 First, we estimated overall motion (framewise displacement; FD) as described by  Power et al. (2012) , regressed out each subject’s motion from the gF scores, and found that the LPFC GBC-gF correlation was almost identical to before (r=.30, p=.004). We next used the ‘scrubbing’ method recommended by  Power et al. (2012) , and found that the LPFC GBC-gF remained statistically significant (r=.27, .0075) despite using a highly conservative threshold (FD=.3, DVAR=.3; Power et al. used FD=.5, DVAR=.5) to remove a large amount of potentially motion-contaminated data. These results strongly suggest that the LPFC GBC-gF correlation is not an artifact of motion. 
 
 
 Determining If The Left LPFC GBC-gF Effect Was Global In Origin 
 We next sought to more thoroughly understand the source of this GBC-gF effect, to determine if it was truly global in nature or actually reflected a dominant effect of a subset of LPFC connections. LPFC connectivity was restricted to different ranges of (both positive and negative) connectivity strength, and we examined how these restrictions changed the GBC-gF correlation ( Figure 4 ). Strength ranges were specified starting at an Fz (Fisher’s z transformed r value) of 0 and going up and down in .05 bins. We found that the correlation was statistically significant for nearly every strength range ( Figure 4A ) – even those in weak and negative connection strength ranges – suggesting a global origin of the LPFC GBC-gF effect rather than a localized contribution of a subset of connections. Note that weak connections are typically ignored in rs-fcMRI studies due to their low signal-to-noise ratio, but that the GBC measure may be effectively boosting signal-to-noise of wide-spread effects by averaging connectivity values across voxels (similar to improved local signal-to-noise from spatial smoothing;  Mikl et al., 2008 ). 
 Expanding upon this analysis, we sought to identify whether there were distinct functional systems underlying these LPFC connection strength ranges. We observed that the strong positive connections with LPFC occurred with regions primarily in the fronto-parietal control network, while weak positive and negative connections were made primarily with sensory-motor regions. Strong negative LPFC connections were primarily with the ‘default-mode’ network – a set of regions that are metabolically active at rest but de-activated during cognitive control tasks ( Raichle, 2010 ). We formalized these observations by defining these three systems based on independent criteria from probabilistic cytoarchitecture and meta-analysis results ( Eickhoff et al., 2005 ;  Yarkoni et al., 2011 ), and using cut-offs from the strength-range distinctions described above ( Figure 5A ). We found that LPFC connectivity significantly predicted gF in each of the three systems ( Figure 5B ), supporting the conclusion that the LPFC GBC-gF effect is truly global rather than originating from within-network (strong positive) connections alone. 
 Several follow-up analyses were conducted to test for alternative explanations of these results. First, we measured the across-individual standard deviation for each strength range to see if the stronger individual-differences effects were due to greater variance in the weaker strength ranges. Incompatible with this possibility, the standard deviation actually went up along with (both positive and negative) connectivity strength. Second, we counted the number of voxels contributing to each strength range. We reasoned that if the LPFC GBC-gF correlation were truly global in origin, the correlation should be higher when more voxels are included, rather than when connections are stronger. Compatible with a global origin, the highest negative and positive strength ranges had very low voxel counts (due to strict thresholds for these high strengths) and were the only strength ranges not statistically significant. 
 As a final analysis, we tested whether the LPFC GBC-gF correlation was truly global in origin, by examining if the three functional systems identified in  Figure 5  were correlated in terms of their predictive role in explaining gF variation. In other words, we hypothesized that the LPFC connectivity-gF correlation would not be statistically significant for any single functional system when accounting for individual differences in the other functional systems using multiple linear regression. Compatible with a global origin of the LPFC GBC-gF effect (in which individual differences in LPFC’s connectivity act in a unified fashion across systems), LPFC connectivity with each of the systems was no longer uniquely correlated with gF when the other two were included in a single linear model (all p>.21). This was also true when each of the systems were modeled in pairs (control network + default network, control network + sensory-motor networks, or default network + sensory-motor networks; all p>.10). Further, individual differences in LPFC connectivity with the sensory-motor networks was correlated with the default mode network (r=−.56, p<.001) and cognitive control network (r=.69, p<.001), while individual differences in LPFC connectivity with the cognitive control network was also correlated with the default mode network (r=−.59, p<.001). The observation that gF-correlating LPFC connectivity appears to vary between individuals as a whole, rather than in a system-specific manner, suggests that the contribution of LPFC’s connectivity to fluid intelligence can be best characterized in terms of global – rather than connection-specific or system-specific – connectivity. 
 
 
 Estimating the Relative Effect Size of the LPFC GBC-gF Correlation 
 The LPFC GBC-gF correlation’s effect size might be considered small (r=.32, 10% of the variance). In order to gain some perspective on this, we looked at the well-known brain size-intelligence correlation ( Willerman et al., 1991 ). Standard Freesurfer gray matter segmentation ( Dale et al., 1999 ) was used to estimate gray matter volume for each participant. Gray matter volume predicted gF with a correlation of r=.26 (p=.009; 6.7% of the variance). Critically, this is similar to the effect size of the LPFC GBC-gF correlation: r=.32. Also, the LPFC GBC-gF correlation explained independent variance (r= −.019 between brain size and LPFC GBC), suggesting the LPFC GBC-gF is reflecting a unique mechanism underlying intelligence. 
 Also addressing the concern regarding effect size, we examined the LPFC activity-gF correlation (reported previously in  Burgess et al., 2011 ). This effect size was smaller (r=.23, p=.03, 5% of the variance) than the GBC-gF correlation in the same voxels (r=.30, p=.004), again suggesting the LPFC GBC-gF effect size is meaningful in relation to previous findings of fundamental factors underlying intelligence. Critically, the LPFC GBC-gF correlation again explained independent variance (r= −.05). This strongly suggests that the GBC effect is based on an independent mechanism supporting intelligence. Further, the lack of correlation between LPFC activity and LPFC GBC supports the conclusion that task activity was unlikely to have affected the GBC result. 
 Given the statistical independence of these three factors correlating with gF, we built a single statistical model to see how much gF variance the three factors could explain together. We included only the 88 participants overlapping between the GBC and  Burgess et al. (2011)  analyses. Note that the whole brain gray matter volume correlation with gF was higher in these 88 individuals than the full set of 94 individuals: r=.33 (p=.0017). A linear model including LPFC GBC, LPFC lure activity, and whole brain gray matter volume was able to explain 26% of the variance in gF (r=.51, p=.00001). All three factors significantly contributed to the model (p=.001 for LPFC GBC, p=.016 for LPFC activity, and p=.0009 for gray matter volume). 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 We hypothesized – based on previous work demonstrating that control network regions have high GBC ( Cole et al., 2010a ) – that the global connectivity of some control network regions would predict intelligence. Supporting this hypothesis, we found that left LPFC’s GBC predicted gF across individuals. Surprisingly, this effect was relatively specific to left LPFC, as only this region was statistically significant in a whole brain search. Further, this effect was statistically larger than in a variety of other regions and remained significant even after removing variance from other control network regions. 
 
 Methodological Implications 
 Given that GBC is computed by averaging connection strengths, it is possible for a region’s GBC to simply reflect a small set of strong connections (the region’s ‘community’) ( Power et al., 2011 ). However, the present results demonstrate that a region’s GBC can reflect connectivity throughout the brain, and that it is possible for behavior-connectivity relationships to be well characterized in terms of global connectivity. 
 Though weak connections have typically been ignored in rs-fcMRI studies (e.g.,  Fox et al., 2005 ), the present results suggest (based on an independent behavioral measure) that these connections may be functionally relevant (see  Figure 4 ). Rather than reflecting direct connectivity, these weaker connections might reflect distant indirect connections ( Krienen and Buckner, 2009 ) between LPFC and other brain regions. Importantly, this suggests GBC with rs-fcMRI may be a particularly comprehensive way to assess functionally relevant connections, since this approach can detect connections even if functional relevance might be the result of long multi-synaptic chains. Alternatively, this weak connectivity could be the result of mixtures of strong positive and strong negative connectivity at a finer spatial grain than our multi-millimeter voxels. Supporting this possibility, LPFC anatomical connections are known to project (directly, and indirectly via thalamus) to both excitatory and inhibitory neurons in macaque monkey sensory-motor cortices ( Barbas and Zikopoulos, 2007 ). 
 We used whole brain signal regression as an rs-fcMRI preprocessing step. Recently, it has been argued that this might artifactually introduce rs-fcMRI negative connectivity by shifting the connectivity distribution ( Murphy et al., 2009 ). However, others have demonstrated that connectivity is more functionally specific when using whole brain signal regression ( Fox et al., 2009 ). The apparent utility of whole brain signal regression in conjunction with the remaining controversy regarding negative connectivity led us to utilize this method but focus on positive connections in the main GBC-gF analysis ( Figure 2 ). 
 Importantly, however, our use of individual difference correlations with an independent behavioral measure could provide evidence regarding the functional relevance of negative connectivity with rs-fcMRI. We found that even negative LPFC connectivity correlated with gF. Critically, we would expect a  positive  correlation between negative connectivity and gF if negative resting-state connectivity was actually positive connectivity shifted into negative connectivity ranges. In contrast to this prediction, the LPFC GBC-gF correlation involving negatively signed connections was also negative. In other words, when negative connections between LPFC and other brain regions were greater in sign (i.e., stronger), fluid intelligence was higher. This effect is the mirrored pattern of that observed with positive connections. Such an effect provides new evidence, based on an independent behavioral measure, that the strength of negative connections is not purely a measurement error, but may also be functionally relevant. 
 
 
 Limitations 
 Previous research suggests that there are only minor differences between functional connectivity estimates from extended rest periods and concatenated short rest periods as used here ( Fair et al., 2007 ). It remains possible, however, that some gF-correlating connectivity was altered by individuals’ (task-related or task-independent) mental states, especially given that task blocks were interspersed in time with the resting periods ( Waites et al., 2005 ;  Barnes et al., 2009 ). This possibility appears unlikely given that the GBC-gF correlation was not significant for a variety of regions with gF-correlating activity, and LPFC GBC did not correlate with LPFC activity (r=−.05). Even if mental state did affect the GBC-gF correlations, however, this would not invalidate the present results. Rather, it would shift our interpretation, suggesting that high gF individuals transiently increase their LPFC GBC more than low gF individuals. This would continue to suggest a key role for LPFC global connectivity in cognitive control, but would indicate a different mechanism by which these brain-based and psychological factors are related. Future research into this possibility will be important for determining whether global connectivity – a region’s integration with the entire brain – is relatively static or is changeable on a moment-to-moment basis. 
 Most previous studies that have investigated the relationship between connectivity and intelligence focused on specific connections ( Jung and Haier, 2007 ;  Song et al., 2008 ), local/within-network integration ( Li et al., 2009 ;  Song et al., 2009 ), or overall global connectivity ( Li et al., 2009 ;  Zalesky et al., 2011 ), rather than region-specific global connectivity. To our knowledge, only two studies have investigated the relationship between  region-specific  global connectivity and intelligence:  Langer et al. (2011)  and  van den Heuvel et al. (2009a ; see their voxel-wise secondary analysis). Our study represents a significant methodological and conceptual advance over this prior work. In contrast to  Langer et al. (2011) , we used fMRI in order to improve spatial localization relative to electroencephalography ( Sharon et al., 2007 ), which is especially important for properly characterizing connectivity ( Schoffelen and Gross, 2009 ). In contrast to  van den Heuvel et al. (2009a) , we used a large sample size (N=94), corrected for multiple comparisons, and defined ROIs based on independent and theoretically-meaningful functional criteria, thus avoiding circularity concerns ( Kriegeskorte et al., 2009 ). It has been argued that using functionally defined regions is superior to using anatomically or arbitrarily defined regions for connectivity analysis, since inadvertently including two regions in a single node can be detrimental to characterizing a graph ( Smith et al., 2010 ;  Wig et al., 2011 ). Further, the use of large sample sizes is especially critical when identifying individual differences effects, as recent methodological analyses have made it clear that studies with smaller sample size are likely subject to effect size inflation ( Yarkoni, 2009 ), whereas studies with larger samples are likely to result in effect sizes closer to the true population effect ( Braver et al., 2010b ). The results here demonstrate that these advances enabled significantly greater specificity in the functional inference drawn from the data, i.e., the three-way relationship between cognitive control, global connectivity, and fluid intelligence was only observed within a single brain region, the left LPFC. 
 Note that though our observed effect size (r=.32) was moderately sized, we would not expect any single fundamental factor to predict intelligence much more than this, given the many factors that likely contribute to intelligence. Supporting this conclusion, we found that two previously reported factors contributing to gF have equivalent effect sizes (brain size: r=.26, LPFC activity: r=.23). Further, it may be that few brain-behavior relationships are actually greater than this effect size, given that much of the existing literature reflects inflated effect sizes due to small sample sizes (see above) and/or double-dipping ( Vul et al., 2009 ), which we avoided. 
 The present results might seem to suggest left LPFC is the ‘seat of intelligence’. Critically, however, our analyses suggest LPFC is  mechanistically  unique, rather than unique in its support of intelligence. Indeed, analyses with the same dataset indicate activity in a variety of regions support intelligence ( Burgess et al., 2011 ; also see  Preusse, 2011 ), while other studies show brain-wide connectivity ( Van Den Heuvel et al., 2009a ), specific connections ( Jung and Haier, 2007 ), and dopamine signaling ( Schlagenhauf et al., 2012 ) also support intelligence. Our results provide novel evidence that left LPFC supports cognitive control and intelligence via a unique mechanism involving extensive global connectivity. Thus, it was critical that we rigorously tested for  region-specific  global connectivity, rather than overall global connectivity (as most studies looking for intelligence correlations with global connectivity have done). One important possibility for future research to investigate is whether other control network regions are able to exert control over a variety of task-relevant regions via their influence on LPFC. Further, it will be important to assess if other measures of connectivity might be more sensitive/accurate with respect to either global hub properties or unique mechanisms present in other cognitive control regions. 
 
 
 Theoretical Implications And Future Directions For Research 
 In contrast to studies emphasizing whole-brain network contributions to intelligence or studies emphasizing the contributions of specific regions (or networks) to intelligence, we found that a specific region’s global connectivity predicts intelligence. This suggests a reconceptualization of LPFC as a functional hub that uses its brain-wide influence to facilitate cognitive control and intelligence. Importantly, the observation of other cognitive control regions with high GBC but significantly lower GBC-gF correlations suggests that LPFC likely has some additional properties beyond extensive connectivity that underlie the observed GBC-gF correlation. 
 One possibility, based on  Miller & Cohen’s (2001)  model of LPFC function, is that LPFC acts as a ‘flexible’ hub – able to flexibly shift its connectivity with a variety of task-relevant regions according to task demands. Within this conceptualization, resting-state fMRI GBC likely reflects the number of possible routes that LPFC can use during tasks to reconfigure connectivity. Thus, individuals with greater LPFC GBC would likely be able to dynamically reconfigure to a more specific connectivity pattern for any of a wide variety of possible task demands, increasing the specificity of LPFC’s control over activity in those regions. This increased capacity for control across individuals would likely be reflected in the LPFC GBC-gF correlation. Further research is necessary to verify other predictions of the flexible hub hypothesis, such as task-dependent shifts in connectivity (but see  Rowe et al., 2005 ;  Cole et al., 2010b ;  Stelzel et al., 2011 ;  Deserno et al., 2012 ). 
 We found that the LPFC GBC-gF correlation was present across a wide variety of strength ranges and spatial locations. Supporting the flexible hub account, many of these connections were with sensory and motor regions. This may reflect a particular architecture for a flexible neural system underlying human intelligence: Engineers have characterized flexible, adaptive control in terms of the ability for a system to access (both monitor and influence) multiple sources of task-relevant information ( Åström and Murray, 2008 ). Additionally, although the functional importance of negative connectivity is not well understood ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), the predictive relationship between gF and LPFC connections with the default-mode network is consistent with a key role for inhibition of task-irrelevant processing in cognitive control and fluid intelligence ( Anticevic et al., 2010 ). Further investigation into the functional relevance of cognitive control hubs – including the possibility that LPFC benefits from high global connectivity due to its unique flexibility – will be essential for understanding the neural architecture underlying human intelligence. 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported by NIH MH66088, MH66078, and MH66078-06A1W1. The authors wish to thank Patryk Laurent and Jeremy Reynolds for their helpful feedback, and Jordan Livingston, Lauren Ness, and Nicholas Fazzio for their help with data analysis. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 When less is more: TPJ and default network deactivation during encoding predicts working memory performance 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 49 
 2638 
 2648 
 19913622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Åström 
 KJ 
 
 
 Murray 
 RM 
 
 
 Feedback systems: an introduction for scientists and engineers 
 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barbas 
 H 
 
 
 Zikopoulos 
 B 
 
 
 The Prefrontal Cortex and Flexible Behavior 
 The Neuroscientist : a review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry 
 2007 
 13 
 532 
 545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barnes 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Endogenous Human Brain Dynamics Recover Slowly Following Cognitive Effort 
 PLoS ONE 
 2009 
 4 
 e6626 
 19680553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Vive les differences! Individual variation in neural mechanisms of executive control 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2010a 
 20 
 242 
 250 
 20381337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Vive les differences! Individual variation in neural mechanisms of executive control 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2010b 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 5 
 49 
 62 
 9038284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Kelley 
 WM 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Direct comparison of prefrontal cortex regions engaged by working and long-term memory tasks 
 Neuroimage 
 2001 
 14 
 48 
 59 
 11525336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 G 
 
 
 Gray 
 J 
 
 
 Conway 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Neural Mechanisms of Interference Control Underlie the Relationship Between Fluid Intelligence and Working Memory Span 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 2011 
 1 
 70 
 21299316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cattell 
 RB 
 
 
 Cattell 
 AKS 
 
 
 Institute for P, Ability T 
 Measuring intelligence with the culture fair tests: Institute for Personality and Ability Testing 
 1973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 The cognitive control network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 343 
 360 
 17553704 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Pathak 
 S 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 Identifying the brain's most globally connected regions 
 Neuroimage 
 2010a 
 49 
 3132 
 3148 
 19909818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Bagic 
 A 
 
 
 Kass 
 R 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 Prefrontal dynamics underlying rapid instructed task learning reverse with practice 
 J Neurosci 
 2010b 
 30 
 14245 
 14254 
 20962245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Barch 
 D 
 
 
 Variable Global Dysconnectivity and Individual Differences in Schizophrenia 
 BPS 
 2011 
 70 
 43 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 A 
 
 
 Cowan 
 N 
 
 
 Bunting 
 M 
 
 
 Therriault 
 D 
 
 
 A latent variable analysis of working memory capacity, short-term memory capacity, processing speed, and general fluid intelligence 
 Intelligence 
 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conway 
 AR 
 
 
 Engle 
 RW 
 
 
 Individual differences in working memory capacity: more evidence for a general capacity theory 
 Memory (Hove, England) 
 1996 
 4 
 577 
 590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Kerszberg 
 M 
 
 
 Changeux 
 JP 
 
 
 A neuronal model of a global workspace in effortful cognitive tasks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 1998 
 95 
 14529 
 14534 
 9826734 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deserno 
 L 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 Wustenberg 
 T 
 
 
 Heinz 
 A 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Reduced Prefrontal-Parietal Effective Connectivity and Working Memory Deficits in Schizophrenia 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 12 
 20 
 22219266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeYoung 
 CG 
 
 
 Shamosh 
 NA 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Intellect as distinct from Openness: differences revealed by fMRI of working memory 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 2009 
 97 
 883 
 892 
 19857008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeYoung 
 CG 
 
 
 Hirsh 
 JB 
 
 
 Shane 
 MS 
 
 
 Papademetris 
 X 
 
 
 Rajeevan 
 N 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Testing predictions from personality neuroscience: brain structure and the big five 
 Psychol Sci 
 2010 
 21 
 820 
 828 
 20435951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Palmer 
 ED 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 Burgund 
 ED 
 
 
 Grimes 
 AL 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 A core system for the implementation of task sets 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 50 
 799 
 812 
 16731517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 A Neural Basis for General Intelligence 
 Science 
 2000 
 289 
 457 
 460 
 10903207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: mental programs for intelligent behaviour 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2010 
 14 
 172 
 179 
 20171926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 25 
 1325 
 1335 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engle 
 RW 
 
 
 Tuholski 
 SW 
 
 
 Laughlin 
 JE 
 
 
 Conway 
 AR 
 
 
 Working memory, short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 1999 
 128 
 309 
 331 
 10513398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 D 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 B 
 
 
 Cohen 
 A 
 
 
 Miezin 
 F 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 N 
 
 
 Wenger 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 M 
 
 
 Snyder 
 A 
 
 
 Raichle 
 M 
 
 
 Petersen 
 S 
 
 
 A method for using blocked and event-related fMRI data to study "resting state" functional connectivity 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 35 
 396 
 405 
 17239622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fales 
 CL 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Burgess 
 GC 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 A 
 
 
 Mennin 
 DS 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Anxiety and cognitive efficiency: differential modulation of transient and sustained neural activity during a working memory task 
 Cognitive, affective &amp; behavioral neuroscience 
 2008 
 8 
 239 
 253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Dieterich 
 M 
 
 
 Haselgrove 
 C 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Killiany 
 R 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 D 
 
 
 Klaveness 
 S 
 
 
 Montillo 
 A 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Rosen 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 33 
 341 
 355 
 11832223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Zalesky 
 A 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Meunier 
 D 
 
 
 Ellison-Wright 
 I 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 Wood 
 SJ 
 
 
 Shaw 
 K 
 
 
 O'Connor 
 J 
 
 
 Nertney 
 D 
 
 
 Genetic influences on cost-efficient organization of human cortical functional networks 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 3261 
 3270 
 21368038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The Global Signal and Observed Anticorrelated Resting State Brain Networks 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2009 
 101 
 3270 
 3283 
 19339462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2005 
 102 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: a general linear approach 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1995 
 2 
 189 
 210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfredson 
 L 
 
 
 Saklofske 
 DH 
 
 
 Intelligence: Foundations and issues in assessment 
 Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne 
 2009 
 50 
 183 
 195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfredson 
 LS 
 
 
 Why g matters: The complexity of everyday life 
 Intelligence 
 1997 
 24 
 79 
 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfredson 
 LS 
 
 
 g: Highly general and highly practical 
 The general factor of intelligence: How general is it 
 2002 
 331 
 380 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Personality predicts working-memory-related activation in the caudal anterior cingulate cortex 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2002 
 2 
 64 
 75 
 12452585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Integration of emotion and cognition in the lateral prefrontal cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2002 
 99 
 4115 
 4120 
 11904454 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Chabris 
 CF 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of general fluid intelligence 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2003 
 6 
 316 
 322 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Burgess 
 GC 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 A 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Larsen 
 RJ 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Affective personality differences in neural processing efficiency confirmed using fMRI 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2005 
 5 
 182 
 190 
 16180624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Thiran 
 JP 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 2035 
 2040 
 19188601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jo 
 HJ 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Milbury 
 LA 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 52 
 571 
 582 
 20420926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jung 
 RE 
 
 
 Haier 
 RJ 
 
 
 The Parieto-Frontal Integration Theory (P-FIT) of intelligence: Converging neuroimaging evidence 
 The Behavioral and brain sciences 
 2007 
 30 
 135 
 17655784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kane 
 MJ 
 
 
 Conway 
 AR 
 
 
 Miura 
 TK 
 
 
 Colflesh 
 GJ 
 
 
 Working memory, attention control, and the n-back task: A question of construct validity 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 2007 
 33 
 615 
 622 
 17470009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2009 
 12 
 535 
 540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Segregated Fronto-Cerebellar Circuits Revealed by Intrinsic Functional Connectivity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 1 
 13 
 18448452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Langer 
 N 
 
 
 Pedroni 
 A 
 
 
 Gianotti 
 LRR 
 
 
 Hänggi 
 J 
 
 
 Knoch 
 D 
 
 
 Jäncke 
 L 
 
 
 Functional brain network efficiency predicts intelligence 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis 
 CM 
 
 
 Baldassarre 
 A 
 
 
 Committeri 
 G 
 
 
 Romani 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Learning sculpts the spontaneous activity of the resting human brain 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 17558 
 17563 
 19805061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 Y 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Li 
 J 
 
 
 Qin 
 W 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Yu 
 C 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Brain anatomical network and intelligence 
 PLoS Comput Biol 
 2009 
 5 
 e1000395. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lynall 
 ME 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Kerwin 
 R 
 
 
 McKenna 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kitzbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Muller 
 U 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Functional connectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2010 
 30 
 9477 
 9487 
 20631176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meng 
 X 
 
 
 Rosenthal 
 R 
 
 
 Rubin 
 D 
 
 
 Comparing correlated correlation coefficients 
 Psychological bulletin 
 1992 
 111 
 172 
 175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mikl 
 M 
 
 
 Mareček 
 R 
 
 
 Hluštík 
 P 
 
 
 Pavlicová 
 M 
 
 
 Drastich 
 A 
 
 
 Chlebus 
 P 
 
 
 Brázdil 
 M 
 
 
 Krupa 
 P 
 
 
 Effects of spatial smoothing on fMRI group inferences 
 Magnetic resonance imaging 
 2008 
 26 
 490 
 503 
 18060720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 E 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2001 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 11283309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: Are anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Hayasaka 
 S 
 
 
 Controlling the family wise error rate in functional neuroimaging: a comparative review 
 Stat Methods Med Res 
 2003 
 12 
 419 
 14599004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 59 
 2142 
 2154 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Vogel 
 AC 
 
 
 Laumann 
 TO 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Functional Network Organization of the Human Brain 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 72 
 665 
 678 
 22099467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preusse 
 F 
 
 
 Fluid intelligence allows flexible recruitment of the parieto-frontal network in analogical reasoning 
 2011 
 1 
 14 
 
 
 
 
 R Development Core Team 
 R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Two views of brain function 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2010 
 14 
 180 
 190 
 20206576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raven 
 J 
 
 
 Raven 
 JC 
 
 
 Court 
 JH 
 
 
 Manual for Raven's progressive matrices and vocabulary scales 
 1998 
 Oxford 
 Oxford Psychologists Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 The prefrontal cortex shows context-specific changes in effective connectivity to motor or visual cortex during the selection of action or colour 
 Cerebral cortex (New York, NY, 1991) 
 2005 
 15 
 85 
 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubinov 
 M 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Weight-conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 56 
 2068 
 2079 
 21459148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Burgess 
 GC 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Individual differences in amygdala activity predict response speed during working memory 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 10120 
 10128 
 17021168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Rapp 
 MA 
 
 
 Huys 
 QJM 
 
 
 Beck 
 A 
 
 
 Wüstenberg 
 T 
 
 
 Deserno 
 L 
 
 
 Buchholz 
 HG 
 
 
 Kalbitzer 
 J 
 
 
 Buchert 
 R 
 
 
 Bauer 
 M 
 
 
 Ventral striatal prediction error signaling is associated with dopamine synthesis capacity and fluid intelligence 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schoffelen 
 J-M 
 
 
 Gross 
 J 
 
 
 Source connectivity analysis with MEG and EEG 
 Human Brain Mapping:NA-NA 
 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Deficits in strategy application following frontal lobe damage in man 
 Brain 
 1991 
 114 
 Pt 2 
 727 
 741 
 2043945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shamosh 
 NA 
 
 
 DeYoung 
 CG 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Reis 
 DL 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MR 
 
 
 Conway 
 ARA 
 
 
 Engle 
 RW 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Individual differences in delay discounting: relation to intelligence, working memory, and anterior prefrontal cortex 
 Psychological science 
 2008 
 19 
 904 
 911 
 18947356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sharon 
 
 
 Hämäläinen 
 M 
 
 
 Tootell 
 R 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 The advantage of combining MEG and EEG: Comparison to fMRI in focally stimulated visual cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 1225 
 1235 
 17532230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Gotimer 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Lee 
 SH 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Roy 
 AK 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2209 
 2229 
 19221144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Salimi-Khorshidi 
 G 
 
 
 Webster 
 M 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Ramsey 
 JD 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Network modelling methods for FMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 1 
 17 
 19744568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Filippini 
 N 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Toro 
 R 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Correspondence of the brain's functional architecture during activation and rest 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 13040 
 13045 
 19620724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Song 
 M 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Zhou 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 K 
 
 
 Yu 
 C 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Default network and intelligence difference 
 Conference proceedings : Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Conference 
 2009 
 2009 
 2212 
 2215 
 19964951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Song 
 M 
 
 
 Zhou 
 Y 
 
 
 Li 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Tian 
 L 
 
 
 Yu 
 C 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Brain spontaneous functional connectivity and intelligence 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 41 
 1168 
 1176 
 18434203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelzel 
 C 
 
 
 Basten 
 U 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Functional connectivity separates switching operations in the posterior lateral frontal cortex 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 23 
 3529 
 3539 
 21568635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain: 3-Dimensional Proportional System: An Approach to Cerebral Imaging: Thieme 
 1988 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Den Heuvel 
 MP 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 Efficiency of Functional Brain Networks and Intellectual Performance 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2009a 
 29 
 7619 
 7624 
 19515930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Den Heuvel 
 MP 
 
 
 Mandl 
 RCW 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2009b 
 30 
 3127 
 3141 
 19235882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KRA 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Venkataraman 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 KC 
 
 
 Lazar 
 SW 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Intrinsic Functional Connectivity As a Tool For Human Connectomics: Theory, Properties, and Optimization 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2010 
 103 
 297 
 321 
 19889849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 A Population-Average, Landmark-and Surface-based (PALS) atlas of human cerebral cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 635 
 662 
 16172003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Drury 
 HA 
 
 
 Dickson 
 J 
 
 
 Harwell 
 J 
 
 
 Hanlon 
 D 
 
 
 Anderson 
 CH 
 
 
 An Integrated Software Suite for Surface-based Analyses of Cerebral Cortex 
 J Am Med Inform Assoc 
 2001 
 8 
 443 
 459 
 11522765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 J 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Fox 
 M 
 
 
 Snyder 
 A 
 
 
 Baker 
 J 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 D 
 
 
 Zempel 
 J 
 
 
 Snyder 
 L 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Raichle 
 M 
 
 
 Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain 
 Nature 
 2007 
 447 
 83 
 86 
 17476267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Bhalodia 
 VM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Mixed blocked/event-related designs separate transient and sustained activity in fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 19 
 1694 
 1708 
 12948724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vul 
 E 
 
 
 Harris 
 C 
 
 
 Winkielman 
 P 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 Puzzlingly High Correlations in fMRI Studies of Emotion, Personality, and Social Cognition 1 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 2009 
 4 
 274 
 290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waites 
 AB 
 
 
 Stanislavsky 
 A 
 
 
 Abbott 
 DF 
 
 
 Jackson 
 GD 
 
 
 Effect of prior cognitive state on resting state networks measured with functional connectivity 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 24 
 59 
 68 
 15382248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS-III) 
 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Concepts and principles in the analysis of brain networks 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2011 
 1224 
 126 
 146 
 21486299 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Willerman 
 L 
 
 
 Schultz 
 R 
 
 
 Neal Rutledge 
 J 
 
 
 Bigler 
 ED 
 
 
 In vivo brain size and intelligence 
 Intelligence 
 1991 
 15 
 223 
 228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Big correlations in little studies 
 Perspect Psychol Stud 
 2009 
 4 
 294 
 298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 Szymura 
 E 
 
 
 Cognitive neuroscience approaches to individual differences in working memory and executive control: Conceptual and methodological issues 
 Handbook of individual differences in cognition: Attention, memory and executive control 
 2010 
 New York 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 BOLD correlates of trial-by-trial reaction time variability in gray and white matter: a multi-study fMRI analysis 
 PLoS ONE 
 2009 
 4 
 e4257 
 19165335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data 
 Nature Methods 
 2011 
 1 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zalesky 
 A 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Seal 
 ML 
 
 
 Cocchi 
 L 
 
 
 Westin 
 CF 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Egan 
 GF 
 
 
 Pantelis 
 C 
 
 
 Disrupted Axonal Fiber Connectivity in Schizophrenia 
 BPS 
 2011 
 69 
 80 
 89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Cognitive control regions, as defined by successful cognitive control.  A ) Regions of interest were defined based on brain activity during successful N-back task performance. The following highly selective criteria were used: 1) Preferential activation for trials requiring flexible control (lures), 2) Correct > incorrect trials, 3) Positive correlation with accuracy across participants. All three of these regions were hubs (in top 10% connectivity in the brain).  B ) Illustration of effects defining the LPFC region of interest. LPFC was more active across correct relative to error trials, and more active for lure than other trial types. LPFC activity (correct trials across all trial types) was also correlated with overall response accuracy across individuals (r=.39, p=.0002). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Global brain connectivity (GBC) correlations with general fluid intelligence (gF).  A ) Positive GBC was calculated for the three regions identified in the task-based analysis, and correlations were assessed with gF. Only LPFC showed a significant correlation. GBC is a graph theoretical measure of resting-state functional connectivity MRI, calculated here for each seed region of interest, by computing the average connectivity strength between the region and every other voxel of the brain. Note that all three regions were in the top 10% in terms of GBC (but only LPFC’s GBC was significantly correlated with gF).  B ) Correlations were assessed between each brain voxel’s positive GBC and gF scores. Out of the entire brain, again only left LPFC was statistically significant (P<0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons). The LPFC region strongly overlapped with the LPFC region identified in the task-based analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Examining the specificity of the left LPFC GBC-gF correlation.  A ) The LPFC GBC-gF correlation was compared with the GBC-gF correlation of every brain voxel. Significant voxel clusters are shown (p<0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons). This supports the specificity of the LPFC GBC-gF effect, and demonstrates that the contribution of global connectivity to intelligence is not uniform throughout the brain. Potential control regions (based on previous studies) are highlighted.  B ) The GBC-gF correlation was calculated for a larger set of regions from  Burgess et al. (2011)  that appeared likely to show GBC-gF correlations. Using the same dataset as here, Burgess et al. identified 10 regions (the largest eight are depicted here) with N-back lure fMRI activity correlating with individual differences in cognitive control capacity (e.g., gF). Despite these regions’ activities correlating with gF, only left LPFC (substantially overlapping with the previously defined LPFC region) showed a significant GBC-gF correlation.  C ) The left LPFC GBC-gF correlation was computed before and after removing variance from all Burgess et al. regions (excluding left LPFC). The GBC-gF correlation for the left LPFC region (as defined in  Figure 1 ) was largely unaffected by removing the variance from the Burgess et al. regions. This demonstrates that the left LPFC GBC-gF correlation was statistically independent of a large set of cognitive control regions. Note that nine of the 10 regions had voxels in the top 10% GBC, demonstrating that the GBC-gF correlation is not guaranteed simply due to a control region having both gF-correlating activity and high GBC. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Identifying the origin of the LPFC GBC-gF correlation.  A ) We systematically restricted the connectivity contributing to the calculation of the GBC-gF correlation to determine the contributing connectivity strength ranges. LPFC’s group average connectivity map was split into Fz .05 ‘strength bands’, and restricted GBC-gF correlations calculated using those voxels. All strength ranges were significant, except the highest and lowest, likely due to the low number of voxels included in these two strength ranges. This likely indicates that the GBC-gF effect is global in origin – such that the more voxels that are included the better the connectivity-gF correlation. This is in contrast to the effect originating from high-strength connectivity – in which restricting to higher strength connections would improve the connectivity-gF correlation.  B ) The LPFC seed connectivity group map, colored by connectivity strength ranges (corresponding to colors in part A). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Testing for global or system-specific origins of the LPFC GBC-gF effect.  A ) We separated LPFC connectivity into three systems. The cognitive control network was identified using a meta-analysis of cognitive control studies, sensory-motor regions were identified based on probabilistic cytoarchitecture, and the default-mode network was identified using a meta-analysis of studies investigating that network.  B ) LPFC group average connectivity generally had high positive strength for cognitive control regions, low positive and negative strength (combined using absolute values) for sensory-motor regions, and high negative strength for default-mode regions. We used the conjunctions between the masks in part A along with these group strength ranges to isolate the three systems. Individual differences in mean LPFC connectivity with each of the three systems correlated with gF, suggesting a truly global origin of the LPFC GBC-gF effect. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Regions identified in the task-based and resting-state analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 A – Regions identified in the task-based analysis. 
 
 
 
 Volume (4 mm 3 ) 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Lure vs. others 
 Correct vs. error 
 Accuracy correlation 
 
 
 
 
 LPFC 
 17 
 −43.4 
 13.6 
 29.4 
 F=10,p=.002 
 F=11,p=.001 
 r=.39,p=.0002 
 
 
 mPPC 
 17 
 11.4 
 −64.3 
 52.2 
 F=11,p=.001 
 F=6,p=.02 
 r=.42,p=.0001 
 
 
 PMC 
 11 
 28.5 
 −4.6 
 54.2 
 F=9,p=.003 
 F=15,p=.0002 
 r=.29,p=.007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B – Regions identified in the voxel-wise GBC-gF correlation analysis. 
 
 
 
 Volume (4 mm 3 ) 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 LPFC 
 16 
 −46.3 
 14.9 
 28.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C – Overlap between task-based, resting-state, and  Burgess et al. (2011)  analyses. 
 
 
 
 Volume (4 mm 3 ) 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 LPFC 
 9 
 −44.2 
 13.7 
 29.8 
 
 
 
 
 
