
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9108167 
 2510 
 Hippocampus 
 Hippocampus 
 
 Hippocampus 
 
 1050-9631 
 1098-1063 
 
 
 22807169 
 3482287 
 10.1002/hipo.22053 
 NIHMS388432 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Repetition Related Changes in Activation and Functional Connectivity in Hippocampus Predict Subsequent Memory 
 
 
 
 
 Manelis 
 Anna 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Paynter 
 Christopher A. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 Mark E. 
 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 
 Reder 
 Lynne M. 
 
 1 
 2 
 * 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University 
 2 The Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition 
 3 Department of Psychology 
 4 Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh 
 
 * corresponding author. ADDRESS:  CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY , Department of Psychology ~ Baker Hall 342c, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, PHONE: (412) 268-3792, FAX: (412) 268-2844,  reder@cmu.edu 
 
 
 4 
 7 
 2012 
 
 
 18 
 7 
 2012 
 
 
 1 
 2013 
 
 
 01 
 1 
 2014 
 
 23 
 1 
 53 
 65 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Using fMRI, this study examined the relationship between repetition-related changes in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) activation during encoding and subsequent memory for similarity of repetitions. During scanning, subjects classified pictures of objects as natural or man-made. Each object-type was judged twice with presentations of either identical pictures or pictures of different exemplars of the same object. After scanning, a surprise recognition test required subjects to decide whether a probe word corresponded to pictures judged previously. When a subject judged the word as “old”, a second judgment was made concerning the physical similarity of the two pictures. Repetition related changes in the MTL activation varied depending on whether or not subjects could correctly state that pictures were different. Moreover, psychophysiological interactions analyses showed that accuracy in recalling whether the two pictures were different was predicted by repetition-related changes in the functional connectivity of MTL with frontal regions. Specifically, correct recollection was predicted by increased connectivity between the left posterior hippocampus and the right inferior frontal gyrus, and also by decreased connectivity between the left posterior hippocampus and the left precentral gyrus on the second stimulus presentation. The opposite pattern was found for trials that were incorrectly judged on the nature of the repetition. These results suggest that successful encoding is predicted by a combination of increases and decreases in both the MTL activation and functional connectivity, and not merely by increases in activation and connectivity as suggested previously. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 psychophysiological interaction 
 hippocampus 
 priming 
 subsequent memory 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 T32 MH019983 || MH 
 
 
 National Institute of General Medical Sciences : NIGMS 
 T32 GM081760 || GM 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH052808 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Recently, a number of studies have explored how repetition-related changes in brain activation during encoding are related to subsequent memory ( Wagner et al., 2000 ;  Turk-Browne et al., 2006 ;  Manelis et al., 2011 ;  Xue et al., 2010 ,  2011 ). It would seem that subsequent memory should be predicted by the repetition-related changes in the MTL, given that successful (compared to unsuccessful) encoding is associated with increased activation in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) including hippocampus (HPC), perirhinal (PRc) and parahippocampal (PHc) cortices (e.g.,  Brewer et al., 1998 ;  Wagner et al., 1998 ;  Kirchhoff et al., 2000 ;  Otten et al., 2001 ;  Jackson and Schacter, 2004 ;  Staresina and Davachi, 2006 ;  Wimber et al., 2010 ; for reviews, see  Henson, 2005 ;  Spaniol et al., 2009 ; Kim, 2010). Surprisingly, however, only the study of  Turk-Browne et al. (2006)  reported that subsequent memory effects correlate with the magnitude of changes in activation across repetitions in the MTL. The Turk-Browne et al. study found that the PHc exhibited greater repetition-related decreases for hits than for misses. A different study looked at the effect of repetition in the MTL subregions for the pictures that were continuously recognized in the experiment ( Yassa and Stark, 2008 ). They found repetition-related decreases in activation of bilateral PHc and anterior PRc and repetition-related increases in activation of bilateral posterior PRc. Neither study, however, reported any hippocampal effects. 
 One potential explanation for the failure to observe HPC effects in these studies involves the idea that the HPC is engaged in pattern separation to avoid interference from the similar representations (e.g.,  Yassa and Stark, 2008 ). Both studies used identical repetitions of the stimuli so that each repetition strengthened the existing representation, obviating any need for pattern separation. Another possible explanation for the failure to find HPC effects might be the nature of the recognition requirements at test. Both  Turk-Browne et al. (2006)  and  Yassa and Stark (2008)  used a recognition task that did not allow them to discriminate between judgments that were based on familiarity versus recollection. HPC plays a critical role in encoding the details of the study episode (e.g.,  Davachi et al., 2003 ;  Ranganath et al., 2004 ;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2009 ); therefore, it may be necessary to test subjects’ recollection in order to detect changes in HPC activation (e.g.,  Wheeler and Buckner, 2004 ;  Montaldi et al., 2006 ;  Diana et al., 2007 ;  Eichenbaum et al., 2007 ). 
 The latter explanation derives support from recent studies of  Gagnepain et al. (2011)  and  Poppenk et al. (2010) . These studies examined the effect of recollection vs. familiarity judgments for stimuli that had been exposed prior to scanning compared to stimuli that had not been so primed. They found that HPC activation is modulated by both stimulus repetition and whether the subjects give a recollection response. Thus, there were stronger source memory effects (i.e., source memory vs. no source memory) for repeated (primed) compared with novel (unprimed) stimuli in the bilateral posterior HPC ( Poppenk et al., 2010 ). In contrast, the right anterior HPC showed stronger source memory effects ( Poppenk et al., 2010 ) and stronger recollection effects (i.e., “Remember” > “Know”) for novel compared to repeated stimuli ( Gagnepain et al., 2011 ). Given that the subjects in these studies were not scanned during the priming phase of the experiment, the relationship between the repetition-related dynamics in the HPC and other MTL subregions during encoding and whether the stimuli are subsequently recollected is yet to be specified. 
 The present study addresses this matter by examining the relationship between repetition-related changes in the MTL during encoding and subsequent memory for pictures of objects. Subjects viewed either two identical pictures of an object or two different exemplars from the same basic category (e.g., a red apple and a green apple). We refer to the first case as a  same-exemplar  repetition and the second as a  different-exemplar  repetition. Some previous studies have also examined subsequent memory effects as a function of whether a probe stimulus was an identical or different exemplar from the same category of objects (e.g.,  Garoff et al., 2005 ), but they did not involve stimulus repetition during encoding. 
 A surprise memory test was then given outside the scanner that required subjects to make old/new judgments about the images when probed with words that could correspond to previously viewed pictures. For each “old” judgment, subjects had to indicate whether they remembered two different or two identical pictures that correspond to the probe word. Both memory judgments, old and same/different, also required a confidence decision (“sure” or “unsure”) about the judgment. Given that increased activity in the HPC and PHc often predicts subsequent memory strength (e.g.,  Kirwan et al., 2008 ;  Wais, 2008 ;  Song et al., 2011 ) rather then memory accuracy, this latter procedure allowed us to compare different types of subsequent memory while controlling for memory strength. Trials in which a subject correctly and confidently recognized a probe word as “old” and then correctly and confidently recalled whether the two presentations were the same or different were classified as  correct recollection . Conversely, trials for which a subject correctly and confidently recognized a probe word as “old” but then confidently misremembered whether the two presentations were the same or different were classified as  gist recollection . 
 The current paper examines neural priming in the MTL for  correct recollection vs. gist recollection  and reports a different set of analyses on different subsets of data than those previously published in  Manelis et al. (2011) . That previous report differs from the present one in that it compared neural priming for the items that were subsequently confidently recollected with the items that were subsequently forgotten (i.e., trials we define as  gist recollection  were not included in the previous report and the current paper does not analyze misses). The main finding reported in  Manelis et al. (2011)  was that the degree of neural attenuation in the temporo-occipital and frontal regions depended on the interaction between perceptual similarity across repeated presentations and the quality of their encodings. 
 Based on findings from some previous studies (e.g.,  Davachi et al., 2003 ;  Ranganath et al., 2004 ;  Weis et al., 2004 ), we predict that there should be a main effect of subsequent memory in the MTL but with greater activation in HPC and PHc for  correct  compared to  gist recollection . While there is no consensus on the role of anterior and posterior HPC in memory (e.g.,  Henson, 2005 ), some studies suggest that the posterior aspect of the HPC is associated with recollection, while its anterior aspect is associated with novelty (e.g.,  Daselaar et al., 2006 ). Based on these findings, it is possible that in our study,  correct recollection  compared to  gist recollection  will elicit greater activation in the posterior portion of the HPC. Conversely, anterior HPC may show a larger effect for  different-exemplar  compared to  same-exemplar  repetition because of the novelty introduced by the presentation of a different exemplar in the different-exemplar condition. 
 A growing body of work on pattern completion and pattern separation in HPC suggests that HPC serves as a pattern separation device (e.g.,  Bakker et al., 2008 ;  Yassa and Stark, 2008 ,  2011 ). From that view it follows that one should find the greatest HPC involvement in our study for different-exemplar repetitions when subjects actually remember that there were two different exemplars of the same object category. Different exemplars taken from the same basic category of objects share multiple perceptual features (e.g.,  Rosch et al., 1976 ). Therefore, to tease apart the two presentations and recollect that they were actually two different exemplars requires that a subject overcome the interference that comes from the similarity of perceptual features in the two exemplars by separating the exemplars’ patterns. 
 The second goal of this paper is to explore the repetition-related changes in the functional connectivity associated with the different levels of memory. Few studies have examined the changes in the functional connectivity as a function of repetition. One of these studies reported that repetition-related attenuation in regions responsible for processing of object and spatial information also showed increases in effective connectivity between these same regions ( Büchel et al., 1999 ). Another study using MEG ( Ghuman et al., 2008 ) found results consistent with those of Büchel et al. such that stimulus repetition strengthens the interactions among brain regions. No study, however, has examined repetition-related changes in connectivity of MTL and neocortex, especially as a function of subsequent memory. The results of several previous studies that involve subsequent memory (but not the interaction of subsequent memory and priming) suggest that functional and effective connectivity between the MTL subregions (especially, HPC) and neocortex are important factors predicting the subjects’ performance on memory tasks (e.g.,  Ranganath et al., 2005 ;  Hannula and Ranganath, 2009 ;  Gagnepain et al., 2011 ;  Westerberg et al., 2011 ). For example, the analysis of effective connectivity in the Gagnepain et al. study revealed that successful stimulus encoding is related to the increased connectivity from the anterior aspect of the superior temporal gyrus (involved in processing of auditory stimuli) to the HPC. Hannula and Ranganath reported that functional connectivity between HPC and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) predicts accuracy for associative memory. Taken together, these findings suggest that successful encoding may be related to the increased HPC-neocortex connectivity over repetitions. 
 
 
 2. Materials and methods 
 
 2.1 Subjects 
 Fourteen volunteers (20 – 35 years old, all right-handed, eight female) with normal or corrected to normal vision participated in this fMRI study. One subject was excluded from the study due to biased responses in the subsequent recognition test (always answered “old, confident”). All subjects were fluent in English and were treated in accordance with the CMU and Pittsburgh University IRB guidelines. 
 
 
 2.2 Design and Procedure 
 Before conducting the experiment, we created a database of pictures that consisted of two different images for each of 508 different concepts pertaining to a basic level category (e.g. squirrel, hammer, etc.) The stimuli have gone through multiple revisions to ensure correspondence between the pictures and the concept label. All lab members generated labels for each picture in random order. When one of the photographs was not correctly labeled, we discarded that category and both pictures. The photographs comprising a pair for a given category differed from each other along several dimensions. They were not, for example, pictures of the same apple taken from different perspective, but they were pictures of two different types of apples, chairs, etc. 
 While inside the scanner, each subject viewed 336 pictures that corresponded to 168 concepts randomly selected from the entire pool with the constraint that half be natural (e.g., apple) and half man-made (e.g., chair). Furthermore, for half the natural and half the man-made concepts the two pictures that were shown were identical, while for the other half the two pictures were different. The subject’s task was to indicate whether the picture was natural or man-made by making a button press with either the left or right response glove ( Figure 1A ). The presentation order of the pictures was randomly determined with the constraint that the second picture for any concept was not shown until all the concepts had had one of their two pictures shown. The mean lag between stimulus presentations was 415.8 sec (SE=10.6). The experiment was self-paced such that a stimulus stayed on until the subject responded. We chose a self-paced stimulus presentation for two reasons. First this allows fast-responders to spend less time lying in the scanner off task. Second, slow-responders will miss fewer trials. After the response, a fixation cross against a gray background was shown for 1.5 seconds before the next stimulus appeared. 
 After finishing the encoding phase, subjects took a break for ten to fifteen minutes outside the scanner. Subjects were then informed that they had seen two pictures for each concept/word and given a surprise recognition test in which they saw the words (the names of the concepts) that corresponded to the pictures shown in the scanner. Two-thirds of the concepts were old and one-third of the concepts were new (after  Turk-Browne et al., 2006 ) for a total of 252 test words. For each test word, subjects made a “first-order” judgment as to whether they had seen a picture during the encoding phase that corresponds to the probe word. They made this judgment by pressing one of three buttons on a keyboard corresponding to “old confident,” “old maybe,” or “new.” When subjects responded either “old confident” or “old maybe”, they then made a “second-order” judgment as to whether the two pictures seen at encoding were identical or different. Subjects were instructed to press the key labeled “same, sure” if they remembered two identical pictures appearing for the concept and “different, sure” if they remembered two different pictures appearing for the concept. They were instructed to press either “same, unsure” or “different, unsure” if they were less confident in their judgment. 
 
 
 2.3 Image acquisition 
 Functional and anatomical images were acquired on a Siemens 3 T Allegra MR system. A high-resolution structural image (TR = 1540 ms, TE = 3.04 ms, slice thickness = 1mm, FOV = 205, FA = 8°, number of slices = 192, resolution 1 × 1 × 1mm) was acquired using an MPRAGE (a magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition in gradient echo) sequence in the beginning of the experiment. Functional data (BOLD signal) were collected using a gradient echo, echo-planar sequence (TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, slice thickness = 3.2 mm, FOV = 205, FA = 79°, number of slices = 35, resolution = 3.2 × 3.2 × 3.2). Stimuli were presented in a self-paced manner. This resulted in a variable number of volumes in subjects’ fMRI data (ranged from 377 to 547 volumes). 
 
 
 2.4 fMRI Data analysis 
 The images were processed and analyzed with FSL 4.1.7 (FMRIB’s Software Library,  www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl ) software. On each raw BOLD dataset, nonlinear noise reduction was done with SUSAN (Smallest Univalue Segment Assimilating Nucleus), motion correction with MCFLIRT ( Jenkinson et al., 2002 ), slice-timing correction with Fourier-space time-series phase-shifting non-brain removal with BET ( Smith, 2002 ), and spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel of FWHM 6mm. Multiplicative mean intensity normalization of the volume at each time point along with high-pass temporal filtering was done with a Gaussian-weighted least-squares straight line fitting using sigma=25.0s. 
 The preprocessed data served as an input to GLM using FEAT ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/feat5/index.html ). A hemodynamic response function (HRF) was modeled using a Gamma function. Co-registration was carried out using FLIRT ( Jenkinson & Smith, 2001 ;  Jenkinson et al., 2002 ). BOLD images were registered to the high-resolution structural (MPRAGE) images, the high-resolution images were registered to the MNI152_T1_2mm template, and the two resulting transformations were concatenated and applied to the original BOLD image ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/flirt/gui.html ) to transform it to the MNI space. Functional localization of the MTL regions (i.e., right and left HPC, PHc and PRc) was determined using the Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical structural probability atlases ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslview/atlas.html ) with the probability of a voxel being in the region of interest (ROI) at or above 30%. Given our interest in the role of anterior and posterior HPC for accurate memory encoding, we divided HPC on anterior and posterior aspects along y=−20 (following  Henson, 2005 ). 
 The FEAT (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool, v5.98) was used for the first- and higher-level analysis. The length of each event was modeled in the GLM by specifying the duration of the response in the second column of a three-column event file. We back-sorted trials based on subsequent recognition (e.g.,  Brewer et al., 1998 ;  Wagner et al., 1998 ). Only trials on which the probes were confidently recognized as “old” and then, confidently judged as  same-exemplar  or  different-exemplar  repetitions were selected for the analyses.  Table 1  describes the trials that are the focus of the present paper in more detail. One first-level analysis computed a main effect of memory for whether the two exemplars were identical or different by contrasting  correct recollection  with  gist recollection  for different-exemplar repetitions and a main effect of repetition type by contrasting  same-exemplar correct recollection  with  different-exemplar correct recollection  in the MTL (collapsed across Presentation 1 and Presentation 2). Another first-level analysis calculated the magnitude of neural priming by contrasting the first and second stimulus presentations for  correct  and  gist recollection  as a function of  same - vs.  different-exemplar  repetition. The summary of all fMRI data analyses described in the paper is presented in the  Supplement (Table S1) . 
 All higher-level analyses were carried out using OLS (ordinary least squares) mixed effects that models the subject variability (e.g.,  Mumford and Poldrack, 2007 ). Group means were computed for each of the first-level comparisons. In addition, we contrasted the magnitudes of neural priming for  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection , for  same-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar correct recollection , and for  same-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection . This last category of trials was of interest because in both cases the subjects were confident that they saw the two identical images, but the judgment was correct only for the  same-exemplar  repetition type. Given that previous research suggests that it is often difficult to image the HPC due to an inherent low signal-to-noise ratio ( Greicius et al. 2003 ;  Zeineh et al. 2003 ), the resulting images of the MTL ROIs were thresholded at  p <0.005 (uncorrected) and cluster extent threshold of n = 5 voxels. If the images passed this threshold, we tested whether the voxels in the cluster (or at least the voxel at the maximum z-score) pass the threshold of p<0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons. The correction was performed at the voxel level using Gaussian Random Field (GRF) theory ( Worsley, 1992 ) within the pre-defined MTL ROIs (anterior and posterior HPC, PHc and PRc). 
 
 
 2.5. Correlation analysis 
 The number of trials with correctly remembered exemplars and those with incorrectly remembered exemplars varied from subject to subject. Moreover, a small number of the  gist recollection  responses for  same-exemplar  repetitions did not allow us to compare this category of responses with other response categories. Therefore, we conducted a correlation analysis in order to examine whether the subjects with a greater magnitude of neural priming (Presentation 1 – Presentation 2) for collapsed  correct  and  gist recollection  judgments also had a higher percentage of  correct recollection  judgments relative to the total number of  correct  and  gist recollection  judgments. The images were thresholded as explained in the section 2.4. 
 
 
 2.6. Psychophysiological interactions (PPI) 
 We explored whether and how functional connectivity between each of the MTL regions (revealed by the analyses described in sections 2.4 and 2.5) and the rest of the brain changed as a function of subsequent recollection and similarity of repeated stimuli using the PPI method ( Friston et al., 1997 ). In the PPI analysis models, there are a) three psychological regressors ( same-exemplar correct recollection  presentation 1 vs.  same-exemplar correct recollection  presentation 2,  different-exemplar correct recollection  presentation 1 vs.  different-exemplar correct recollection  presentation 2, and  different-exemplar gist recollection  presentation 1 vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  presentation 2); b) one physiological regressor – a mean time course for one of the MTL regions revealed by the 2.4 and the 2.5 analyses; and c) three interaction terms between the physiological and one of the psychological variables (PPI regressor). The contrasts between the first and second presentations were modeled by assigning “−1” and “1” to presentations 1 and 2 respectively. In each PPI model, trial types that were not part of the psychological regressor were included as covariates of no interest. All PPI analyses were conducted on the whole brain. Cluster size limits for corrected threshold ( p corrected  < 0.05) were generated by Monte Carlo simulations (1000 iterations) using the AlphaSim program ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/manual/275AlphaSim.pdf ) with FWHM = 6 mm, uncorrected voxel-wise  p -value=0.001 and the image of whole brain as a mask. According to AlphaSim, the cluster size for this analysis had to be at least 38 voxels. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 In this paper we chose to focus on trials for which subjects were confident that they had seen pictures corresponding to the word and for which they were also confident in their second decision concerning the similarity of the two pictures, regardless of whether the second judgment was correct or not. Therefore, we present here only the analyses pertaining to confident  correct recollection  and confident  gist recollection , while omitting the analysis of misses and all unconfident responses from either the first or second recognition judgment. Some of the omitted analyses can be found elsewhere ( Manelis et al., 2011 ). If a picture was miscategorized during the encoding phase (e.g. a “hammer” was categorized as natural) or if a subject took longer than 6 seconds to make a response, then this concept was excluded from both behavioral and neuroimaging analyses. However, this happened infrequently (less than 7% of trials were excluded on this basis). 
 
 3.1. Behavioral results 
 Subjects confidently recognized the word corresponding with the encoded pictures 71% of time both when the two pictures were identical ( same-exemplar  condition) and when the two pictures were different ( different-exemplar  condition). Of the confident hits for different pairs, subjects were sure and correct that the two pictures were different 32% of time ( correct recollection ) and confident but incorrect that the two pictures were identical 25% of time ( gist recollection ). Of the confident hits for identical pairs, slightly more than half (63%) were confidently and correctly reported as two identical pictures ( correct recollection ) and confidently but incorrectly reported as two different pictures 7% of the time ( gist recollection ). This bias in the direction of errors (to say “same” more often than “different”) was also reflected in the fact that only 9 of the 13 subjects made  gist recollection  responses for identical pairs. 
 Figure 2  illustrates subjects’ response times (RT) to make artificial/natural judgments during encoding. A repetition type (same- vs. different-exemplar) × Presentation (1 vs. 2) × subsequent-memory ( correct  vs.  gist recollection ) ANOVA for mean correct RTs was performed on the 9 subjects that had observations in all conditions. This analysis revealed a main effect of repetition type ( F (1,8)=17.3,  p <0.005) with faster responses for the  same-exemplar  than for the  different-exemplar  repetition condition, driven by the greater speed up on the second presentation for identical repetitions. That is, there was a reliable repetition type × presentation interaction ( F (1,8)=5.8,  p <0.05). 
 Given that the ANOVA described above was limited to only 9 subjects, we conducted three 2-way ANOVAs that excluded the  same-exemplar gist recollection  category in order to use all 13 subjects. A 2 × 2 ANOVA (presentation number × subsequent-memory) conducted on the  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  responses revealed a marginally significant presentation × memory interaction effect on RT ( F (1,12)=3.5,  p =0.09) suggesting greater repetition-related decreases for  correct  than  gist recollection . Another ANOVA that also examined presentation number × subsequent-memory effects but for  same-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection , revealed an interaction effect ( F (1,12)=5.3,  p <0.05) with greater decreases for  same-exemplar correct recollection  than for  different-exemplar gist recollection . A 2 × 2 ANOVA (presentation number × repetition type) conducted on the  same-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar correct recollection  judgments revealed a main effect of presentation, ( F (1,12)=8.9,  p <0.05), with slower RT on the first stimulus presentation than on the second one. 
 Further analyses of behavioral priming were carried out using four paired t-tests comparing RT on the presentations 1 and 2 on the four conditions described in  Table 1 . Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels for these tests were 0.0125 per test (0.05/4). These analyses revealed significant decreases in RT on the second presentation for the  same-exemplar  trials ( t (12)=4.3,  p <0.01 for  correct recollection ;  t (8)=3.5,  p <0.01 for  gist recollection ). There was no significant facilitation, however, for the  different-exemplar  trials for either  correct  or  gist recollection  (all  p-values  > 0.1). 
 
 
 3.2. Neuroimaging results 
 The  tables 2  and  3  report the results thresholded at p<0.005 uncorrected, cluster size > 5 voxels. In addition, unless specified otherwise, the results pertaining to the MTL ROIs analyses passed the p<0.05 threshold corrected for multiple comparisons at least in the voxel with the maximum z-score. 
 Subjects rarely responded “different, sure” when the two presentations were actually the same. Therefore, to examine the differences between  correct recollection  vs.  gist recollection  in MTL, we contrasted these two types of judgments for  different-exemplar  repetition. We found a main effect of recollection in bilateral anterior HPC, right posterior HPC and bilateral PHc with greater activation for  correct  compared to  gist recollection  (see  Table 2 ). For different-exemplar repetitions there was also an interaction between presentation (1 vs. 2) and memory accuracy ( correct  vs.  gist recollection ) in the right anterior HPC and left posterior HPC. Both areas revealed greater neural priming for  gist than  for  correct recollection  ( Table 2 ,  Figure 3 C,E ). A follow-up analysis showed that, in the left posterior HPC, this effect was due to significant repetition-related decreases for  different-exemplar gist recollection ,  t (12)=3.2,  p <0.01, and a lack of significant changes for  different-exemplar correct recollection  (p>0.1). In the right anterior HPC, the interaction effect was explained by the finding that activity on the second presentation for trials that produced  correct recollection  was significantly greater than for ones that resulted in  gist recollection ,  t (12)=3.1,  p <0.05. 
 The main effect of repetition type ( same-exemplar  vs.  different-exemplar ) on the MTL activation for correctly recollected exemplars was found in the right posterior HPC. The  same-exemplar correct recollection  judgments elicited stronger HPC activation than the  different-exemplar correct recollection  judgments. A presentation (1 vs. 2) × repetition type (same vs. different exemplar) interaction effect was found in left PRc, left PHc and right anterior and posterior HPC ( Table 2 ,  Figure 3 ). The anterior HPC area overlapped with the right anterior HPC area found in the  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  contrast. A follow-up analysis showed that the interaction effects in the above MTL regions were explained by the significant repetition-related decreases for the  same-exemplar  trials (left PRc:  t (12)=2.5,  p <0.05; left PHc:  t (12)=3.4,  p <0.01; right HPC/PHc region:  t (12)=2.6,  p <0.05), but marginally significant increases (left PRc:  t (12)=−2.1,  p =0.06; right anterior HPC,  t (12)=−1.8,  p =0.09) or sustained activation (left PHc and right HPC/PHc) across presentations for the  different-exemplar  trials. 
 The effect of veridical memory (subjects say that the two presentations were the same on the  same-exemplar  trials) vs. imprecise memory (subjects say that the two presentations were the same on the  different-exemplar  trials) was investigated by contrasting repetition-related changes for  same-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection . In both conditions, subjects were confident that the two presentations were identical pictures; however, in the latter case, this judgment was false. The only region that showed the effect of veridical vs. imprecise memory was left posterior HPC ( Table 2 ,  Figure 3 D ) that was located slightly posterior to the left posterior HPC area identified in the  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  contrast. A follow-up analysis showed that this effect was primarily due to a significant attenuation of the fMRI signal from Presentation 1 to Presentation 2 for the  different-exemplar gist recollection  judgments,  t (12)=3.6,  p <0.005, but not for the  same-exemplar correct recollection judgments . 
 
 
 3.3. Correlation analysis 
 The goal of this analysis was to provide converging evidence that less neural priming in MTL is associated with better exemplar recall.  Table 3  illustrates the results of the correlational analysis, across subjects, between the magnitude of neural priming (Presentation 1 – Presentation 2) and proportion of trials for which the nature of the repetition (identical vs. different exemplar) was correctly recollected. We found a significant negative correlation between the magnitude of neural priming and exemplar recall in bilateral HPC for  same-exemplar  repetition and in the bilateral HPC and right PRc for  different-exemplar  repetition ( Table 3 ). Consistent with the results described in section 3.2, subjects with better memory for whether the two exemplars were identical or different showed, respectively, less repetition-related neural attenuation for  same-exemplar  repetitions but more of an increase for  different-exemplar  repetitions in the MTL regions shown in  Figure 4 . 
 
 
 3.4 PPI analysis 
 The goal of this analysis was to examine whether subsequent exemplar recollection (i.e., subjects’ ability to remember that there were two different exemplars in the different-exemplar condition) can be predicted by the repetition-related changes in the functional connectivity between HPC and other brain regions. For this purpose, we compared the repetition-related changes in the functional connectivity for the  different-exemplar correct recollection  and for the  different-exemplar gist recollection responses  using the right anterior HPC and the left posterior HPC as the seed regions, identified in  Table 2  and  Figure 3 C and 3 E . We found no significant presentation number (1 vs. 2) × memory accuracy (correct vs. gist recollection) interaction effect on the functional connectivity between the right anterior HPC and other brain regions (at least at the  p corrected  < 0.05). 
 There was, however, a significant presentation number (1 vs. 2) × memory accuracy (correct vs. gist recollection) on the functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and two regions in the frontal cortex. The functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and the right inferior frontal cortex (IFG; z-max=4.16 at [58 20 18], number of voxels = 48) increased on the second presentation for the  correct recollection  responses, but decreased on the second presentation for the  gist recollection  responses ( Figure 5 ). A planned comparison analysis revealed that both the increases for  correct recollection  and the decreases for  gist recollection  were statistically significant ( t (12)=2.9,  p <0.05 for  correct recollection ;  t (12)=−4.5,  p <0.005 for  gist recollection ). In addition, the connectivity was significantly stronger for  gist  than  correct recollection  on the first presentation ( t (12)=3.4,  p <0.01). On the second presentation, the connectivity was marginally stronger for  correct  than  gist recollection  ( t (12)=1.9,  p <0.1). 
 A pattern of functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and the left precentral gyrus (z-max=4.4 at [−38 −14 54], number of voxels = 40) was opposite to that described above. The functional connectivity decreased on the second presentation for  correct recollection  but increased for  gist recollection  ( Figure 5 ). A planned comparison analysis showed that both the decreases for  correct recollection  and the increases for  gist recollection  were statistically significant ( t (12)=−3.5,  p <0.01 for  correct recollection ;  t (12)=2.6,  p <0.05 for  gist recollection ). The functional connectivity was significantly stronger for  correct  than  gist recollection  ( t (12)=2.6,  p <0.05) on the first presentation; however, on the second presentation the connectivity was significantly stronger for  gist  than  correct recollection  ( t (12)=2.4,  p <0.05). 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 
 4.1 Neural priming in the MTL predicts subsequent memory accuracy in judging whether encoded exemplars were identical or different 
 Recent studies have shown that the magnitude of repetition-related neural attenuation can be predictive for whether the stimuli are subsequently remembered of forgotten ( Turk-Browne et al., 2006 ;  Manelis et al., 2011 ;  Xue et al., 2011 ). It was unclear, however, whether this effect exists only in cortical regions or also in the HPC and whether the differences in neural priming can predict subsequent recollection for two identical or different study episodes. The results of our study provide novel evidence that the patterns of neural priming in the MTL, including HPC, predict subsequent recollection. 
 The repetition-related changes in activation of the right anterior HPC and the left posterior HPC were predictive for whether subjects would correctly recollect seeing two different exemplars or incorrectly recollect seeing two identical exemplars on the  different-exemplar  repetition trials. In both HPC areas, c orrect recollection  was characterized by sustained activation over the two encoding presentations. In contrast,  gist recollection  (i.e., when subjects were confident that they saw two identical pictures that were in fact different exemplars) was characterized by the significant decreases in activation on the second presentation. The finding of sustained activation for  correct recollection  is, in general, consistent with the recent report that activation patterns across repetitions are more similar for subsequently recognized and recalled stimuli than for the stimuli that are later forgotten ( Xue et al., 2010 ). 
 Thus far, there is no consensus on the role of anterior and posterior HPC on memory performance (e.g.,  Henson, 2005 ). Some studies suggest that the posterior aspect of the HPC is associated with recollection, while its anterior aspect is associated with novelty (e.g.,  Daselaar et al., 2006 ). Another view is that anterior HPC is more specialized for successful associative encoding compared to the posterior HPC ( Sperling et al., 2003 ;  Jackson and Schacter, 2004 ;  Chua et al., 2007 ). Still another view proposes that the anterior HPC is involved in flexible retrieval of relational information, while the posterior HPC is involved in retrieval of repeated representations ( Giovanello et al., 2009 ). In our study, anterior and posterior regions showed similar sensitivity to memory for exemplars suggesting that co-activation of these two regions may be especially important for  recollection  (and reintegration over repetitions, and categorization) of two encoding episodes that appear at two different time points of the experiment. This idea is consistent with the recent finding that right anterior and left posterior HPC were co-activated when subjects had to remember the order of the stimuli presented in the experiment ( Tubridy and Davachi, 2011 ). 
 In addition to a joint role of anterior and posterior HPC in recollection, it is likely that each of the regions makes a unique contribution during successful encoding. For example, sustained activation in the posterior HPC may be important for binding each representation to a specific time frame and to a specific category of objects in the experiment, which later helps determine whether the two instances of an object were identical or different. One piece of evidence for this view comes from the finding that sustained activation in the posterior HPC was found not only for the contrast between  different-exemplar  c orrect recollection  and  different-exemplar gist recollection , but also in the contrast that compares same- exemplar  c orrect recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection . The left posterior HPC region that showed sustained activation in the latter contrast was in close proximity to the posterior HPC region found in the  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  contrast. Notably, both of these regions in the left posterior HPC correspond to the HPC area [−32 −30 −12 in  Kim, 2011 ] that, according to a recent meta-analysis ( Kim, 2011 ), is more active for associative encoding than for item encoding of pictures. 
 Another piece of evidence for the role of posterior HPC in correct recollection of two encoding episodes came from the correlation analysis between the magnitude of neural priming (for  correct  and  gist recollection  collapsed) and the proportion of correctly recollected exemplars. The findings support the idea that formation of strong representations occurs when activation of the posterior HPC on the second presentation is equivalent or stronger than on the first. We found a negative correlation between the magnitude of neural priming and the proportion of correct responses in the right posterior HPC for  same-exemplar  repetitions and the bilateral posterior HPC and the right PHc for  different-exemplar  repetitions. This indicates that subjects with better recollection of whether the two presentations were identical or different showed less neural priming in HPC and PHc. Moreover, in the different-exemplar condition, subjects with better exemplar recollection showed repetition-related increases in HPC and PHc activation, while subjects with poor recollection showed repetition-related decreases in these regions. 
 Functional specificity of the right anterior HPC was revealed through the analysis involving the  same - vs.  different-exemplar correct recollection  judgments. Although both conditions represent confident, correct responses, the area in the right anterior HPC (that overlapped with the right anterior HPC area observed in the  different-exemplar correct recollection  vs.  different-exemplar gist recollection  contrast) showed differential activation patterns for these two conditions. The slight repetition-related decreases in activation of the right anterior HPC for  same-exemplar  repetitions were paralleled by the repetition-related increases for  different-exemplar  repetitions. This finding may be related to the fact that presentation of a different exemplar from the same category of objects elicited a novelty response in HPC, a view consistent with earlier work (e.g.,  Tulving et al., 1996 ;  Kirchhoff et al., 2000 ;  Daselaar et al., 2006 ;  Kumaran and Maguire, 2006 ;  Poppenk et al., 2010 ). 
 Some previous studies suggest that novelty detection in HPC occurs automatically (e.g.,  Yamaguchi et al., 2004 ). Automaticity in novelty detection predicts no difference in repetition-related changes in HPC activation for  correct  and  gist recollection  in the  different-exemplar  condition because the second stimulus presentation is different from the first presentation in both cases. Despite this prediction, we found that the HPC response depended on whether the subjects actually remembered having seen two different exemplars. This finding suggests that the novelty detection is not an automatic property of HPC but depends on the quality of encoding. 
 
 
 4.2. Pattern separation and pattern completion in HPC 
 Our findings contribute to the growing body of literature on pattern separation and completion in the HPC (e.g.,  Bakker et al., 2008 ;  Yassa and Stark, 2011 ) as these two phenomena seem to account for subjects’ successes and failures to recollect whether the two instances are of the same object. It is important to emphasize that the analyses reported in this paper excluded unsure responses (as well as misses) from the first-order judgments and unsure responses from the second-order judgments concerning with whether the two presentations were identical. Therefore, both  correct recollection  and  gist recollection  responses were confident judgments. To confidently decide that a stimulus is “old" requires only that there be a strong memory trace for one of the two presentations. Whether the subsequent judgment is  correct recollection  or  gist recollection  depends on whether both presentations have strong traces in memory. 
 If both traces are strong, subjects can correctly and confidently recollect whether the two exemplars were identical or different objects. Such recollection requires “pattern separation” to overcome the interference that comes from the similarity in perceptual features between the two exemplars from the same category. The “pattern separation” is thought to be expressed in brain regions as sustained activation on the second presentation of the stimulus (“the activity should resemble that of an initial presentation” ~  Yassa and Stark, 2011 , p.518). Consistent with this view, our study demonstrated that  correct recollection  of different exemplars relies on sustained activation in HPC, while  gist recollection  is associated with significant neural attenuation on the second presentation. On the other hand, the results of our correlational analysis indicate that even identical repetitions can produce sustained activation because subjects with better recollection did not show repetition-related decreases. That is, “pattern separation” seems to be required not only for recollection of two different exemplars but also for recollection of two identical exemplars. 
 An alternative explanation of the encoding processes, that better fits with the correlation analyses, is that correct recollection involves having recollected the first presentation when the second one is presented and storing that the two presentations differed. Support for this view comes from a similar paradigm using ERP in which we found evidence that the amplitude of recollection (LPC) signal during the second presentation predicts the level memory accuracy at test (DeWolfe et al., in preparation). 
 Gist recollection can occur whenever only one of the two presentations has a strong trace in memory. There was a bias to respond “same, sure” and presumably subjects used this whenever they were confident that the saw a picture of the object probed but could not remember two different pictures. Consider the case where the first presentation of two identical pictures is well encoded, but the second presentation is not. All features encoded on the second presentation will reestablish the features already encoded on the first presentation. This will create a feeling that the two presentations match (supported by “pattern completion”), which will result in the subsequent correct response that the two presentations are identical. Given that in this scenario, the correct responses are not based on two strong memory representations, this correct response should be considered more of a “lucky guess” than a  correct recollection . Given that separating “lucky guesses” from pure recollection was not possible, the  correct recollection  responses for  same-exemplar  repetitions were the mixture of true  correct recollection  and “lucky guesses”. 
 The proportion of “lucky guesses” would be of no concern if it were the same in all conditions. However, the probability of “lucky guesses” in the different-exemplar condition was much lower than in the same-exemplar condition. Whether the subjects formed a strong memory trace for the first presentation and a weak one for the second or vice versa, they will tend to respond that they saw two identical exemplars because they remember only one exemplar but know that there were two presentations of each object (because we told them so). This explains why there was a bias to respond “same” and why there were almost twice as many  correct recollection  responses for  same-exemplar  than for  different-exemplar  repetitions even though the number of “confident hits” was equivalent for both conditions. This also explains why, according to the correlation analysis, the subjects that were able to correctly recollect that there were two different exemplars in the  different-exemplar  condition increased HPC activation on the second presentation, while the subjects that were able to correctly recollect that there were two identical exemplars in the  same-exemplar  condition showed no changes between Presentation 1 and Presentation 2. 
 
 
 4.3 Differences in functional connectivity related to type of stimulus repetition and quality of subsequent memory 
 The HPC is anatomically connected to a wide range of areas in the brain, thereby enabling information encoded by different regions to be bound together (e.g.,  Suzuki and Eichenbaum, 2000 ). It is useful to then ask whether the subsequent memory effect in HPC is related to the changes in the functional connectivity of HPC with other regions in the brain. The increases in connectivity between HPC and prefrontal regions were observed in several previous studies (e.g.,  Hannula and Ranganath, 2009 ;  Westerberg et al., 2011 ). Our study adds to these findings by showing that successful encoding is not necessarily predicted by greater HPC activation or stronger functional connectivity but rather by the changes in neural dynamics from one presentation to the next (that includes local activation and functional coupling of HPC with other brain regions). Specifically, we found that for  correct recollection  judgments, there was strengthening of connectivity on the second stimulus presentation between the left posterior HPC and the right IFG, but weakening of functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and the left precentral gyrus. The opposite was true for  gist recollection  that showed repetition-related decreases in the functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and the right IFG but repetition-related increases in the functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and the left precentral gyrus. 
 One way to think about successful encoding is that memory for distinct encoding episodes requires a chain of events to occur. Both frontal regions, right IFG and left precentral gyrus, that were functionally connected to HPC in our study, are involved in subsequent memory effects (see  Kim, 2011  for review). Successful encoding on the first presentation establishes the coupling between the posterior HPC and precentral gyrus. One previous study ( Zysset et al., 2002 ) reported that the brain region located in close proximity to the left precentral region we report here (Talairach coordinates [−39 −14 47] in the Zysset et al. study and MNI coordinates [−38 −14 54] in our study) showed a stronger response when subjects had to make semantic judgments (e.g., “Leipzig is the capital of Germany”) compared to evaluative judgments (“I like Leipzig”). This suggests that the coupling between the posterior HPC and left precentral gyrus may be related to semantic processing of a picture to make an artificial/natural judgment. The second presentation strengthens the connectivity with IFG. Given that some studies found greater involvement of prefrontal cortex in associative memory than for item memory ( Hales and Brewer, 2010 ), the increased functional connectivity between the HPC and IFG for successful encoding may determine the formation of an associative link between the two presentations based on their semantic similarity. 
 Not much is known about how decreases in functional connectivity can support memory encoding. One recent study, however, sheds light on this phenomenon by examining changes in the functional connectivity related to consolidation of face-location associations ( Takashima et al., 2009 ). According to this study, decreases in the functional connectivity of posterior HPC with fusiform face area and posterior parietal cortex characterized the consolidation of information in memory. Given these recent findings, we speculate that decreases in the functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and left precentral gyrus (that characterized successful encoding of details) reflect a consolidation process. A problem with this explanation is that consolidation occurs gradually, often during sleep (like in the Takashima et al. study). On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that under certain circumstances the consolidation process can occur quite rapidly, maybe even on-line ( Tse et al., 2007 ). 
 An alternative explanation for decreased connectivity between HPC and left precentral gyrus on the second presentation for correctly recollected different exemplars is that during the first stimulus presentation subjects had to make a semantic judgment about the stimulus to classify it as natural or man-made. On the second presentation, subjects were already primed with that specific category of objects, so making artificial/natural judgment was easier with less semantic involvement required. 
 
 
 4.4 Summary 
 In summary, our study provides novel findings that whenever encoding involves two stimulus presentations, subsequent memory for these presentations is determined by the changes in brain activation between the two stimulus presentations in the HPC as well as by the changes in functional connectivity between the HPC and frontal cortex. Importantly, successful encoding is predicted by the combination of increases and decreases in HPC activation and functional connectivity, not by mere increases as suggested in previous studies. This paper also adds to the understanding of the functional dissociation between anterior and posterior aspects of HPC. Both of these regions jointly contribute to recollection of two distinct encoding episodes. However, the role of posterior HPC may be to bind memory representations to specific time points in the experiment, while the role of anterior HPC may be to detect whether the exemplars from the same category of objects are identical or different. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supp Table S1 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants 5R01MH052808, T32MH019983 and T32GM081760. It was also supported by the National Science Foundation grant DGE0549352. We thank Lisa Storey for help conducting the study. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Bakker 
 A 
 
 
 Kirwan 
 CB 
 
 
 Miller 
 M 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 Pattern separation in the human hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus 
 Science 
 2008 
 319 
 1640 
 1642 
 18356518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Z 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Making memories: Brain activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered 
 Science 
 1998 
 281 
 1185 
 1187 
 9712581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 The predictive value of changes in effective connectivity for human learning 
 Science 
 1999 
 283 
 1538 
 1541 
 10066177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Evidence for a specific role of the anterior hippocampal region in successful associative encoding 
 Hippocampus 
 2007 
 17 
 1071 
 1080 
 17604351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Fleck 
 MS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Triple dissociation in the medial temporal lobes: Recollection, familiarity, and novelty 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2006 
 96 
 1902 
 1911 
 16738210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Multiple routes to memory: Distinct medial temporal lobe processes build item and source memories 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2003 
 100 
 2157 
 2162 
 12578977 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diana 
 RA 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: A three-component model 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2007 
 11 
 379 
 386 
 17707683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 30 
 123 
 152 
 17417939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gagnepain 
 P 
 
 
 Henson 
 R 
 
 
 Chételat 
 G 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Lebreton 
 K 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 Is neocortical-hippocampal connectivity a better predictor of subsequent recollection than local increases in hippocampal activity? New insights on the role of priming 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 23 
 391 
 403 
 20146612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garoff 
 RJ 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 The neural origins of specific and general memory: the role of the fusiform cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2005 
 43 
 847 
 859 
 15716157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giovanello 
 KS 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 D 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 Distinct hippocampal regions make unique contributions to relational memory 
 Hippocampus 
 2009 
 19 
 111 
 117 
 18727049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghuman 
 AS 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 Dobbins 
 IG 
 
 
 Schnyer 
 DM 
 
 
 The effects of priming on frontal-temporal communication 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2008 
 105 
 8405 
 8409 
 18541919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Boyett-Anderson 
 JM 
 
 
 Eliez 
 S 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Regional analysis of hippocampal activation during memory encoding and retrieval: fMRI study 
 Hippocampus 
 2003 
 13 
 164 
 174 
 12625466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hales 
 JB 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Activity in the hippocampus and neocortical working memory regions predicts successful associative memory for temporally discontiguous events 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2010 
 48 
 3351 
 3359 
 20667491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 The eyes have it: Hippocampal activity predicts expression of memory in eye movements 
 Neuron 
 2009 
 63 
 592 
 599 
 19755103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 RNA 
 
 
 A mini-review of fMRI studies of human medial temporal lobe activity associated with recognition memory 
 Q J Exp Psychol B 
 2005 
 58 
 340 
 360 
 16194973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackson 
 O 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Encoding activity in anterior medial temporal lobe supports subsequent associative recognition 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 456 
 462 
 14741683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Bannister 
 P 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 Improved optimisation for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 17 
 825 
 841 
 12377157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain images 
 Med Image Anal 
 2001 
 5 
 143 
 156 
 11516708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 H 
 
 
 Neural activity that predicts subsequent memory and forgetting: A meta-analysis of 74 fMRI studies 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 54 
 2446 
 2461 
 20869446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirchhoff 
 BA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Stern 
 CE 
 
 
 Prefrontal-temporal circuitry for episodic encoding and subsequent memory 
 J Neurosci 
 2000 
 20 
 6173 
 6180 
 10934267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirwan 
 CB 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Activity in the medial temporal lobe predicts memory strength, whereas activity in the prefrontal cortex predicts recollection 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 10541 
 10548 
 18923030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kumaran 
 D 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 An unexpected sequence of events: Mismatch detection in the human hippocampus 
 PLoS Biol 
 2006 
 4 
 e424 
 17132050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manelis 
 A 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Paynter 
 CA 
 
 
 Storey 
 L 
 
 
 Reder 
 LM 
 
 
 Opposing patterns of neural priming in same-exemplar vs. different-exemplar repetition predict subsequent memory 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 55 
 763 
 772 
 21168518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Montaldi 
 D 
 
 
 Spencer 
 TJ 
 
 
 Roberts 
 N 
 
 
 Mayes 
 AR 
 
 
 The neural system that mediates familiarity memory 
 Hippocampus 
 2006 
 16 
 504 
 520 
 16634088 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mumford 
 JA 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Modeling group fMRI data 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2007 
 2 
 251 
 257 
 18985145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Depth of processing effects on neural correlates of memory encoding: Relationship between findings from across- and within-task comparisons 
 Brain 
 2001 
 124 
 399 
 412 
 11157567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poppenk 
 J 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Past experience modulates the neural mechanisms of episodic memory formation 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 4707 
 4716 
 20357121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Heller 
 A 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Brozinsky 
 CJ 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Functional connectivity with the hippocampus during successful memory formation 
 Hippocampus 
 2005 
 15 
 997 
 1005 
 16281291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Dy 
 CJ 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Dissociable correlates of recollection and familiarity within the medial temporal lobes 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2004 
 42 
 2 
 13 
 14615072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosch 
 E 
 
 
 Mervis 
 CB 
 
 
 Gray 
 WD 
 
 
 Johnson 
 DM 
 
 
 Boyes-Braem 
 P 
 
 
 Basic objects in natural categories 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 1976 
 8 
 3 
 382 
 439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 Fast robust automated brain extraction 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2002 
 17 
 143 
 155 
 12391568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Song 
 Z 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Smith 
 CN 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Different nonlinear functions in hippocampus and perirhinal cortex relating functional MRI activity to memory strength 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2011 
 108 
 5783 
 5788 
 21436048 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Davidson 
 PSR 
 
 
 Kim 
 ASN 
 
 
 Han 
 H 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI studies of episodic encoding and retrieval: Meta-analyses using activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 1765 
 1779 
 19428409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 R 
 
 
 Chua 
 E 
 
 
 Cocchiarella 
 A 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 R 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Putting names to faces: Successful encoding of associative memories activates the anterior hippocampal formation 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 20 
 1400 
 1410 
 14568509 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staresina 
 BP 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Differential encoding mechanisms for subsequent associative recognition and free recall 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 9162 
 9172 
 16957073 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 WA 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 The neurophysiology of memory 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 2000 
 911 
 175 
 191 
 10911874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takashima 
 A 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 ILC 
 
 
 Jensen 
 O 
 
 
 Talamini 
 LM 
 
 
 Rijpkema 
 M 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 Shift from hippocampal to neocortical centered retrieval network with consolidation 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 10087 
 10093 
 19675242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tse 
 D 
 
 
 Langston 
 RF 
 
 
 Kakeyama 
 M 
 
 
 Bethus 
 I 
 
 
 Spooner 
 PA 
 
 
 Wood 
 ER 
 
 
 Witter 
 MP 
 
 
 Morris 
 RGM 
 
 
 Schemas and memory consolidation 
 Science 
 2007 
 316 
 76 
 82 
 17412951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tubridy 
 S 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Medial temporal lobe contributions to episodic sequence encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 272 
 280 
 20494967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Markowitsch 
 HJ 
 
 
 Craik 
 FE 
 
 
 Habib 
 R 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Novelty and familiarity activations in PET studies of memory encoding and retrieval 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1996 
 6 
 71 
 79 
 8670640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turk-Browne 
 NB 
 
 
 Yi 
 DJ 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 Linking implicit and explicit memory: Common encoding factors and shared representations 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 49 
 917 
 927 
 16543138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 M 
 
 
 Rugg 
 M 
 
 
 Selecting for memory? The influence of selective attention on the mnemonic binding of contextual information 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 8270 
 8279 
 19553466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Interactions between forms of memory: When priming hinders new episodic learning 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2000 
 12 
 52 
 60 
 11506647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Building memories: Remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity 
 Science 
 1998 
 281 
 1188 
 1191 
 9712582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wais 
 PE 
 
 
 fMRI signals associated with memory strength in the medial temporal lobes: A meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 3185 
 3196 
 18817791 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weis 
 S 
 
 
 Specht 
 K 
 
 
 Klaver 
 P 
 
 
 Tendolkar 
 I 
 
 
 Willmes 
 K 
 
 
 Ruhlmann 
 J 
 
 
 Elger 
 CE 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 Process dissociation between contextual retrieval and item recognition 
 Neuroreport 
 2004 
 15 
 2729 
 2733 
 15597043 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Westerberg 
 CE 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 Reber 
 PJ 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 Medial temporal contributions to successful face-name learning 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 1337 
 1349 
 15050559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wimber 
 M 
 
 
 Heinze 
 HJ 
 
 
 Richardson-Klavehn 
 A 
 
 
 Distinct frontoparietal networks set the stage for later perceptual identification priming and episodic recognition memory 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 13272-1328 
 20926653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Marrett 
 S 
 
 
 Neelin 
 P 
 
 
 A three-dimensional statistical analysis for CBF activation studies in human brain 
 J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 
 1992 
 12 
 900 
 918 
 1400644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Dong 
 Q 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Lu 
 Z 
 
 
 Mumford 
 JA 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Greater neural pattern similarity across repetitions is associated with better memory 
 Science 
 2010 
 330 
 97 
 101 
 20829453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Mei 
 L 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Lu 
 Z-L 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 R 
 
 
 Dong 
 Q 
 
 
 Spaced learning enhances subsequent recognition memory by reducing neural repetition suppression 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 23 
 1624 
 1633 
 20617892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yamaguchi 
 S 
 
 
 Hale 
 LA 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Rapid prefrontal-hippocampal habituation to novel events 
 J Neurosci 
 2004 
 24 
 5356 
 5363 
 15190108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yassa 
 MA 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 Multiple signals of recognition memory in the medial temporal lobe 
 Hippocampus 
 2008 
 18 
 945 
 954 
 18493928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yassa 
 MA 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 Pattern separation in the hippocampus 
 Trends Neurosci 
 2011 
 34 
 515 
 525 
 21788086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zeineh 
 MM 
 
 
 Engel 
 SA 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Dynamics of the hippocampus during encoding and retrieval of face-name pairs 
 Science 
 2003 
 299 
 577 
 580 
 12543980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Huber 
 O 
 
 
 Ferstl 
 E 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 The anterior frontomedian cortex and evaluative judgment: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 983 
 991 
 11906238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 The experimental design. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Response times to make man-made/natural judgments about the pictures on the first and second presentations for  same - and  different-exemplar  repetitions for  correct recollection  and  gist recollection . The  same-exemplar gist recollection  category of responses is differently shaded to indicate that this condition represents data from only 9 of 13 subjects. Standard error bars represent “within-subject” estimated variability of the differences in means across conditions within subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Differences in repetition-related changes in hippocampus (HPC), parahippocampal (PHc) and perirhinal (PRc) cortices. Boxes around different conditions refer to the contrast. Red color:  same-exemplar correct-detail  hits >  different-exemplar correct-detail  hits contrast. Blue color:  different-exemplar correct-detail  hits <  different-exemplar incorrect-detail  hits contrast. Brown color:  same-exemplar correct-detail  hits <  different-exemplar incorrect-detail  hits contrast.  Same-exemplar incorrect-detail  hits that were available only for 9 of 13 subjects are illustrated by the slanted line pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Correlation between repetition-related neural attenuation and percent of correctly recalled exemplars for same-exemplar (blue) and different-exemplar (red) repetitions. Negative values of parameter estimates mean increased activation on Presentation 2 relative to Presentation 1. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Functional connectivity between the left posterior HPC and frontal regions for different-exemplar pairs subsequently remembered as old, as a function of presentation (1 vs. 2) and accuracy for type of repetition ( correct vs. gist recollection ). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Trials of interest selected for behavioral and neuroimaging data analyses 
 
 
 
 
 
 Repeated exemplars were 
 
 
 
 Same 
 Different 
 
 
 
 
 Subjects said that the two exemplars were “ same ” 
 
 Same-exemplar 
 
 correct recollection 
 
 
 Different-exemplar 
 
 gist recollection 
 
 
 
 Subjects said that the two exemplars were “ different ” 
 
 Same-exemplar 
 
 gist recollection 
 
 
 Different-exemplar 
 
 correct recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. Only trials on which the probes were confidently recognized as “old” and then, confidently judged as  same-exemplar  or  different-exemplar  repetitions were selected for the analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Comparison of the magnitude of neural priming (defined as the difference in activation on Presentation 1 vs. Presentation 2) in hippocampus, parahippocampal and perirhinal cortices 
 
 
 
 
 Hemisphere 
 Region 
 N voxels 
 Z- Max 
 
 MNI coordinates 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Main effect of subsequent memory accuracy correct vs. gist recollection 
 
 Different-exemplar correct recollection > Different-exemplar gist recollection 
 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus, anterior 
 9 
 3.09 
 22 
 −8 
 −22 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus, posterior 
 7 
 3.01 
 26 
 −36 
 −6 
 
 
 L 
 Hippocampus, anterior 
 5 
 3.04 
 −22 
 −6 
 −22 
 
 
 R 
 Parahippocampal cortex 
 12 
 3.59 
 18 
 −32 
 −18 
 
 
 L 
 Parahippocampal cortex 
 12 
 3.42 
 −26 
 −40 
 −12 
 
 
 
 Main effect of repetition type 
 
 Same-exemplar correct recollection > Different-exemplar correct recollection 
 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus, posterior 
 6 
 3.2 
 34 
 −32 
 −8 
 
 
 
 Presentation (1 vs 2) × Memory (correct vs. gist) interaction 
 
 Different-exemplar correct recollection < Different-exemplar gist recollection 
 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus, anterior 
 11 
 3.3 
 24 
 −4 
 −28 
 
 
 L 
 Hippocampus, posterior 
 8 
 3.0 
 −32 
 −30 
 −10 
 
 
 
 Presentation × Repetition type interaction 
 
 Same-exemplar correct recollection > Different-exemplar correct recollection 
 
 
 
 L 
 Perirhinal cortex 
 16 
 3.5 
 −16 
 −10 
 −24 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus/Parahippocampal cortex 
 12 
 3.2 
 22 
 −26 
 −12 
 
 
 L 
 Parahippocampal cortex 
 11 
 3.5 
 −28 
 −28 
 −24 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus, anterior 
 10 
 3.4 
 26 
 −4 
 −28 
 
 
 
 Presentation × Repetition type interaction for the “same” judgments 
 
 Same-exemplar correct recollection < Different-exemplar gist recollection 
 
 
 
 L 
 Hippocampus, posterior 
 14 
 3.37 
 −34 
 −34 
 −6 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 The results of the correlation analysis between the magnitude of neural priming (Presentation 1 – Presentation 2) and subsequent recollection of the exemplar similarity 
 
 
 
 
 Hemisphere 
 Region 
 N voxels 
 Z- max 
 
 MNI coordinates 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Negative correlation between neural priming (Presentation1 – Presentation 2) and proportion of correct-exemplar responses 
 
 Different-Exemplar  repetitions 
 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus 
 83 
 3.6 
 30 
 −38 
 −4 
 
 
 L 
 Hippocampus 
 6 
 2.9 
 −28 
 −38 
 0 
 
 
 R 
 PHc 
 32 
 3.55 
 30 
 −30 
 −16 
 
 
 
 Negative correlation between neural priming (Presentation1 – Presentation 2) and proportion of correct-exemplar responses 
 
 Same-Exemplar  repetitions 
 
 
 
 R 
 Hippocampus 
 60 
 4.3 
 36 
 −26 
 −8 
 
 
 L 
 Hippocampus 
 11 * 
 3.02 
 −34 
 −16 
 −20 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. 
 
 
 * 
 This region did not survive correction for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 
 
