
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 23079572 
 3523276 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.072 
 NIHMS414885 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 FMRI task parameters influence hemodynamic activity in regions implicated in mental set switching 
 
 
 
 
 Witt 
 Suzanne T. 
 
 a 
 stwitt@harthosp.org 
 
 
 
 Stevens 
 Michael C. 
 
 a 
 b 
 msteven@harthosp.org 
 
 
 a Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford Hospital, Address: 200 Retreat Avenue, ONRC, Whitehall Building, Hartford, CT 06106, USA 
 b Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, Address: Department of Psychiatry, 300 George Street, Suite 901, New Haven, CT 06511, USA 
 
 CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: Suzanne T. Witt, 200 Retreat Avenue, ONRC, Whitehall Building, Hartford, CT 06106, USA, Phone: 860-545-7858, Fax: 860-545-7797,  stwitt@harthosp.org 
 
 
 25 
 10 
 2012 
 
 
 15 
 10 
 2012 
 
 
 15 
 1 
 2013 
 
 
 15 
 1 
 2014 
 
 65 
 139 
 151 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Mental set switching is a complex executive function that is required when the focus of attention must be altered in order to adapt to a frequently-changing environment. While there is generally acceptance that switching is subserved by a fronto-parietal network, there is a considerable lack of consistency across studies as to other brain regions involved in executing mental set switches. This functional magnetic resonance imaging study sought to determine whether paradigmatic design aspects such as stimulus complexity, motor response complexity, and stimulus ordering could account for the differences in reporting of brain regions associated with mental set switching across previous studies. Several brain regions, including the striatum and anterior cingulate, previously associated with mental set switching were found to be related more to resolving intra-stimulus interference conferred by increased stimulus complexity and increased motor response complexity than to executing the mental set switch. In considering stimulus ordering, defined as the number of non-switch trials preceding a switch trial, brain activity was not observed in the fronto-parietal regions typically associated with switching but rather in regions in the anterior prefrontal cortex, sensorimotor cortex, and secondary visual cortices. Our results indicate that these important paradigm design aspects that are theoretically unrelated to set switching  per se  should be balanced and controlled for in future experiments, so as not to obscure clear identification of brain regions truly engaged in mental set switching. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 paradigm 
 set switching 
 set shifting 
 striatum 
 anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH081969 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 1.1 Mental set switching 
 Mental set switching is a complex executive function that is required when the focus of attention must be altered in order to adapt to a frequently-changing environment. In its broadest sense, set switching can be said to be necessary for nearly any type of cognitive set switch, whether it be shifting attention from one stimulus attribute to another (e.g.,  Hampshire and Owen, 2006 1  Loose et al., 2006 ), altering stimulus-response mappings in contexts with different contingencies (e.g.,  Rubia et al., 2006 ), or switching from performing one task to another (e.g.,  Dreher and Grafman, 2003 ). Despite the diversity of switch types, the underlying behavior being measured is the ability to update the executive control parameters representing a given ‘task set’ to accommodate a new task set ( Logan and Gordon, 2001 ;  Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ). Although the unique neural correlates of set switching are still a matter of active research, meta-analyses of relevant functional neuroimaging literature have confirmed the importance of brain activity within frontal and parietal cortex regions when a mental set switch is required ( Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ;  Wager et al., 2004 ). However, across the growing body of fMRI and PET studies published to date, it is clear more than these regions are commonly engaged when set switching is required. For example, in his meta-analytic synthesis of studies prior to 2004,  Wager et al. (2004)  noted evidence across studies for set shifting engagement of occipital cortices, sensorimotor regions, temporal cortex, insulae, anterior cingulate, and thalamus ( Wager et al., 2004 ). Many of these same regions were also noted in a second, later meta-analysis ( Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ). Additionally, some brain regions, such as the striatum ( Casey et al., 2004 ;  Casey et al., 2002 ;  Luna et al., 2001 ;  Sohn et al., 2000 ) and anterior cingulate cortex ( Braver et al., 2003 ;  Derrfuss et al., 2004 ;  Rubia et al., 2006 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ), are frequently implicated in small subsets of individual set switching studies. 
 
 
 1.2 Inconsistencies in reported neural correlates of mental set switching 
 Wager et al. (2004)  attempted to account for the inconsistencies across studies by examining whether brain activity elicited across set shifting neuroimaging studies was related to inherent properties of brain organization, (i.e., whether different brain regions were functionally specialized for shifting attention for location, objects, attributes, rules, and tasks). However, they did not find any brain region active during a specific switch type that was not also active during all other switch types ( Wager, et al. 2004 ). Gender has not routinely been considered as a factor that dictates neural activity differences in set switching tasks. Numerous studies have shown that there are no differences in behavioral performance on cognitive switching tasks between adult males and females (e.g.,  Kalkut et al., 2009 ). Indeed, there is only limited evidence that females engage fronto-striatal regions more than males, while males engage parietal regions more than females during performance of a Meiran-type stimulus-response set switching task ( Christakou et al., 2009 ). Because that study included both adolescents and adults, it is not clear whether the observed gender-related differences were dominated by changes in neural activity during adolescence ( Christakou et al., 2009 ). Another aspect of the previous body of set shifting literature that has not yet been considered when attempting to understand the Inconsistencies across studies is the design differences in the fMRI paradigms themselves. Different paradigm types can impose different types of cognitive demands, each of which could conceivably elicit different profiles of brain activity. For instance, set switching paradigms unavoidably rely on the integrity of other cognitive systems including working memory, inhibition, and attention ( Miyake et al., 2000 ). It is possible that failure to effectively balance these paradigm design considerations (or even other cognitive demands) between switch and non-switch conditions might obscure evidence for regional activation (e.g.,  Rubia et al., 2006  employed a paradigm in which switch trials were preceded by no fewer than three non-switch trials, potentially biasing results towards any effects of stimulus ordering;  Derfuss et al., 2004  reported that switch trials could be preceded by upwards of five non-switch trials, but gave no indication as to whether this ordering had been balanced across the run), leading to variable findings across studies and possibly inaccurate conclusions about which brain regions are functionally specialized for effecting a switch of mental set. 
 
 
 1.3 Summary of various paradigms employed in functional neuroimaging studies of set switching 
 A review of the set switching literature reveals that studies measuring the same switch type can have very different degrees of stimulus complexity and motor response options. Complex stimuli can be considered those stimuli that differ on multiple dimensions, thus increasing interference in determining the correct target. For example, studies employing tasks requiring both attribute and rule switches, such as card sorting tasks, can use simple stimuli requiring a forced choice option (e.g.,  Asari et al., 2005 ) or more complex stimuli which require the participant to choose from several possible options (e.g.,  Hampshire and Owen, 2006 ;  Monchi et al., 2006 ;  Nagahama et al., 1999 ). Likewise, experiments can employ response options that require a participant to either continually switch between stimulus-response set mappings (e.g.,  Crone et al., 2006 ;  Derrfuss et al., 2004 ;  Dove et al., 2000 ;  Rubia et al., 2006 ;  Wilkinson et al., 2001 ) or select from upwards of four different responses (e.g.,  Monchi et al., 2006 ). Paradigms employing these more complex motor response options also increase stimulus-response interference when selecting motor program for the correct response (e.g.,  Hazeltine et al., 2000 ;  Jiang and Kanwisher, 2003 ). Another aspect of paradigm design that can influence the observed neural correlates of set switching lies in the ordering and timing of stimuli. It has been shown that varying the inter-stimulus interval or response-to-cue interval had a significant effect on the behavioral performance of an attribute set switching task ( Badre and Wagner, 2006 ;  Cepeda et al., 2001 ;  Loose et al., 2006 ). Additionally, for those mental set switching experiments that employ a cue notifying of an impending shift, varying the cue-to-target interval (“task set reconfiguration” manipulation; ( Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ) has also been shown to have a significant measureable effect on behavioral performance ( Cepeda et al., 2001 ;  Meiran, 1996 ,  2000 ). In line with these previous results regarding stimulus timing in set switching tasks, one might reasonably expect that stimulus ordering (i.e., having more or fewer non-switch trials preceding a switch trial) would alter both behavioral performance and the activity in those brain regions engaged in switching. Other evidence for stimulus order on brain function come from fMRI studies examining task automaticity and habituation, which have shown a role for the frontal cortices and inferior parietal lobes in reorienting attention after error perception in a Go/No-go task ( Hester et al., 2005 ) and after a target switch in an over-practiced visual search task ( Kubler et al., 2006 ). 
 
 
 1.4 Summary and hypotheses 
 We present results from an attribute set switching task that manipulated stimulus complexity, motor response complexity (i.e., number of possible responses), and the number of non-switch trials preceding a given switch or non-switch trial in a pseudo-random factor throughout each task session. The paradigm was constructed not only to balance several other design factors relevant to shifting, but also to determine the effect of trial type (i.e., switch or non-switch) on these paradigmatic design considerations. As our paradigm was designed to be able to quantify these three design aspects for each trial, we employed a GLM approach including measures for stimulus complexity, motor response complexity, and the number of preceding non-switch trials as parametric modulation terms. The aims of this study were twofold. First, we wanted to identify the neural correlates of set-shifting unconfounded by otherwise controllable experimental parameters, and second, we wanted to characterize the neural correlates of these paradigm design aspects and determine if the discrepancies found in the set-shifting literature are related to them. In line with the previously cited meta-analyses, we anticipate that set-shifting would engage predominantly frontal and parietal regions. We hypothesized that increasing stimulus complexity would result in increased hemodynamic activity in both frontal and motor planning regions to assist in overcoming the increased interference posed by stimuli differing on multiple dimensions. As the anterior cingulate cortex has previously been linked to interference resolution, as in Stroop tasks ( Nee et al., 2007 ), we anticipated that this region would be engaged more for overcoming stimulus complexity interference than switching. We predicted that increasing the number of possible motor response options would result in increased hemodynamic activity in both motor planning and motor performance regions. Both the caudate and putamen have been linked to motor planning and performance ( Witt et al., 2008 ), thus we hypothesized that these regions would be enlisted to overcome motor response complexity. A recent review of the role of interference in set switching found that both stimulus- and response-based interferences, conferred by moderately and maximally complex stimuli, had dissociable and measurable effects on set switching behavioral performance, with greater effects noted for switch trials compared to non-switch trials ( Kiesel et al., 2010 ). Thus we anticipated that any observed activity in these frontal and motor regions would be greater during switch trials, due to the need to overcome both inter- and intra-stimulus interference, as evidenced by increased behavioral switch costs. As there is not a large body of work published on task automaticity during executive or cognitive functions, we speculated that switch trials following long trains of non-switch trials might engage brain regions associated with reorienting attention after periods of task automaticity or habituation. These included regions in the superior, medial, middle, and inferior frontal cortices as well as the inferior parietal lobes and supramarginal gyri ( Hester et al., 2005 ;  Kubler et al., 2006 ). As with our hypotheses for stimulus and motor response complexity, we anticipated that the effects of long trains of non-switch trials preceding a switch trial would be more pronounced during switch trial due to need to reorient attention to the new mental set. 
 
 
 
 METHODS 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 A total of 83 right-handed adult participants (46 females) were recruited for several studies at the Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center through community advertisements. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 31 years (mean (SD) = 22 (2.7) years) and were screened to ensure that they were medically healthy and had no past head injury, neurologic condition, learning disability, or other neurodevelopmental conditions. The absence of current or lifetime psychiatric and substance abuse disorders was determined using the screening module of the Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnosis (SCID-IV; ( First et al., 1996 ). All participants underwent written informed consent using procedures approved by the Hartford Hospital IRB. 
 
 
 2.2 FMRI Stimulus Delivery/Response Recording 
 The fMRI set switching task was implemented using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.). Visual stimuli were presented using a projection system (5000 ANSI lumens) and displayed on a high resolution screen located just behind the participant’s head. The participant viewed the screen using a mirror attached to the head coil. Corrective lenses were provided as needed. An MR-compatible fiber optic response device (Lightwave Medical, Inc., Vancouver, B.C.) was used to acquire behavioral responses. 
 
 
 2.3 Set switching Paradigm 
 The set switching paradigm ( Figure 1 ) was designed as a rapid, event-related fMRI task, where each of two unique runs consisted of 81 trials, 41 switch trials (counting the first trial as a switch) and 40 non-switch trials. Trials were pseudo-randomly ordered, where any given switch trial could be preceded by between 1 and 6 non-switch trials (mean = 2; median = 1 preceding non-switch trials) and stimulus complexity and response options varied in no discernable pattern. The number of non-switch trials preceding a given switch trial was distributed such that 50% of switch trials were preceded by 1 non-switch trial, 25% by 2 non-switch trials, and 25% by 3 or more non-switch trials. Each trial was 4 seconds long, preceded by a 1.2 second cue ( Cepeda et al., 2001 ). The cue informed participants whether they would be required to count the number of different colors, sizes, or shapes on the stimulus, and this cue remained on the screen throughout the trial to remove extraneous working memory demands. The cue duration was selected based on previous evidence that 1.2 seconds was sufficient to equalize impact on behavioral switch costs due to proactive task set reconfiguration ( Cepeda et al., 2001 ). The response type was held constant on all trials (i.e., participants always pressed button 1, 2, or 3 if there were 1, 2, or 3 dimensions counted). The task itself (counting) remained the same on all trials, but participants had to shift among attribute sets to count the relevant stimulus attribute. The stimuli were 3×3 grids of different colors (red, yellow, or blue), sizes (small, medium, or large), and shapes (triangles, circles, or squares) that ranged from very simple (all large, yellow squares, i.e., differing on only one dimension) to complex (differing on three dimensions). Importantly, the task was counterbalanced across all factors, such that the frequency of each color, size, and shape (including combinations and mappings to task) was equiprobable, ensuring that there were no frequency or familiarity confounds. Additionally, no stimulus was repeated. The interstimulus interval (ISI) was varied between 0.5 and 9.5 seconds, with an average (SD) of 2.4 (2) seconds. Each run lasted 8 minutes and 41 seconds. 
 
 
 2.4 Imaging Parameters 
 MR images were acquired on a 3T Siemens Allegra (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) located at the Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center at the Institute of Living/Hartford Hospital in Hartford, CT. The functional imaging volumes were collected in axial orientation to the anterior commissure-posterior commissure line using a single-shot-gradient-echo echo-planar sequence (TR/TE = 1,500/28 msec; flip angle = 65; FOV = 24 cm; matrix = 64; 3.4×3.4 mm in-plane resolution; slice thickness = 5 mm; 30 slices) with whole brain coverage. The two runs each consisted of 347 time points, with an initial 9 second rest session to allow for T1 effects to stabilize. These initial six images were not included in subsequent analyses. 
 High resolution T1- and T2-weighted anatomical images were also acquired on all participants to ensure that all were free from obvious brain structure abnormality that might influence both task performance results and interpretation of functional imaging results. 
 
 
 2.5 Behavioral Data Analyses 
 The reaction time data for correct trials were analyzed using a series of multivariate, repeated measures ANOVAs in SPSS (IBM Corporation, Somers, NY). Trial type (switch, non-switch) and each paradigm design aspect (stimulus complexity, number of potential response options, and number of preceding non-switch trials) were used as within-subjects factors. Evidence for significant multivariate effects was examined at each level of each paradigm design aspect (i.e., 1, 2, 3 for stimulus complexity and number of potential response options and 1–6 for the number of preceding non-switch trials;  Figure 1 ). Two additional series of multivariate, repeated measures ANOVAs were also conducted using age binned to the nearest integer and gender as between-subjects factors. Again, evidence for significant multivariate behavioral task effects was examined for each between-subject factor, each within-subject factor, and all possible within- and between-subjects interactions in a mixed-effects regression model. 
 
 
 2.6 Image Processing 
 Functional images were reconstructed offline. Each run was corrected for slice-timing acquisition differences and separately realigned using INRIalign ( Freire and Mangin, 2001 ;  Freire et al., 2002 ) as implemented in SPM5 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). A mean functional image volume was constructed for each participant for each run from the realigned image volumes and used to determine the parameters for spatial normalization into standardized Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. These normalization parameters were then applied to the corresponding functional image volumes, and the normalized images were smoothed with an 8 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. All participants’ data were individually inspected to ensure that no participant had translational or rotational head motion greater than the acquired voxel size. 
 
 
 2.7 FMRI Statistics 
 The regressors from each participant’s fMRI model were derived by extracting the stimulus onset timing for all trials and modeled using a synthetic hemodynamic response function. The functional imaging data of each participant were modeled individually in SPM5 and included regressors for switch trials and non-switch trials. Stimulus complexity, response-mapping, and the number of preceding non-switch trials were included into each participant model as parametric interaction terms, in that order. Stimulus complexity was parameterized as the number of attribute dimensions on a given stimulus (i.e., 1, 2, or 3). Similarly, response-mapping was parameterized as the number of potential response options (i.e., 1, 2, or 3), based on the number of potential valid response options assuming that the cue was ignored. Example stimuli are shown in lower portion of  Figure 1 . While stimulus complexity and motor response complexity often corresponded in this paradigm, the actual correlation between the two regressor terms was only  r  = 0.26 for each run. Finally, the number of preceding non-switch trials was parameterized as the integer number of non-switch trials preceding a given trial. As SPM5 utilizes serial orthogonalization, individual participant models were rerun several times in different ways to ensure that the order in which the parametric interaction terms were included in the statistical parametric model did not affect the results. The six motion-corrected parameter estimates (x, y, and z displacements and pitch, roll, and yaw rotations) were included as covariates of no interest to statistically control signal change related to head motion. A high-pass filter (cutoff period = 128 s) was incorporated into the model to remove low-frequency signals. Contrasts corresponding to the main effect of switch trials, non-switch trials and the parametric main effects of stimulus complexity, response-mapping, and number of preceding non-switch trials were specified for each participant. All contrast images written by SPM5 represented brain activity relative to an ‘implicit baseline’ of unmodeled variance. In addition, linear combinations of these contrasts were specified to examine the difference between elicited BOLD signal changes on switch versus non-switch trials for each of these factors. 
 The main effects of switching were estimated using a 1-sample t-test of each participant’s contrast directly comparing switch trials to non-switch trials. The neural correlates of each paradigm design aspect were also measured via three individual 1-sample t-tests of each participant’s contrasts estimating the parametric effects of stimulus complexity, number of potential response options, or number of preceding non-switch trials, respectively, across both trial types. To determine the parametric effects of each paradigm design aspect on a given trial type (switch or non-switch), individual 1-sample t-tests were performed on every participant’s contrast terms comparing each paradigm design aspect for switch trials to that for non-switch trials. These tests allowed us to identify which of these brain regions with activity related to a given paradigm design aspect -- irrespective of parametric level (e.g., increased versus decreased stimulus complexity) -- also differed in activation in some way between switch trials compared with non-switch trials and vice versa. By choosing to use an arguably simpler parametric analysis over a more complicated four-way GLM-interaction, we lost the ability to fully describe the interaction between switching and paradigm design aspect, perhaps presenting an avenue for future work to fully describe these relationships. All group effect maps underwent whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons using False Discovery Rate (FDR;  Genovese et al., 2002 ). 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Data 
 All participants were able to perform the set-switching task with high accuracy and consistency. The average response accuracies were 92.2% and 89.4% for non-switch and switch trials, respectively. Overall there was an average of <1% missed (no response) trials. No single participant had less than 75% accuracy or failed to respond to more than 10% of trials, regardless of trial type. 
 Significant multivariate effects on reaction time were observed for Trial type (switch versus non-switch trials), confirming the presence of an overall switch cost of 96 msec (F (1,82)  = 198.271, p < 1.36 × 10 −23 ). Significant multivariate effects were also observed for each of the three factors under consideration, stimulus complexity (F (2,81)  = 181.381, p < 1.76 × 10 −22 ), number of response options (F (2,81)  = 190.506, p < 2.37 × 10 −37 ), and the number of preceding non-switch trials (F (3,80)  = 117.072, p < 3.55 × 10 −29 ), indicating that these paradigmatic design factors have an overall effect on performance, regardless of trial type. Finally, significant multivariate Design Factor x Trial Type (switch versus non-switch trials) interactions were observed between each of the three factors: stimulus complexity (F (2,81)  = 11.129, p < 5.4×10 −5 ), number of response options (F (2,81)  = 47.510, p < 2.23 × 10 −14 ), and number of preceding non-switch trials (F (3,80)  = 8.498, p < 5.75×10 −5 ), indicating that each of these factors, beyond affecting overall reaction times, had an effect on switch costs ( Figure 2 ). 
 A second set of multivariate analyses confirmed that the significant effects of stimulus complexity, number of response options, and number of preceding non-switch trials described above were not the result of either differences due to gender or age. There were no overall multivariate age effects for switch costs, stimulus complexity, number of response options, and number of preceding non-switch trials, nor were there any significant multivariate Age x Design Factor x Trial Type interactions. Similarly, we did not observe any significant multivariate effects between gender and switch costs, stimulus complexity, number of response options, and number of preceding non-switch trials. However, significant Gender x Design Factor x Trial Type interactions were observed for stimulus complexity (F (2,80)  = 3.378, p < 0.0391) and number of response options (F (2,80)  = 3.189, p < 0.047), but these interactions are likely explained by slightly better overall performance in men compared with women. 
 
 
 3.2 Functional imaging results 
 
 3.2.1 Main effects of switching 
 The comparison of switch versus non-switch trials (main effects of switching) is summarized here to provide a context of key findings related to “switching” for this paradigm ( Figure 3 ,  Table 1 ). Switch trials resulted in greater activity in the left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6/9/46), left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44/45), left superior and inferior parietal lobes (BA 7/40), medial and superior frontal gyrus (BA 6/8), right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6), right superior parietal lobe (BA 7), bilateral insula, bilateral thalamus, as well as several occipital and temporal regions. Non-switch trials were predominantly characterized by a large cluster of activation in the medial cuneus (BA 18) and a small but significant cluster of activity in the medial frontal gyrus (BA 10). 
 
 
 3.2.2 Parametric effects of stimulus complexity 
 Increased complexity ( Figure 4A ,  Table 2A ) was characterized by significantly greater activity in bilateral middle/inferior frontal gyri (BA 6/9/46/47), right medial frontal cortex (BA 8, pre-SMA), bilateral superior parietal lobes (BA 7), bilateral inferior parietal lobes (BA 40), bilateral caudate, bilateral thalamus, bilateral anterior insula, bilateral middle/inferior occipital gyri, and bilateral fusiform/lingual gyri. Increased complexity also was characterized by lower activity in bilateral anterior frontal gyri (BA 8/9), anterior cingulate, inferior parietal gyri (BA 40), posterior cingulate (BA 31), posterior insula (BA 13), and middle temporal gyri (BA 22). 
 
 
 3.2.3 Modulatory effects of stimulus complexity on set switching 
 A number of brain regions identified above as being related to stimulus complexity ( Figure 4B ,  Table 2B ) modulated brain activity during switch trials compared with non-switch trials. These regions encompassed frontal, motor, and parietal control areas, including the right anterior cingulate (BA 32), bilateral MFG (BA 8), right postcentral gyrus (BA 2), bilateral cerebellum, left anterior insula (BA 13), bilateral posterior cuneus, and thalamus, as well as more extensive activity in bilateral middle and medial frontal gyri (BA 6). There were also effects of stimulus complexity on non-switch trials relative to switch trials in bilateral medial frontal cortex/anterior cingulate (BA 9/10/24/32), left posterior cingulate (BA 31), bilateral inferior parietal lobes (BA 39), bilateral middle temporal gyri (BA 21), and bilateral parahippocampi. 
 
 
 3.2.4 Parametric effects of number of response options 
 An increased number of response options ( Figure 4C ,  Table 3A ) was characterized by greater activity in numerous regions throughout the brain. These included bilateral anterior cingulate (BA 32), middle/inferior frontal and precentral gyri (BA 6), SMA (BA 6), postcentral gyri (BA 2), superior parietal lobes (BA 7), inferior parietal lobes (BA 40), caudate, thalamus, anterior insulae (BA 13), and middle occipital gyri (BA 19), as well as left putamen, and right lingual gyrus. A decreased number of response options was characterized by relatively lower activity in bilateral superior frontal gryi (BA 8/9), several regions in bilateral inferior parietal lobes (BA 40), bilateral middle temporal gyri (BA 22), and left cuneus (BA 19). 
 
 
 3.2.5 Modulatory effects of the number of response options on set switching 
 Several brain regions, identified above as being engaged by number of response options, modulated activity during switch trials compared with non-switch trials ( Figure 4D ,  Table 3B ). These regions included bilateral superior/middle/inferior frontal gyri (BA 6/9/44/46), superior parietal lobes (BA 7), inferior parietal lobes (BA 40), bilateral putamen/globus pallidus, thalamus, left insula, left postcentral gyrus (BA 2), and right caudate. In contrast, no such significant effect of the number of response options was observed for non-switch trials compared with switch trials. 
 
 
 3.2.6 Parametric effects of number of preceding non-switch trials 
 A greater number of non-switch trials preceding a given trial ( Figure 5 ,  Table 4 ) was characterized by increased activity in bilateral superior frontal gyri (BA 8/9), medial frontal gyri (BA 10), inferior frontal gyri (BA 47), anterior cingulate (BA 24), pre-/postcentral gyri (BA 3/4), inferior parietal lobes (BA 39/40), cuneus (BA 18), middle temporal gyri (BA 21/22), right posterior cingulate (BA 30), right caudate, and right thalamus. An increased number of preceding non-switch trials did not significantly reduce BOLD response in any brain regions. 
 
 
 3.2.7 Effects of number of preceding non-switch trials on set switching 
 There were no significant modulatory effects of the number of preceding non-switch trials when comparing switch or non-switch trials. 
 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 The purposes of this study were to identify the neural correlates of set-shifting, unconfounded by common paradigm design aspects, and to determine whether these stimulus design aspects (largely uncontrolled in previous functional neuroimaging studies of set shifting), such as stimulus complexity, motor response complexity, and stimulus ordering, could account for neural activity in some of the brain regions frequently but inconsistently attributed to mental set switching. The study had several important, novel findings. First, we have demonstrated that when several stimulus and paradigm design aspects were effectively balanced within the fMRI paradigm, set switches among different stimulus attributes appeared to be executed by a predominantly left-lateralized fronto-parietal cortical control network. This is a subset of brain regions identified in previous meta-analyses as engaged for set switching ( Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ;  Wager et al., 2004 ). Second, our analyses also helped clarify the somewhat ambiguous role of brain regions such as the anterior cingulate cortex and striatum in set switching. Specifically, we found evidence that neither of these regions was involved in the direct execution of a set switch. Instead, their engagement appeared to be more related to mediating interference induced by complex stimuli. Finally, we observed that there was a demonstrable effect of stimulus ordering on set switching brain function. This particular paradigm design aspect may represent an additional, largely unexplored, cognitive component of mental set switching, as the behavioral and neural correlates suggested a form of attentional disengagement not previously described. 
 
 4.1 Main effects of switching 
 By controlling for the paradigm and stimulus design aspects of stimulus complexity, motor response complexity, and stimulus ordering, we were able to identify a number of brain regions that appeared to be, in the context of this study, engaged to execute a mental set switch. In addition, activity in these regions could not easily be attributed to the three experimental factors. This suggests that, in comparison to meta-analyses of previous functional neuroimaging set-shifting studies that find a somewhat larger handful of regions, these regions might be more central to attribute set-shifting. This predominantly left lateralized fronto-parietal network included the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, and inferior parietal lobe and was in line with previous summaries of published results (e.g.,  Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ;  Wager et al., 2004 ). In particular, the current results confirmed a role for the prefrontal cortex, especially the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in switching when stimulus selection was the only issue ( Rushworth et al., 2002b ;  Rushworth et al., 2004 ;  van Veen et al., 2001 ). Likewise, fMRI studies in healthy participants have associated hemodynamic activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus to conflict resolution in switch trials ( Badre and Wagner, 2006 ,  2007 ). Similar studies in patients with damage to this region have also noted impairment in task-switching performance, specifically in the ability to select and maintain task-set ( Aron et al., 2004 ;  Mecklinger et al., 1999 ;  Rogers et al., 1998 ). The inferior parietal lobes have associated with the selection of stimulus-response sets ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ). 
 
 
 4.2 Parametric effects of stimulus complexity 
 As hypothesized, increased stimulus complexity resulted in engagement of additional frontal and parietal regions, including the medial frontal gyrus, dorsal caudate, and superior parietal lobules. The presence of activity in the medial frontal gyrus and dorsal caudate (discussed below in terms of their shared roles in overcoming both stimulus and response complexity) confirms our second aim that activity in these regions may be related more to other paradigm design considerations than to executing the mental set-shift. 
 
 
 4.3 Parametric effects of response complexity 
 Stimuli with an increased number of motor response options engaged additional motor planning and programming regions, including the medial frontal gyrus, premotor cortices, sensorimotor cortices, superior parietal lobules, and ventral striatum. Activity in several of the same regions, including medial frontal cortex, superior parietal lobules, and striatum, again suggests that these regions that they play a role in overcoming general stimulus-response set interference more than executing mental set switches, as discussed below. Additionally, the differences between the neural correlates of increased stimulus complexity and motor response complexity, including that increased response complexity engaged motor performance regions and ventral striatum, confirm our hypothesis, as well as behavioral work done by  Kiesel et al., (2010) , that these two phenomena are capturing different neural effects. 
 
 
 4.4 Role of anterior cingulate cortex in switching and stimulus and response complexity 
 In contrast to several previous mental set switching studies ( Braver et al., 2003 ;  Derrfuss et al., 2004 ;  Rubia et al., 2006 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ), we did not observe activity in anterior cingulate cortex that was related to executing attribute-based mental set switches. There also was no evidence for striatal engagement during switching once major paradigmatic factors were controlled for, adding to both previous and current evidence that striatal involvement in switching is perhaps only required to inhibit competing cognitive or motor responses ( Cools, 1980 ;  Mink, 1996 ). The anterior cingulate cortex and striatum, in addition to other regions commonly associated with motor planning, programming, and performance, appeared to be engaged more to overcome intra-stimulus interference either due to increased stimulus complexity or increased motor response complexity. In several previous studies, the anterior cingulate cortex has been demonstrated to be active only during switches with changes in response set or conflicts between possible response sets ( Botvinick et al., 2004 ;  Rushworth et al., 2002a ;  Rushworth et al., 2004 ;  van Veen et al., 2001 ). A recent study examining mechanisms of cognitive flexibility found that activity in the anterior cingulate was related more to switching between response sets than switching between stimulus attributes ( Kim et al., 2011 ). Several authors also proposed that the neighboring pre-SMA region is involved in such interference resolution ( Ridderinkhof et al., 2004 ;  Rushworth et al., 2008 ;  Ullsperger and von Cramon, 2001 ), as it is thought to be engaged in change-of-plan and stop tasks ( Aron and Poldrack, 2006 ;  Curtis, 2006 ;  Li et al., 2006 ;  Nachev et al., 2005 ). Neural activity in these medial frontal cortical regions has been related to inhibiting responses, switching between tasks, and switching between stimulus-response sets ( Brass and von Cramon, 2002 ;  Crone et al., 2006 ;  Garavan et al., 2003 ;  Rushworth et al., 2002a ;  Wager et al., 2004 ). Neither the pre-SMA nor the anterior cingulate cortex has been shown to be engaged in switching when the switching entails only how stimuli are processed without any stimulus-response set changes ( Rushworth et al., 2002b ,  2005 ). In general, the role of the anterior cingulate cortex and pre-SMA in task control involves anticipatory preparation and selection of task set, while their role in response competition can be explained by need to select or re-select partially ambiguous stimulus-response sets ( Rushworth et al., 2004 ). This fits well with our results showing medial frontal engagement associated with stimulus and motor response complexity and not switching  per se . 
 
 
 4.5 Role of striatum in switching and mediating stimulus and response complexity 
 Striatal activity was also associated to stimulus and motor response complexity but not switching itself. Although dorsal striatal activity was noted both for trials with increased stimulus complexity and trials with increased motor response complexity, only trials with increased motor response complexity engaged regions of the ventral striatum, including the putamen. At least one previous study has shown that the caudate is active during the cognitive decision to shift, but not during the simple execution of a shift ( Monchi et al., 2006 ). Activity in the caudate has additionally been seen when evaluation and decision to change set is required but not during blocks of continuous shifting ( Grahn et al., 2008 ). Its engagement in association with increased stimulus complexity and increased number of response options also suggests a potential role for the caudate in mediating conflict and interference. In contrast, activity in bilateral putamen has been predominantly associated with motor performance ( Lehericy et al., 1998 ;  Maillard et al., 2000 ;  Witt et al., 2008 ), having strong connections to the sensorimotor strip, SMA, and anterior cingulate cortex ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ). The ventral striatum has been associated with cortical regions engaged in executive functions, decision making, and motor planning ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ), however, since activity in the ventral striatum was only observed during trials of increased number of motor response options, its observed activity here was most likely related to motor planning. 
 
 
 4.6 Additional regions engaged in mediating stimulus and response complexity 
 Several other brain regions exhibited activity apparently related more to stimulus and motor response complexity than switching itself, including middle and medial frontal gyri and superior parietal lobe. The bilateral premotor and supplementary motor cortices have been previously associated with motor programming and planning ( Grafton et al., 1992 ;  Passingham, 1985 ;  Roland, 1984 ;  Roland et al., 1980 ;  Wise et al., 1997 ), in addition to the execution of simple, voluntary movements in general ( Witt et al., 2008 ). Both left and right superior parietal lobes, extending into the inferior parietal lobes and precuneus, have been connected to both mediating stimulus-response set conflict or interference and selecting the appropriate stimulus-response set ( Hazeltine et al., 2000 ;  Jiang and Kanwisher, 2003 ). The superior parietal lobes, in conjunction with the supplementary motor area, left cingulate, and left middle and bilateral inferior frontal gyri, have also been linked to processing increasingly complex stimuli ( Kroger et al., 2002 ), lending further evidence that increased stimulus complexity and increased motor response complexity require additional resources to overcome the conferred interference. 
 
 
 4.7 Summary of parametric effects of stimulus and response complexity 
 Our careful task design and use of parametric analyses to control for various stimulus and paradigm design aspects suggests that anterior cingulate, striatum, middle and medial frontal gyri, and superior parietal lobule play more of a role in facilitating switches by mediating stimulus-induced interference rather than in executing the switch itself. Therefore, while previous studies linking activity in these brain regions to set switching were not incorrect, they did not uncover the specificity of arguably distinct cognitive demands that engaged those regions. We observed that activity in these regions was also modulated for switch trials. Qualitative comparison of the results for parametric effects of stimulus and response complexity to their respective modulatory effects on switching strongly suggests that activity in these regions increased. However, the limitation of our parametric analysis framework made it impossible to precisely confirm this. Future experiments that specifically seek to describe how these complexities influence switch-related activation could confirm this observation that inter-trial interference (i.e., switching) necessitates greater engagement of the brain these regions. It is noteworthy that brain regions exhibiting increased activity during non-switch trials mirrored those active during trials with overall reduced stimulus and motor response complexity and included many regions though to comprise the default mode network (i.e., superior/medial frontal gyri, posterior cingulate gyri, and inferior parietal lobes; ( Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  Greicius et al., 2003 ;  Gusnard and Raichle, 2001 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ;  van den Heuvel et al., 2009 ). This suggests that the additional cortical and motor planning control, afforded by the anterior cingulate cortex, striatum, and superior parietal lobe, was only needed to overcome the interference posed by highly complex stimuli when a switch was being performed. During non-switch trials, the observed lesser degree of “deactivation” within regions of the default mode network could be interpreted in a similar manner as  Eichele et al. (2008)  and  Weissman et al. (2006) , wherein reduced deactivation was taken as an indication of reduced attention to the task at hand. If correct, the current results suggest that the less complex the stimulus, the more likely it was for participants to lose focus on the task at hand if the behavioral set remained unchanged across subsequent trials. 
 Behaviorally, both increased stimulus and response complexity resulted in both overall slowing of performance regardless of trial type and increased switch costs, paralleling the neuroimaging results. This indicated that increased cognitive resources are recruited to process the most complex stimuli. Both stimulus complexity and the number of potential response options exhibited similar behavioral and neuroimaging correlates, which was not wholly unexpected given that the two were linked in the paradigm employed in this study, i.e., the number of potential response options on a given stimulus, for the most part, paralleled the number of dimensions on which the stimulus differed. However, these two design aspects were not significantly correlated and did not measure the same cognitive phenomenon. Thus, they should not be conflated. Notable differences in how these two factors modulated brain activity included engagement of the ventral striatum and more posterior aspects of middle and medial frontal regions for trials with increased motor response complexity compared with trials of increased stimulus complexity (Sections 3.2.2–3.2.5;  Figure 3 ;  Tables 2 – 3 ). Additionally, it should also be noted that for trials with minimal response complexity (i.e., only one possible motor response option), switch costs were effectively eliminated. As described previously ( Figure 1 , Section 2.7), the most complex stimulus could have only one response option while, a relatively simple stimulus could have three potential response options. Additionally, as reviewed in the Introduction (Section 1.4), it is possible to design a mental set-shifting paradigm that uses very complex stimuli with very simple motor response patterns and vice versa. 
 
 
 4.8 Effects of stimulus ordering 
 With a greater number of preceding non-switch trials, the data suggested there was disengagement of the cognitive control brain regions normally observed active during switching in favor of regions related to attention reorientation, task reversal, and motor programming and performance. In contrast to our initial prediction that increasing the number of preceding non-switch trials to a switch trial would engage similar brain regions to that previously observed for task automaticity and habituation, no significant switch-elicited activity was observed in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Also, only a small area of the left inferior parietal lobe was observed to exhibit significant activity. Additionally, unlike with the two previously considered paradigmatic design aspects, there was virtually no overlap between the parametric effects of increasing number of preceding non-switch trials and either the main effects of switching or the main effects of stimulus complexity or number of motor response options. The uniqueness of the effect the number of preceding non-switch trials had on switches suggested that it, like task set reconfiguration ( Allport et al., 1994 ;  Meiran, 1996 ;  Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ) and task set inertia ( Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ), may represent another component of cognitive theories of mental set switching. The neural correlates of this phenomenon indicate that the fronto-parietal cognitive control network proposed to underlie mental set switching disengaged quickly in the face of increasingly longer trains of non-switch trials and was not fully re-engaged during switch trials preceded by long trains of non-switch trials. Behaviorally, this was reflected in overall improved performance with increased number of preceding non-switch trials up to three preceding non-switch trials. For switch trials preceded by four or more non-switch trials, there appeared to be a resetting of switch costs and overall performance back to the level of that associated with switch trials preceded by only one non-switch trial. 
 Although the overall pattern of neural activity for the main effects of the number of preceding non-switch trials was widespread, the areas of activity with the largest signal change and extent included the anterior frontal cortex, the sensorimotor strip, and secondary visual areas. A few mental set switching fMRI studies have noted increased hemodynamic activity in the anterior PFC ( Braver et al., 2003 ;  Rubia et al., 2006 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ).  Braver et al., (2003) , using a block design, noted that activity in the anterior PFC was sustained during blocks in which participants had to randomly switch between two tasks. They related activity in the anterior PFC to the increased working memory and attentional demands of the switching task.  Rubia et al., (2006)  noted increased anterior PFC activity in adults during switch trials compared with non-switch trials. Of note, this particular study employed an event-related design in which switch trials were purposefully preceded by no fewer than four non-switch trials, such that they might have captured activity in the anterior PFC of a similar origin to what was observed in this present study. However,  Derfuss et al., (2004) , in employing an event-related design in which switch trials could be preceded by up to five non-switch trials, failed to note any significant neural activity in anterior PFC. Activity in this region has been linked to numerous higher-order cognitive functions. As reviewed by ( Ramnani and Owen, 2004 ), the anterior PFC (BA 10) has been linked to processing internal states ( Christoff and Gabrieli, 2000 ), prospective memory ( Burgess et al., 2001 ), episodic memory retrieval ( Konishi et al., 2000 ;  McDermott et al., 2003 ;  Ranganath and Paller, 2000 ;  Rugg et al., 1998 ), branching and reallocating attention ( Baker et al., 1996 ;  Braver and Bongiolatti, 2002 ;  Koechlin et al., 1999 ;  Koechlin et al., 2000 ;  Sakai and Passingham, 2003 ;  Sylvester et al., 2003 ), and relational integration ( Braver et al., 2003 ;  Kroger et al., 2002 ). Neural activity in BA 10 has also been proposed in relation to motor response programming ( Peterson et al., 1999 ). As no significant trial type modulation was observed for this effect, it was difficult to determine whether the increased activity in anterior PFC observed here was related to maintaining attention during repetitive trains of non-switch trials or to reorienting attention during a switch trial preceded by a long train of non-switch trials. The activity observed in the anterior PFC also extended inferiorly into the orbitofrontal cortices, which have been linked to both response inhibition and task reversal ( Elliott and Deakin, 2005 ). This again indicated that switch trials performed after a long succession of non-switch trials required additional cognitive control from regions not typically observed during the main effects of switching ( Buchsbaum et al., 2005 ;  Wager et al., 2004 ). In contrast to the increased cognitive control afforded by the anterior prefrontal cortex, the presence of significant activity in the sensorimotor strip, in the relative absence of activity in the motor planning/programming regions noted above for increased stimulus and response complexity, suggested that only those regions associated with motor performance were needed when the target stimulus remained the same across several trials. 
 
 
 
 CONCLUSIONS 
 Our findings emphasize that merely describing mental set switching in terms of simple comparisons between switch and non-switch trials is inadequate in terms of accurately delimitating the neural correlates of switching. This study more thoroughly unravels the growing number of theoretically distinct cognitive phenomena at play during the act of executing a mental set switch. This study has several strengths including its large sample size, well-balanced paradigm, and its use of the relatively novel analytic technique that controlled for paradigmatic design aspects by including them as parametric modulation terms within the statistical parametric model. It is hoped that other researchers are encouraged to explore how stimulus-response set complexity affects the brain function elicited during mental set switching, both to replicate our results as well as to consider types of mental set switching other than attribute switching. One limitation of our study which presents an avenue for future work lies in further characterizing the modulatory effects of stimulus-response complexity on switching, in particular, determining whether, as suggested by the results presented here, brain regions engaged in overcoming increased stimulus-response interference are also engaged more by switch trials than non-switch trials or vice versa. Additional work on the effects of stimulus ordering (i.e., the number of non-switch trials preceding a switch trial) on set switching would be useful to determine if this phenomenon does, as we have suggested, represent an additional cognitive component of mental set switching. Finally, while controlling for paradigmatic design considerations like stimulus-response set complexity, stimulus ordering, and experimental timing is not a trivial design consideration, future mental set switching research should pay attention to these factors to ensure that the effects described in this study do not become inextricably entangled in what are perceived as the main effects of switching. 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant R01-MH081969 (PI: MCS). 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allport 
 DA 
 
 
 Styles 
 EA 
 
 
 Hsieh 
 S 
 
 
 
 
 Umilta 
 C 
 
 
 1994 
 Shifting intentional set: Exploring the dynamic control of tasks 
 Attention and Performance XV 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, MA 
 421 
 452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Monsell 
 S 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 BJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 2004 
 A componential analysis of task-switching deficits associated with lesions of left and right frontal cortex 
 Brain 
 127 
 1561 
 1573 
 15090477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2006 
 Cortical and subcortical contributions to Stop signal response inhibition: role of the subthalamic nucleus 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 2424 
 2433 
 16510720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asari 
 T 
 
 
 Konishi 
 S 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Miyashita 
 Y 
 
 
 2005 
 Multiple components of lateral posterior parietal activation associated with cognitive set shifting 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 694 
 702 
 15955479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2006 
 Computational and neurobiological mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 7186 
 7191 
 16632612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2883 
 2901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baker 
 SC 
 
 
 Rogers 
 RD 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 1996 
 Neural systems engaged by planning: a PET study of the Tower of London task 
 Neuropsychologia 
 34 
 515 
 526 
 8736565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2004 
 Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: an update 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 8 
 539 
 546 
 15556023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2002 
 The role of the frontal cortex in task preparation 
 Cereb Cortex 
 12 
 908 
 914 
 12183390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Bongiolatti 
 SR 
 
 
 2002 
 The role of frontopolar cortex in subgoal processing during working memory 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 523 
 536 
 11848695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural mechanisms of transient and sustained cognitive control during task switching 
 Neuron 
 39 
 713 
 726 
 12925284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 BR 
 
 
 Greer 
 S 
 
 
 Chang 
 WL 
 
 
 Berman 
 KF 
 
 
 2005 
 Meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of the Wisconsin card-sorting task and component processes 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 25 
 35 
 45 
 15846821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Quayle 
 A 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2001 
 Brain regions involved in prospective memory as determined by positron emission tomography 
 Neuropsychologia 
 39 
 545 
 555 
 11257280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Davidson 
 MC 
 
 
 Hara 
 Y 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 Martinez 
 A 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Halperin 
 JM 
 
 
 Rodriguez-Aranda 
 CE 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 Early development of subcortical regions involved in non-cued attention switching 
 Dev Sci 
 7 
 534 
 542 
 15603286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 Davidson 
 MC 
 
 
 Kunz 
 K 
 
 
 Franzen 
 PL 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociating striatal and hippocampal function developmentally with a stimulus-response compatibility task 
 J Neurosci 
 22 
 8647 
 8652 
 12351738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cepeda 
 NJ 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Gonzalez de Sather 
 JC 
 
 
 2001 
 Changes in executive control across the life span: examination of task-switching performance 
 Dev Psychol 
 37 
 715 
 730 
 11552766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christakou 
 A 
 
 
 Halari 
 R 
 
 
 Smith 
 AB 
 
 
 Ifkovits 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 Sex-dependent age modulation of frontostriatal and temporo-parietal activation during cognitive control 
 Neuroimage 
 48 
 223 
 236 
 19580877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2000 
 The frontopolar cortex and human cognition: Evidence for a rostrocaudal hierarchical organization within the human prefrontal cortex 
 PSYCHOBIOLOGY-AUSTIN 
 28 
 168 
 186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cools 
 AR 
 
 
 1980 
 Role of the neostriatal dopaminergic activity in sequencing and selecting behavioural strategies: facilitation of processes involved in selecting the best strategy in a stressful situation 
 Behav Brain Res 
 1 
 361 
 378 
 7236348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Donohue 
 SE 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural evidence for dissociable components of task-switching 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 475 
 486 
 16000652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Curtis 
 CE 
 
 
 2006 
 Prefrontal and parietal contributions to spatial working memory 
 Neuroscience 
 139 
 173 
 180 
 16326021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damoiseaux 
 JS 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2006 
 Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 13848 
 13853 
 16945915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Derrfuss 
 J 
 
 
 Brass 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004 
 Cognitive control in the posterior frontolateral cortex: evidence from common activations in task coordination, interference control, and working memory 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 604 
 612 
 15488410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Margulies 
 D 
 
 
 Kelly 
 A 
 
 
 Uddin 
 L 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Walters 
 J 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 F 
 
 
 Milham 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 2735 
 18400794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dove 
 A 
 
 
 Pollmann 
 S 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 Wiggins 
 CJ 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2000 
 Prefrontal cortex activation in task switching: an event-related fMRI study 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 9 
 103 
 109 
 10666562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dreher 
 JC 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Dissociating the roles of the rostral anterior cingulate and the lateral prefrontal cortices in performing two tasks simultaneously or successively 
 Cereb Cortex 
 13 
 329 
 339 
 12631562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichele 
 T 
 
 
 Debener 
 S 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Specht 
 K 
 
 
 Engel 
 AK 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Prediction of human errors by maladaptive changes in event-related brain networks 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 105 
 6173 
 6178 
 18427123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elliott 
 R 
 
 
 Deakin 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Role of the orbitofrontal cortex in reinforcement processing and inhibitory control: evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging studies in healthy human subjects 
 Int Rev Neurobiol 
 65 
 89 
 116 
 16140054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 First 
 MB 
 
 
 Spitzer 
 RL 
 
 
 Gibbon 
 M 
 
 
 Williams 
 JB 
 
 
 1996 
 Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV Axis I Disorders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freire 
 L 
 
 
 Mangin 
 JF 
 
 
 2001 
 Motion correction algorithms may create spurious brain activations in the absence of subject motion 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 709 
 722 
 11506543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freire 
 L 
 
 
 Roche 
 A 
 
 
 Mangin 
 JF 
 
 
 2002 
 What is the best similarity measure for motion correction in fMRI time series? 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 21 
 470 
 484 
 12071618 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 J 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 2003 
 A midline dissociation between error-processing and response-conflict monitoring 
 Neuroimage 
 20 
 1132 
 1139 
 14568482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Phelps 
 ME 
 
 
 1992 
 Human functional anatomy of visually guided finger movements 
 Brain 
 115  
  Pt 2 
 565 
 587 
 1606482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grahn 
 JA 
 
 
 Parkinson 
 JA 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 The cognitive functions of the caudate nucleus 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 86 
 141 
 155 
 18824075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 100 
 253 
 258 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2001 
 Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2 
 685 
 694 
 11584306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampshire 
 A 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2006 
 Fractionating attentional control using event-related fMRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 1679 
 1689 
 16436686 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hazeltine 
 E 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 R 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2000 
 Neural activation during response competition 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 12 
 Suppl 2 
 118 
 129 
 11506652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Molholm 
 S 
 
 
 Shpaner 
 M 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural mechanisms involved in error processing: a comparison of errors made with and without awareness 
 Neuroimage 
 27 
 602 
 608 
 16024258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2003 
 Common neural substrates for response selection across modalities and mapping paradigms 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 15 
 1080 
 1094 
 14709228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kalkut 
 EL 
 
 
 Han 
 SD 
 
 
 Lansing 
 AE 
 
 
 Holdnack 
 JA 
 
 
 Delis 
 DC 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of set-shifting ability from late childhood through early adulthood 
 Arch Clin Neuropsychol 
 24 
 565 
 574 
 19679594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiesel 
 A 
 
 
 Steinhauser 
 M 
 
 
 Wendt 
 M 
 
 
 Falkenstein 
 M 
 
 
 Jost 
 K 
 
 
 Philipp 
 AM 
 
 
 Koch 
 I 
 
 
 2010 
 Control and interference in task switching--a review 
 Psychol Bull 
 136 
 849 
 874 
 20804238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 C 
 
 
 Johnson 
 NF 
 
 
 Cilles 
 SE 
 
 
 Gold 
 BT 
 
 
 2011 
 Common and distinct mechanisms of cognitive flexibility in prefrontal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 4771 
 4779 
 21451015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koechlin 
 E 
 
 
 Basso 
 G 
 
 
 Pietrini 
 P 
 
 
 Panzer 
 S 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 1999 
 The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human cognition 
 Nature 
 399 
 148 
 151 
 10335843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koechlin 
 E 
 
 
 Corrado 
 G 
 
 
 Pietrini 
 P 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 Dissociating the role of the medial and lateral anterior prefrontal cortex in human planning 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 97 
 7651 
 7656 
 10852964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Konishi 
 S 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Neural correlates of episodic retrieval success 
 Neuroimage 
 12 
 276 
 286 
 10944410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kroger 
 JK 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 Fales 
 CL 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 Holyoak 
 KJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Recruitment of anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning: a parametric study of relational complexity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 12 
 477 
 485 
 11950765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kubler 
 A 
 
 
 Dixon 
 V 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2006 
 Automaticity and reestablishment of executive control-an fMRI study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 18 
 1331 
 1342 
 16859418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 van de Moortele 
 PF 
 
 
 Lobel 
 E 
 
 
 Paradis 
 AL 
 
 
 Vidailhet 
 M 
 
 
 Frouin 
 V 
 
 
 Neveu 
 P 
 
 
 Agid 
 Y 
 
 
 Marsault 
 C 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 1998 
 Somatotopical organization of striatal activation during finger and toe movement: a 3-T functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Ann Neurol 
 44 
 398 
 404 
 9749610 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 CS 
 
 
 Huang 
 C 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Sinha 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Imaging response inhibition in a stop-signal task: neural correlates independent of signal monitoring and post-response processing 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 186 
 192 
 16399686 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 Gordon 
 RD 
 
 
 2001 
 Executive control of visual attention in dual-task situations 
 Psychol Rev 
 108 
 393 
 434 
 11381835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loose 
 R 
 
 
 Kaufmann 
 C 
 
 
 Tucha 
 O 
 
 
 Auer 
 DP 
 
 
 Lange 
 KW 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural networks of response shifting: influence of task speed and stimulus material 
 Brain Res 
 1090 
 146 
 155 
 16643867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Munoz 
 DP 
 
 
 Merriam 
 EP 
 
 
 Garver 
 KE 
 
 
 Minshew 
 NJ 
 
 
 Keshavan 
 MS 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Sweeney 
 JA 
 
 
 2001 
 Maturation of widely distributed brain function subserves cognitive development 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 786 
 793 
 11304075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maillard 
 L 
 
 
 Ishii 
 K 
 
 
 Bushara 
 K 
 
 
 Waldvogel 
 D 
 
 
 Schulman 
 AE 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 2000 
 Mapping the basal ganglia: fMRI evidence for somatotopic representation of face, hand, and foot 
 Neurology 
 55 
 377 
 383 
 10932271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Watson 
 JM 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 JG 
 
 
 2003 
 A procedure for identifying regions preferentially activated by attention to semantic and phonological relations using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 293 
 303 
 12457755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mecklinger 
 AD 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Springer 
 A 
 
 
 Matthes-von Cramon 
 G 
 
 
 1999 
 Executive control functions in task switching: evidence from brain injured patients 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 21 
 606 
 619 
 10572281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meiran 
 N 
 
 
 1996 
 Reconfiguration of processing mode prior to task performance 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 
 22 
 1423 
 1442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meiran 
 N 
 
 
 2000 
 Modeling cognitive control in task-switching 
 Psychol Res 
 63 
 234 
 249 
 11004878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mink 
 JW 
 
 
 1996 
 The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of competing motor programs 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 50 
 381 
 425 
 9004351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miyake 
 A 
 
 
 Friedman 
 NP 
 
 
 Emerson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Witzki 
 AH 
 
 
 Howerter 
 A 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 2000 
 The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “Frontal Lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis 
 Cogn Psychol 
 41 
 49 
 100 
 10945922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monchi 
 O 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Strafella 
 AP 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional role of the basal ganglia in the planning and execution of actions 
 Ann Neurol 
 59 
 257 
 264 
 16437582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nachev 
 P 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Parton 
 A 
 
 
 Kennard 
 C 
 
 
 Husain 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Volition and conflict in human medial frontal cortex 
 Curr Biol 
 15 
 122 
 128 
 15668167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nagahama 
 Y 
 
 
 Okada 
 T 
 
 
 Katsumi 
 Y 
 
 
 Hayashi 
 T 
 
 
 Yamauchi 
 H 
 
 
 Sawamoto 
 N 
 
 
 Toma 
 K 
 
 
 Nakamura 
 K 
 
 
 Hanakawa 
 T 
 
 
 Konishi 
 J 
 
 
 Fukuyama 
 H 
 
 
 Shibasaki 
 H 
 
 
 1999 
 Transient neural activity in the medial superior frontal gyrus and precuneus time locked with attention shift between object features 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 193 
 199 
 10417251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Interference resolution: insights from a meta-analysis of neuroimaging tasks 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 7 
 1 
 17 
 17598730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 1985 
 Cortical mechanisms and cues for action 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 308 
 101 
 111 
 2858872 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 JC 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AW 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 1999 
 An fMRI study of Stroop word-color interference: evidence for cingulate subregions subserving multiple distributed attentional systems 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 45 
 1237 
 1258 
 10349031 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2001 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2004 
 Anterior prefrontal cortex: insights into function from anatomy and neuroimaging 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 5 
 184 
 194 
 14976518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 2000 
 Neural correlates of memory retrieval and evaluation 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 9 
 209 
 222 
 10729705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control 
 Science 
 306 
 443 
 447 
 15486290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogers 
 RD 
 
 
 Monsell 
 S 
 
 
 1995 
 Costs of a predictable switch between simple cognitive tasks 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-General 
 124 
 207 
 230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogers 
 RD 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 BJ 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Polkey 
 CE 
 
 
 Kennard 
 C 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 1998 
 Dissociating executive mechanisms of task control following frontal lobe damage and Parkinson’s disease 
 Brain 
 121  
  Pt 5 
 815 
 842 
 9619187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 1984 
 Organization of motor control by the normal human brain 
 Hum Neurobiol 
 2 
 205 
 216 
 6715206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 Larsen 
 B 
 
 
 Lassen 
 NA 
 
 
 Skinhoj 
 E 
 
 
 1980 
 Supplementary motor area and other cortical areas in organization of voluntary movements in man 
 J Neurophysiol 
 43 
 118 
 136 
 7351547 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Smith 
 AB 
 
 
 Woolley 
 J 
 
 
 Nosarti 
 C 
 
 
 Heyman 
 I 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Progressive increase of frontostriatal brain activation from childhood to adulthood during event-related tasks of cognitive control 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 27 
 973 
 993 
 16683265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Allan 
 K 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Neural correlates of memory retrieval during recognition memory and cued recall 
 Neuroimage 
 8 
 262 
 273 
 9758740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Hadland 
 KA 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Sipila 
 PK 
 
 
 2002a 
 Role of the human medial frontal cortex in task switching: a combined fMRI and TMS study 
 J Neurophysiol 
 87 
 2577 
 2592 
 11976394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 2002b 
 Components of switching intentional set 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 14 
 1139 
 1150 
 12495521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 2005 
 Components of attentional set-switching 
 Exp Psychol 
 52 
 83 
 98 
 15850156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Bannerman 
 DM 
 
 
 2004 
 Action sets and decisions in the medial frontal cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 8 
 410 
 417 
 15350242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Croxson 
 PL 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 2008 
 Ventrolateral and medial frontal contributions to decision-making and action selection 
 Neuroscience of rule-guided behavior 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 129 
 157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2003 
 Prefrontal interactions reflect future task operations 
 Nat Neurosci 
 6 
 75 
 81 
 12469132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 AB 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural correlates of switching set as measured in fast, event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 21 
 247 
 256 
 15038006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sohn 
 MH 
 
 
 Ursu 
 S 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JR 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2000 
 The role of prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex in task switching 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 97 
 13448 
 13453 
 11069306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CY 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Lacey 
 SC 
 
 
 Hernandez 
 L 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Switching attention and resolving interference: fMRI measures of executive functions 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 357 
 370 
 12457760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2001 
 Subprocesses of performance monitoring: a dissociation of error processing and response competition revealed by event-related fMRI and ERPs 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 1387 
 1401 
 11707094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van den Heuvel 
 MP 
 
 
 Mandl 
 RC 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 2009 
 Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 3127 
 3141 
 19235882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Veen 
 V 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2001 
 Anterior cingulate cortex, conflict monitoring, and levels of processing 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 1302 
 1308 
 11707086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Reading 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Neuroimaging studies of shifting attention: a meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 1679 
 1693 
 15275924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissman 
 DH 
 
 
 Roberts 
 KC 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 2006 
 The neural bases of momentary lapses in attention 
 Nat Neurosci 
 9 
 971 
 978 
 16767087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilkinson 
 DT 
 
 
 Halligan 
 PW 
 
 
 Marshall 
 JC 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Switching between the forest and the trees: brain systems involved in local/global changed-level judgments 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 56 
 67 
 11133309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 Johnson 
 PB 
 
 
 Caminiti 
 R 
 
 
 1997 
 Premotor and parietal cortex: corticocortical connectivity and combinatorial computations 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 20 
 25 
 42 
 9056706 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Witt 
 ST 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Meyerand 
 ME 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional neuroimaging correlates of finger-tapping task variations: an ALE meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 42 
 343 
 356 
 18511305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Partial schematic of the paradigm design and examples of stimuli and associated parametric terms 
 A partial schematic of the paradigm is depicted in the upper portion of the figure, and example stimuli are shown in the lower portion of the figure. Participants were given a verbal cue 1.2 seconds prior to stimulus onset as to which stimulus attribute to count (color, shape, size), and this cue remained on the screen throughout the entire trial. Participants then had 4 seconds to respond with the appropriate button press (1,2,3). ISI stands in for the variable interstimulus interval. Each stimulus was assigned an integer value (1,2,3) based on the number of dimensions, corresponding to its complexity. Stimulus A was assigned a stimulus complexity value of 1, since it did not differ on any dimensions. Stimuli B and C each contained two dimensions (B: size and shape; C: shape and color) and were assigned a stimulus complexity value of 2. Stimulus D had three dimensions (shape, size, color) and was assigned a stimulus complexity value of 3. To determine the response complexity, the number of potential valid responses were counted for each stimuli, not assuming a specific cue. For stimulus A, there was only one potential response option, as there was only one color, one shape, and one size presented. The only valid button press was 1, and stimulus A was assigned a response complexity value of 1. For stimulus B, there were two potential response options, as there was one color, two sizes, and two shapes. Valid button presses were 1 and 2, and stimulus B was, thus, assigned a response complexity value of 2. For stimulus C, there were three potential response options: one size, two colors, and three shapes (valid button presses were 1, 2, and 3). A response complexity value of 3 was assigned to stimulus 3. Finally, for stimulus D, there was again only one potential response option, as there were three sizes, three shapes, and three colors (valid button press was 3). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Behavioral data from Design Factor x Trial Type interaction 
 Graphs of the Design Factor x Trial Type interaction for the three design factors, where switch trial reaction times are shown in BLACK and non-switch trial reaction times in GRAY. For stimulus and response complexity, an overall slowing with increased complexity was observed. Of note, is that for trials with only one potential response option, there was an extinguishing of switch costs. In considering the number of preceding non-switch trials, there is an overall improvement in behavioral performance up to three preceding non-switch trials. For switch trials preceded by four or more non-switch trials, continued improvement is not observed, and switch costs actually revert back to the original levels of switch trials preceded by only one non-switch trial. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Main effects of switching 
 Regions with greater activity during switch trials are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE, and regions with greater activity during non-switch trials are shown in BLUE/GREEN. The t-maps have been thresholded at p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons using False Discovery Rate (FDR). Color bars are expressed in terms of t-scores, and images are displayed in normal convention (left = left). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 A: Parametric effects of stimulus complexity 
 Regions with greater activity for trials with high stimulus complexity are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE, while regions with greater activity for trials with low stimulus complexity are shown in GREEN/BLUE.  B: Effects of stimulus complexity on switching.  Stimulus complexity related regions with greater activity during switch trials are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE. Stimulus complexity related regions with greater activity during non-switch trials are shown in GREEN/BLUE.  C: Parametric effects of response complexity.  Regions with greater activity for trials with greater number of potential response options are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE, while regions with greater activity for trials with fewer number of response options are shown in GREEN/BLUE.  D: Effects of response complexity on switching.  Response complexity related regions with greater activity during switch trials are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE. Response complexity related regions with greater activity during non-switch trials are shown in GREEN/BLUE. All t-maps have been thresholded at p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons (FDR). Color bars are expressed in terms of t-scores, and images are displayed in normal convention. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Parametric effects of number of preceding non-switch trials 
 Regions with greater activity for trials preceded by a greater number of non-switch trials are shown in YELLOW/ORANGE, while regions with greater activity for trials preceded by a lesser number of non-switch trials are shown in GREEN/BLUE. All t-maps have been thresholded at p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons (FDR). Color bars are expressed in terms of t-scores, and images are displayed in normal convention. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Peak stereotactic coordinates for the main effects of switching (switch trials > non-switch trials) 
 Coordinates (MNI) of those regions with greater activity during switch trials are listed in the upper portion of the table, while those with greater activity during non-switch trials are listed in the lower portion. Coordinates are given only for those regions that exhibited significant activity after whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons via False Discovery Rate (FDR) at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 1 
 
 
 
 
 Main effects of switch trials greater than non-switch trials 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Right medial frontal gyrus/superior frontal gyrus/cingulate (BA 6/8/32) 
 
 10 
 20 
 44 
 3.88 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus/superior frontal gyrus (BA 6/8) 
 
 −6 
 20 
 50 
 4.43 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −30 
 8 
 60 
 5.01 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 30 
 8 
 62 
 3.37 
 
 
 
 26 
 0 
 56 
 3.00 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/46) 
 
 −44 
 24 
 26 
 6.38 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 −42 
 6 
 30 
 8.95 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44/45) 
 
 −50 
 36 
 8 
 5.12 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9) 
 
 44 
 10 
 30 
 4.94 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus/insula (BA 47) 
 
 −34 
 20 
 −4 
 4.01 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus/insula 
 
 34 
 22 
 −2 
 3.32 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe (BA 7) 
 
 −24 
 −64 
 48 
 7.36 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe 
 
 26 
 −72 
 54 
 4.66 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −46 
 −58 
 52 
 5.39 
 
 
 
 Left precuneus 
 
 −6 
 −74 
 42 
 5.95 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 32 
 −68 
 38 
 4.38 
 
 
 
 Left cingulate (BA 23/31) 
 
 0 
 −30 
 32 
 3.89 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Right cuneus 
 
 6 
 −80 
 2 
 3.50 
 
 
 
 Right middle occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 44 
 −82 
 2 
 4.23 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus (BA 37) 
 
 −58 
 −52 
 6 
 3.57 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 
 −16 
 −22 
 −4 
 3.48 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 8 
 −12 
 0 
 3.75 
 
 
 
 4 
 −20 
 2 
 3.38 
 
 
 
 Main effects of non-switch trials greater than switch trials 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus (BA 10) 
 
 −14 
 54 
 14 
 5.12 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left cuneus (BA 18) 
 
 −10 
 −100 
 20 
 7.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 A: Peak stereotactic coordinates (MNI) for the parametric effects stimulus complexity 
 Regions with greater activity for trials with high stimulus complexity are listed first, followed by those with greater activity for trials with low stimulus complexity.  B: Peak stereotactic coordinates (MNI) for modulatory effects of stimulus complexity on switching.  Regions with greater activity during switch trials are listed first, followed by regions with greater activity during non-switch trials. Coordinates are given only for those regions that exhibited significant activity after whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons via False Discovery Rate (FDR) at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 2A 
 
 
 
 
 Main effects of increasing stimulus complexity 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Right medial frontal gyrus (BA 8) 
 
 2 
 24 
 48 
 6.88 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −24 
 4 
 52 
 6.80 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 26 
 4 
 52 
 7.39 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 46) 
 
 46 
 34 
 24 
 6.71 
 
 
 
 Left middle/inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9) 
 
 −42 
 6 
 28 
 8.21 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9) 
 
 46 
 10 
 28 
 7.07 
 
 
 
 Left insula 
 
 −32 
 22 
 0 
 5.53 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus/insula (BA 47) 
 
 32 
 24 
 −4 
 6.75 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 −22 
 −62 
 54 
 12.08 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 24 
 −62 
 54 
 13.92 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −40 
 −38 
 42 
 6.43 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe/postcentral gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 46 
 −32 
 46 
 8.56 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left cuneus (BA 19) 
 
 −26 
 −86 
 22 
 12.88 
 
 
 
 Right middle occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 30 
 −82 
 22 
 12.12 
 
 
 
 Left middle/inferior occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 −36 
 −76 
 −8 
 8.99 
 
 
 
 Right middle/inferior occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 42 
 −80 
 −4 
 7.88 
 
 
 
 Left lingual gyrus (BA 17) 
 
 −6 
 −94 
 −6 
 7.46 
 
 
 
 Right lingual gyrus (BA 18) 
 
 8 
 −84 
 −6 
 7.91 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 Left caudate 
 
 −6 
 4 
 12 
 4.39 
 
 
 
 Right caudate 
 
 8 
 10 
 10 
 5.05 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 
 −12 
 −22 
 14 
 4.17 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 20 
 −24 
 16 
 3.95 
 
 
 
 Right caudate/thalamus 
 
 12 
 −6 
 18 
 4.09 
 
 
 
 Main effects of decreasing stimulus complexity 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus (BA 8/9) 
 
 −14 
 50 
 44 
 5.41 
 
 
 
 Right superior frontal gyrus (BA 8/9) 
 
 12 
 52 
 44 
 4.97 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus/anterior cingulate (BA 10) 
 
 −4 
 52 
 0 
 6.19 
 
 
 
 −10 
 60 
 10 
 7.06 
 
 
 
 Left insula (BA 13) 
 
 −40 
 −4 
 14 
 4.80 
 
 
 
 Right insula (BA 13) 
 
 42 
 −8 
 14 
 4.27 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left cingulate gyrus (BA 31) 
 
 −12 
 −28 
 44 
 6.36 
 
 
 
 Right cingulate gyrus (BA 31) 
 
 6 
 −26 
 44 
 6.65 
 
 
 
 Right posterior cingulate (BA 31) 
 
 −2 
 −46 
 30 
 6.20 
 
 
 
 Left angular gyrus 
 
 −54 
 −66 
 32 
 6.87 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −64 
 −46 
 34 
 7.68 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe/postcentral gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 −62 
 −28 
 22 
 6.57 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe/postcentral gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 62 
 −26 
 22 
 8.45 
 
 
 
 Right supramarginal gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 62 
 −52 
 32 
 7.00 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Right cuneus (BA 19) 
 
 4 
 −84 
 28 
 4.44 
 
 
 
 Left parahippocampus (BA 34) 
 
 −20 
 −10 
 −20 
 3.05 
 
 
 
 Right parahippocampus (BA 34) 
 
 22 
 −10 
 −20 
 2.99 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus (BA 22) 
 
 −64 
 −54 
 10 
 5.43 
 
 
 
 Right middle temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) 
 
 66 
 −50 
 4 
 7.11 
 
 
 
 Right superior temporal gyrus 
 
 54 
 0 
 2 
 5.25 
 
 
 
 TABLE 2B 
 
 
 
 
 Modulatory effects of stimulus complexity on switch trials 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −28 
 −2 
 66 
 11.55 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 32 
 4 
 62 
 11.88 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus/cingulate (BA 6/8/32) 
 
 6 
 20 
 50 
 13.18 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9/44) 
 
 58 
 12 
 16 
 12.59 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44) 
 
 58 
 12 
 16 
 12.59 
 
 
 
 Left insula (BA 13) 
 
 −34 
 16 
 4 
 10.78 
 
 
 
 Left insula/putamen (BA 13) 
 
 −40 
 −4 
 10 
 15.05 
 
 
 
 Right insula (BA 13) 
 
 38 
 18 
 0 
 11.46 
 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus (BA 4/6) 
 
 −42 
 −18 
 62 
 13.60 
 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus 
 
 −38 
 −8 
 64 
 11.76 
 
 
 
 Right precentral/postcentral gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 44 
 −8 
 34 
 2.46 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus (BA 3) 
 
 −32 
 −14 
 70 
 14.36 
 
 
 
 Left postcentral gyrus/inferior parietal lobe (BA 4/40) 
 
 −46 
 −36 
 54 
 17.67 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 2/40) 
 
 −42 
 −38 
 48 
 18.44 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe 
 
 46 
 −34 
 48 
 16.95 
 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 −24 
 −64 
 60 
 16.54 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 24 
 −64 
 60 
 15.62 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle occipital gyrus 
 
 −46 
 −74 
 −10 
 13.60 
 
 
 
 Right inferior occipital gyrus 
 
 44 
 −82 
 −6 
 15.85 
 
 
 
 Right cuneus (BA 17) 
 
 2 
 −94 
 −2 
 17.81 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 
 −20 
 −30 
 4 
 10.87 
 
 
 
 −12 
 −22 
 8 
 10.59 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 22 
 −30 
 0 
 10.83 
 
 
 
 14 
 −12 
 10 
 6.82 
 
 
 
 Right putamen 
 
 22 
 0 
 12 
 9.28 
 
 
 
 Left cerebellum 
 
 −30 
 −84 
 −22 
 17.60 
 
 
 
 Right cerebellum 
 
 24 
 −72 
 −18 
 16.02 
 
 
 
 Modulatory effects of stimulus complexity on non-switch trials 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus/anterior cingulate (BA 9/10/24/32) 
 
 −4 
 60 
 12 
 12.14 
 
 
 
 Left anterior cingulate (BA 24) 
 
 −2 
 34 
 0 
 8.62 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left cingulate/precuneus (BA 31) 
 
 −2 
 −44 
 40 
 9.31 
 
 
 
 Left cingulate 
 
 4 
 −22 
 42 
 7.34 
 
 
 
 Left supramarginal gyrus/inferior parietal lobe/superior temporal gyrus (BA 39) 
 
 −48 
 −72 
 42 
 12.66 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe/superior temporal gyrus (BA 39) 
 
 50 
 −68 
 42 
 8.28 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle/inferior temporal gyrus (BA 21) 
 
 −60 
 −18 
 −16 
 8.99 
 
 
 
 Right middle/inferior temporal gyrus (BA 21) 
 
 52 
 −14 
 −24 
 8.89 
 
 
 
 Left parahippocampus 
 
 −24 
 −18 
 −22 
 6.85 
 
 
 
 Right paradhippocampus 
 
 26 
 −16 
 −26 
 6.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 A: Peak stereotactic coordinates (MNI) for the parametric effects response complexity 
 Regions with greater activity for trials with a larger number of potential response options are listed first, followed by those with greater activity for trials with a smaller number of potential response options.  B: Peak stereotactic coordinates (MNI) for modulatory effects of response complexity on switching.  Regions with greater activity during switch trials are listed first, followed by regions with greater activity during non-switch trials. Coordinates are given only for those regions that exhibited significant activity after whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons via FDR at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 3A 
 
 
 
 
 Main effects of increasing number of response options 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus (BA 32) 
 
 −6 
 6 
 52 
 7.72 
 
 
 
 Right cingulate (BA 32) 
 
 8 
 18 
 46 
 6.35 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −24 
 −2 
 50 
 7.78 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 26 
 2 
 58 
 7.81 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal/precentral gyrus (BA 6/9) 
 
 −50 
 4 
 34 
 5.47 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal/precentral gyrus 
 
 48 
 8 
 30 
 7.29 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus/insula 
 
 −32 
 22 
 −2 
 5.63 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus/insula (BA 13) 
 
 34 
 22 
 2 
 6.37 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe (BA 7) 
 
 −24 
 −58 
 56 
 10.49 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 26 
 −58 
 50 
 12.31 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe/postcentral gyrus (BA 2/40) 
 
 −46 
 −32 
 40 
 7.04 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe/postcentral gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 40 
 −36 
 46 
 8.51 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 −38 
 −88 
 10 
 9.55 
 
 
 
 Right middle occipital gyrus (BA 19) 
 
 34 
 −84 
 20 
 10.08 
 
 
 
 Left middle occipital gyrus 
 
 −44 
 −74 
 −8 
 7.59 
 
 
 
 Right middle occipital gyrus 
 
 52 
 −62 
 −10 
 7.13 
 
 
 
 Right lingual gyrus 
 
 14 
 −92 
 −6 
 7.76 
 
 
 
 Subcortial 
 
 
 
 
 Left caudate 
 
 −10 
 8 
 2 
 5.06 
 
 
 
 Right caudate 
 
 10 
 10 
 0 
 6.17 
 
 
 
 Left putamen 
 
 −10 
 8 
 2 
 5.06 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 
 −12 
 −20 
 10 
 5.60 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 8 
 −14 
 10 
 5.63 
 
 
 
 8 
 −26- 
 6 
 6.01 
 
 
 
 Main effects of decreasing number of response options 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus (BA 8) 
 
 −10 
 46 
 50 
 4.82 
 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus (BA 9) 
 
 −16 
 56 
 34 
 5.21 
 
 
 
 Right superior frontal gyrus (BA 8/9) 
 
 20 
 48 
 42 
 3.78 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus (BA 8) 
 
 −40 
 16 
 48 
 6.03 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45/47) 
 
 −50 
 30 
 −6 
 6.55 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −52 
 −60 
 48 
 6.84 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −52 
 −58 
 36 
 7.73 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 56 
 −60 
 42 
 6.53 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left cuneus (BA 19) 
 
 0 
 −90 
 24 
 4.39 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) 
 
 −58 
 −44 
 −4 
 7.27 
 
 
 
 Right middle temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) 
 
 68 
 −40 
 −2 
 4.20 
 
 
 
 TABLE 3B 
 
 
 
 
 Modulatory effects of number of response options on switching 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior/middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −22 
 −2 
 62 
 3.36 
 
 
 
 Right superior frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 12 
 12 
 70 
 4.36 
 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 32 
 8 
 60 
 4.48 
 
 
 
 Left middle/inferior frontal gyrus (BA 6/9) 
 
 −48 
 4 
 44 
 3.98 
 
 
 
 Right middle/inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9/44) 
 
 54 
 12 
 20 
 4.41 
 
 
 
 Right middle/inferior frontal gyrus (BA 46) 
 
 50 
 38 
 14 
 4.40 
 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45) 
 
 40 
 14 
 16 
 4.19 
 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus (BA 6) 
 
 −54 
 2 
 16 
 3.38 
 
 
 
 Left insula (BA 13) 
 
 −28 
 20 
 −2 
 3.98 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left postcentral gyrus (BA 2) 
 
 −54 
 −24 
 52 
 3.71 
 
 
 
 Left superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 −22 
 −62 
 56 
 5.35 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 22 
 −66 
 54 
 5.93 
 
 
 
 Right superior parietal lobe 
 
 28 
 −74 
 46 
 6.87 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 −44 
 −40 
 46 
 4.83 
 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobe (BA 40) 
 
 46 
 −44 
 56 
 5.24 
 
 
 
 Right cingulate (BA 23) 
 
 8 
 −28 
 28 
 4.80 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus (BA 22) 
 
 −48 
 −14 
 −4 
 4.55 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 Left putamen/globus pallidus 
 
 −28 
 −18 
 −6 
 4.57 
 
 
 
 Right putamen 
 
 18 
 4 
 −8 
 3.94 
 
 
 
 Right caudate 
 
 10 
 8 
 10 
 3.88 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 
 −10 
 −24 
 12 
 4.39 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 12 
 −20 
 12 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Peak stereotactic coordinates (MNI) for the parametric effects of the number of non-switch trials preceding a given trial 
 Regions with greater activity for trials preceded by a greater number of non-switch trials are listed first, followed by regions with greater activity for trials preceded by a lesser number of non-switch trials. Coordinates are given only for those regions that exhibited significant activity after whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons via FDR at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 4 
 
 
 
 
 Main effects of increasing number of preceding non-switch trials 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle/superior frontal gyrus (BA 8/9) 
 
 −20 
 34 
 40 
 5.07 
 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus 
 
 −18 
 50 
 32 
 5.13 
 
 
 
 Right superior frontal gyrus (BA 8) 
 
 14 
 48 
 46 
 4.62 
 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus (BA 10) 
 
 −10 
 54 
 4 
 3.93 
 
 
 
 Right medial frontal gyrus (BA 10) 
 
 8 
 56 
 10 
 3.44 
 
 
 
 Right medial frontal gyrus (BA 11) 
 
 4 
 42 
 −18 
 3.63 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45/47) 
 
 −46 
 18 
 4 
 3.73 
 
 
 
 −44 
 26 
 2 
 3.79 
 
 
 
 Right middle/inferior frontal gyrus (BA 11/47) 
 
 44 
 32 
 −2 
 3.80 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus/insula (BA 47) 
 
 −30 
 14 
 −20 
 4.00 
 
 
 
 Right insula (BA 13) 
 
 38 
 0 
 −2 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 Left anterior cingulate 
 
 −10 
 34 
 2 
 4.36 
 
 
 
 Right anterior cingulate (BA 24) 
 
 8 
 38 
 2 
 3.17 
 
 
 
 Left precentral/postcentral gyrus (BA 3/4) 
 
 −34 
 −20 
 48 
 4.13 
 
 
 
 −50 
 −16 
 46 
 4.35 
 
 
 
 Parietal 
 
 
 
 
 Left postcentral gyrus (BA 40) 
 
 −34 
 −38 
 56 
 3.72 
 
 
 
 Right postcentral gyrus (BA 3/4) 
 
 32 
 −30 
 52 
 4.38 
 
 
 
 Right postcentral gyrus (BA 2) 
 
 44 
 −28 
 48 
 4.46 
 
 
 
 Right precentral/postcentral gyrus (BA 4) 
 
 58 
 −16 
 36 
 4.82 
 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobe (BA 39) 
 
 −40 
 −70 
 40 
 4.99 
 
 
 
 Left precuneus (BA 7) 
 
 −18 
 −46 
 46 
 4.41 
 
 
 
 Right posterior cingulate (BA 30) 
 
 12 
 −64 
 8 
 5.09 
 
 
 
 Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 Left cuneus 
 
 −10 
 −68 
 6 
 3.85 
 
 
 
 Right cuneus (BA 18) 
 
 12 
 −94 
 6 
 5.23 
 
 
 
 Left parahippocampus/lingual gyrus 
 
 −18 
 −52 
 0 
 4.38 
 
 
 
 Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus (BA 38) 
 
 −26 
 10 
 −28 
 3.32 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus 
 
 −56 
 −28 
 −8 
 3.41 
 
 
 
 Left middle/superior temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) 
 
 −58 
 −44 
 4 
 3.73 
 
 
 
 Right middle temporal gyrus (BA 21) 
 
 54 
 8 
 −28 
 3.32 
 
 
 
 Right middle temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) 
 
 52 
 −36 
 2 
 3.81 
 
 
 
 Right middle/superior temporal gyrus (BA 39) 
 
 54 
 .62 
 16 
 4.09 
 
 
 
 Left parahippocampus 
 
 −20 
 −42 
 −8 
 3.54 
 
 
 
 Right parahippocampus/fusiform gyrus 
 
 30 
 −52 
 −10 
 5.14 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 Right caudate 
 
 10 
 8 
 −6 
 3.32 
 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 
 12 
 −26 
 0 
 3.72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Set-switching is subserved by a mostly left-lateralized fronto-parietal network. 
 
 
 Several brain regions were recruited solely to overcome intra-stimulus interference. 
 
 
 Stimulus ordering may represent another cognitive component of mental set-switching. 
 
 
 
 
