
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 23228512 
 3580036 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.12.001 
 NIHMS427347 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Action selection in multi-effector decision making 
 
 
 
 
 Madlon-Kay 
 Seth 
 
 seth.madlonkay@duke.edu 
 a 
 1 
 
 
 
 Pesaran 
 Bijan 
 
 bijan@nyu.edu 
 b 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 Nathaniel D. 
 
 nathaniel.daw@nyu.edu 
 b 
 c 
 
 
 a Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA 
 b Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA 
 c Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA 
 
 1 Corresponding author, Mailing address: 6 Washington Place rm 888, New York, NY 10002, Telephone: 212-998-7605 
 
 
 19 
 12 
 2012 
 
 
 07 
 12 
 2012 
 
 
 15 
 4 
 2013 
 
 
 15 
 4 
 2014 
 
 70 
 66 
 79 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Decision making and reinforcement learning over movements suffer from the curse of dimensionality: the space of possible movements is too vast to search or even represent in its entirety. When actions involve only a single effector, this problem can be ameliorated by considering that effector separately; accordingly, the brain’s sensorimotor systems can subdivide choice by representing values and actions separately for each effector. 
 However, for many actions, such as playing the piano, the value of an action by an effector (e.g., a hand) depends inseparably on the actions of other effectors. By definition, the values of such coordinated multi-effector actions cannot be represented by effector-specific action values, such as those that have been most extensively investigated in parietal and premotor regions. For such actions, one possible solution is to choose according to more abstract valuations over different goods or options, which can then be mapped onto the necessary motor actions. Such an approach separates the learning and decision problem, which will often be lower-dimensional than the space of possible movements, from the multi-effector movement planning problem. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) is thought to contain goods-based value signals, so we hypothesized that this region might preferentially drive multi-effector action selection. 
 To examine how the brain solves this problem, we used fMRI to compare patterns of BOLD activity in humans during reward learning tasks in which options were selected through either unimanual or bimanual actions, and in which the response requirements in the latter condition inseparably coupled valuation across both hands. We found value signals in the bilateral medial motor cortex and vmPFC, and consistent with previous studies, the medial motor value signals contained contra-lateral biases indicating effector-specificity, while the vmPFC value signals did not exhibit detectable effector specificity. Although neither region’s value signaling differed significantly between bimanual and unimanual conditions, the vmPFC value region showed enhanced connectivity with the medial motor cortex during bimanual than during unimanual choices. The specific region implicated, the anterior mid-cingulate cortex, is thought to act as a hub that links subjective value signals to motor control centers. These results are consistent with the idea that while valuation for unilateral actions may be subserved by an effector-specific network, complex multi-effector actions preferentially implicate communication between motor regions and prefrontal regions, which may reflect increased top-down input into motor regions to guide action selection. 
 
 
 bimanual 
 decision making 
 value maps 
 effector specificity 
 vmPFC 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH087882 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Humans and other animals possess a variety of effectors, which together support a wide array of possible motor actions. The large space of possible movements implies a classic “curse of dimensionality” due to the exponential explosion of combinations of movements. For instance, coarsely considering only actions involving the eyes, arms, hands and legs yields a seven-dimensional space that can contain many millions of possible joint actions, even if each effector considered alone has only a few candidate movements. Given that the brain most certainly parses the body more finely than merely seven effectors, the actual number of possibilities must be many orders of magnitude larger. Representing such a large number of actions, let alone deciding between them, is computationally challenging. The problem becomes especially laborious when appropriate decisions are learned by trial and error, since even trying out all the possibilities is clearly impossible. 
 One method by which the brain seems to cope with this curse is by subdividing decisions into lower dimensional, effector-specific subspaces: that is, controlling particular effectors separately and independently from the others. Indeed, the basic organization of the brain seems well suited to a “divide and conquer” strategy. Primary motor cortex and many affiliated territories including basal ganglia, supplementary and premotor areas, contain effector-specific topographies wherein different muscle groups in different parts of the body are governed by spatially segregated populations of neurons [ 49 , 1 , 85 , 6 , 69 ]. Similarly effector-specific systems can be found in sensorimotor areas such as posterior parietal cortex, where saccadic eye movements and reaches are represented by distinct subregions [ 94 , 3 , 10 , 48 ]. Recent evidence suggests that such effector-specific movement representations are also a substrate for evaluating and choosing among these actions, e.g. with the eye movement representations in parietal cortex carrying ‘value maps’ of rewards expected for different saccades and with action values for movements of the hands and eyes appearing in distinct subregions of supplementary motor cortex [ 76 , 90 , 2 , 97 , 84 , 107 , 66 ]. Furthermore, in a recent fMRI study we tested explicitly for subdivision across effectors (here, left and right hands) and found lateralized patterns of BOLD signals related to valuation and reward prediction errors consistent with the separation of a multi-effector task into effector-specific subproblems [ 24 ]. 
 However, separating the control of effectors in this way introduces a related problem of coordination. Many actions require the conjoint action of multiple effectors working together to accomplish a single goal. When playing piano chords, for example, playing a C with the left hand will sound dissonant if the right hand chooses a B but pleasingly consonant if instead the right hand plays E. In these cases, the value of a particular effector’s movements depends on the action of another effector. This means that the fundamental units of evaluation and decision must be combinations of movements spanning multiple effectors, and cannot be represented by separate maps of each effector’s outcomes alone. The need for such coordination is also illustrated by corpus callosotomy patients. While they often show improved performance over neurologically intact controls in tasks in which the two hands must act completely independently, such as finger-tapping with different rhythms for each hand, they are unable to perform or learn novel actions requiring that the two hands act in concert, such as threading a needle or playing the piano [ 8 , 21 , 40 ]. In other words, for the case of novel bimanual actions, such patients appear limited to actions that can be represented by independent, effector-specific systems. 
 How, then, does the brain evaluate high dimensional multi-effector actions? One approach is simply also to maintain, in the motor system, representations over multi-effector actions, and their values, as well. Indeed, single units in areas such as the supplementary motor area have been reported with differential tuning for bimanual movements relative to their unimanual counterparts [ 99 , 19 ]. Such a solution would be most useful for selecting among sets of commonly-used or well-learned multi-effector actions, or within groups of effectors commonly used together. However, if applied to all possible multi-effector movements, this solution would likely run into of the curse of dimensionality because the space of all possible multi-effector actions is so vast. 
 Another approach, which may be complementary, is to rely on a “goods-based” rather than an “action-based” evaluation strategy [ 65 , 108 ]: representing the value of a few possible outcomes or goods that might serve as the goals of actions, separate from the movements needed to obtain them. Once a choice has been made in the space of outcomes (which may be low-dimensional), the motor system is left to solve the more targeted problem of executing the choice. Intuitively, this is like first choosing between peanut butter and potato chips, and subsequently planning the movements required to grab the chosen snack food and extract it from its container. Such an approach would support a different sort of divide and conquer strategy, whereby learning, evaluation and choice over goals could be separated from the movement programming required to obtain them. The ventromedial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices (vmPFC and OFC) are thought to contain this sort of “goods-based” value signal. Neurons in the primate OFC represent values of particular consumption goods regardless of the actions involved in obtaining them, and their firing properties generally do not vary with the motor contingencies of tasks [ 104 , 65 , 41 ]. Similarly, in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans, BOLD activity correlates with subjective value across a very wide and general variety of contexts, including those that do not involve making a motor action [ 43 , 5 , 61 , 100 , 37 , 73 ,  108 ,  47 ,  70 ]. The distinction between goods- and action-based choice models has been hotly debated in decision neuroscience [ 65 , 75 , 26 ], but these mechanisms need not be mutually exclusive, and recent imaging studies suggest that the brain uses both [ 107 , 108 ]. In particular, for the reasons discussed above, these two mechanisms are well suited to single- and multi-effector problems, respectively. We thus hypothesized that the vmPFC might preferentially guide action selection during multi-effector choice. 
 To investigate the neural mechanisms of multi-effector decision making, we used fMRI to examine patterns of neural activity in humans playing a four-armed bandit reinforcement learning task, in which choices were executed, in different conditions, by unimanual or bimanual button presses. Although in both conditions subjects learned the values of four shapes, in the bimanual condition, the response requirements for choosing a shape were such that (unlike the separable bimanual task studied by [ 24 ]) the value of each action was indivisible across the effectors. For this reason, choice could operate over an effector-specific value representations in the unimanual condition, but not in the bimanual one. (Note that here we are conceptualizing each hand as a single effector; however, one could instead describe each finger as an effector and the above claims would still apply.) Using estimates of the participants’ values of the options on each trial, we probed the brain for differences in patterns of value-related activity associated with bimanual versus unimanual actions. In particular, we examined functional connectivity between value-related areas of vmPFC and more posterior motor regions as a potential index of the involvement in action of abstract valuation systems. 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 1. Participants 
 Twenty-three right-handed adults, ages 19 to 38 (median 22, 17 female), were recruited from the New York University community to participate in the experiment in exchange for payment. Participants received a fixed amount of money for completing the experiment as well as the money they won during the task. Three participants were excluded due to technical difficulties, leaving twenty subjects whose data were used in the analysis. All participants gave informed consent, and the study was approved by the New York University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects. 
 
 
 2. Experimental task 
 Participants performed a bandit task in which they earned money based on their choices. On each trial, participants selected one of four shapes, each of which was associated with some probability of winning money ( Fig 1A ). Participants recieved feedback regarding whether they won money on that trial 4 seconds after the choice was executed. The probability of winning from each shape changed slowly and independently over the course of the task according to a Gaussian random walk, with reflecting bounds below at 0.3 and above at 0.7, so maximizing payoff required continuously tracking shape values throughout the task. For each winning trial participants received $0.10 at the end of the experiment. 
 Participants selected shapes by pressing buttons with their index and middle fingers on their right and left hands. In order to distinguish single and multi-effector choice-related activity, we manipulated the motor actions required to select shapes. In the unimanual condition, each of the four shapes could be selected by pressing a button with one of the four fingers of the right or left hand being used in the task. In the bimanual condition, participants selected shapes by simultaneously pressing one of four possible pairs of buttons using one finger on each hand in a coordinated bimanual action ( Fig 1B ). If a button was pressed with one hand and no button press was detected for the other hand within 100ms, the trial was deemed a mistrial and no feedback was given. In both conditions, any trial in which participants did respond within 1.5 seconds of choice onset was also considered a mistrial, with no feedback given. To prevent participants from preparing motor action plans during the inter-trial interval (ITI) and better constrain the range of times during which motor preparation could take place, the positions of the shapes on the screen were shuffled randomly from trial to trial. Each button-pressing action thus corresponded to one of the four locations where shapes appeared on the screen rather than to a particular shape. 
 Participants first underwent a short training session described below, and then entered the fMRI scanner and performed the experimental task in four blocks of trials. Blocks alternated between containing only unimanual trials and containing only bimanual trials. Between blocks, participants saw text reminding them of the upcoming block type, and as an additional mnemonic, within blocks the fixation cross was red in the unimanual condition and blue in the bimanual condition. The condition of the first block was counterbalanced across participants. Each block consisted of sixty trials and lasted slightly over twelve minutes for a total of 240 trials, with 120 trials in each condition. 
 
 
 3. Training 
 Before entering the scanner, participants were trained on the motor actions required to select shapes in both the unimanual and bimanual conditions. The shapes appeared on the screen in the same spatial arrangement used in the main task, but with one highlighted shape appearing brighter than the rest. Participants selected the highlighted shape using the required button presses, whereupon the shapes were shuffled and a shape in a new location highlighted. Initially, cues appeared on the bottom of the screen indicating which fingers to use to select the highlighted shape, but those cues were not displayed during the second half of training. We encouraged participants to repeat the motor training if they felt they had any difficulty remembering the different action-location associations, but none performed the training more than twice. Immediately following motor training, participants played 40 practice trials of the full task, with half of the trials in each condition. All participants reported no difficulty selecting their intended shape in either condition. 
 
 
 4. Modeling choice behavior 
 To determine whether participants’ choices were significantly guided by learning about the values of the shapes, and to generate trial-by-trial estimates of their value beliefs, we fit their choice and reward histories to a simple Rescorla-Wagner reinforcement learning (RL) model [ 79 ], using the particular form from [ 86 ]. Under this model, on each trial  t  the current estimated value of the chosen shape  Q t  ( s t ) is compared to the reward actually received that trial  r t  to generate the prediction error δ t , which is then added to  Q t ( s t ), weighted by learning rate α, to determine  Q t +1 ( s t ). This corresponds to a weighted average of past rewards from an option where the weight of a given reward decreases exponentially with samples past at a rate determined by α. 
 Choice history also often has strong effects on subsequent choices, with subjects often showing either perseverative tendencies or sequential sampling [ 46 ]. We modeled these influences analogously to how we modeled the effects of reward, using an exponentially decaying trace κ. 
 Formally, the model is described by the following equations:
 (1) Q t + 1 ( s ) = { Q t ( s ) + α * ( r t − Q t ( s ) ) s = s t Q t ( s ) ∀ s ≠ s t 
 (2) C t + 1 ( s ) = { C t ( s ) * ( 1 − κ ) + κ s = s t C t ( s ) * ( 1 − κ ) ∀ s ≠ s t 
 V t ( s ) = β Q * Q t ( s ) + β C * C t ( s ) 
 (3) π t ( s ) = exp ( V t ( s ) ) ∑ s exp ( V t ( s ) ) 
 The free parameters α and β Q  are the learning rate and inverse softmax temperature for the effect of reward, parameters κ and β C  are the exponential decay and inverse softmax temperature associated with choice history effects,  V t  ( s ) gives the total propensity to choose shape  s  on trial  t , and the probability of choosing  s  on  t , π t  ( s ), is derived from  V t  ( s ) via the softmax  equation 3 . Decay parameters α and κ were bounded between 0 and 1, while both inverse temperatures were unbounded. We fit the free parameters θ = {α, β Q , κ β C } by maximizing  equation 4 , the likelihood of the subject’s series of choices  D  given θ with respect to θ.
 (4) p ( D | θ ) = ∏ t π t ( s t ) 
 To ensure that learning and choice behavior were similar in both unimanual and bimanual blocks, we also fit a ’action-dependent’ model where behavior was allowed to vary between blocks. This model was nearly identical to the standard RL model, differing only in that it featured two sets of parameters, θ u  and θ b . For trials in the unimanual condition, parameter set θ u  was used to compute choice probabilities according to  equations 1  through 3, while trials in the bimanual condition used the θ b  parameter set. 
 To assess which model or mixture of models best described the population, we treated model identity as a random variable and estimated the probabilities that a random subject in the population adheres to each of the considered models [?]Stephan 2009. We accomplished this by computing the Bayesian Information Criterion score as an approximation to the log model evidence of each model for every subject separately [ 87 ] and entered them into the function spm_BMS of the SPM8 package (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). 
 
 
 5. Image acquisition 
 Functional imaging was performed on a 3T Siemens Allegra head-only scanner with a custom head coil (NM-011, Nova Medical, Wakefield, MA) located at the Center for Brain Imaging at New York University. Forty contiguous oblique-axial EPI images (3×3×3 mm voxels) were obtained each 2360 ms TR, oriented for each participant to parallel the orbital-frontal cortical surface in order to improve functional sensitivity and reduce drop-out there [ 15 ]. Slices were positioned to ensure full coverage of orbitofrontal and prefrontal cortex, frontal motor areas, and parietal cortex. This protocol achieved nearly whole-brain coverage, though for several participants ventral parts of temporal lobe, most frequently the temporal pole, and parts of the medial temporal lobe were uncovered. A high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical image (MPRAGE sequence, 1×1×1 mm) was also acquired for each subject after the functional scans. In addition to functional and anatomical scans, we also collected for each participant a field map scan (multiecho GRE sequence) measuring magnetic field inhomogeneities before the functional scan. Images derived from this scan were used for registration between functional and anatomical images [ 34 ]. 
 
 
 6. Image preprocessing 
 Functional images were preprocessed and analyzed using the SPM8 software package (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Because fourteen of the twenty subjects used for analysis moved their heads 0.5 mm or more during a single TR at least once during functional image acquisition (median number of large motions = 4.5), we used the Artifact Repair toolbox for SPM to correct for motion-related artifacts [ 54 ]. First, runs of functional images were realigned using the standard SPM preprocessing pathway. Next, the time-series of motion-related distortions was estimated for each voxel separately and removed from the images. The Artifact Repair software estimates the effect of motion on the MR signal by regressing a time course of activity against a trigonometric function of the translational head motion estimates produced by realignment, and the resulting residuals from the regression represent the signal not explained by motion [ 27 ]. These voxel-wise residuals are written as images and used for all subsequent preprocessing and analysis. The Artifact Repair toolbox also repairs by interpolation volumes marred by very large motions (> 1.5 mm) and volumes where the mean across voxels deviates more from the global mean than plausibly caused by physiological activity (> 1.5% increase). 
 After motion correction, functional and structural images were coregistered by using intermediate registration targets derived from the multiecho GRE scan [ 34 ]. That scan allows the estimation of undistorted spin density, field ( B 0 ), and decay rate maps. The spin density map is used as a target for registration of the structural, and the other maps are used to produce a synthetic  T 2  * -weighted image, which has similar distortions and dropouts as the functionals, as a target for functional image registration. As these two targets are themselves in registration, this accomplishes cross-modal registration between the functional and anatomical scans. 
 Functional images were then normalized into a common space using a 12-parameter affine transformation estimated by warping the subject’s anatomical image to match a template (SPM8 “segment and normalize”). Normalized functional images were resampled into 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxels and smoothed using a 7 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel. 
 
 
 7. Functional Image Analysis 
 All fMRI analyses were conducted in SPM8 using general linear models (GLM) fit by weighted least-squares. All regressors except the intercept terms in the models described below were convolved with SPM8’s canonical hemodynamic response function, and the data was high-pass filtered with a cutoff of 128 seconds before estimation. To model individual subjects a separate set of regression coefficients were estimated for each run, and coefficients modeling the same effects in different runs were then summed to generate single-subject effect estimates. The subject-level effect estimates were then subjected to voxel-wise t-tests to produce  t -maps for population-level inference. To determine statistical significance corrected for multiple comparisons, we threshold maps at  p  < 0.005 uncorrected and subject the resulting clusters of activated voxels to cluster-size correction controlling for the family-wise error rate (FWE) [ 23 ]. Small volume cluster-size corrections based on anatomical masks were used when we had a priori hypotheses about the anatomical location of effects, and whole-brain correction when we did not. Reported p-values of fMRI activations reflect the corrected p-values of the clusters post-thresholding, rather than the uncorrected threshold used to generate maps. 
 Anatomical masks used for small-volume correction and generating anatomically-restricted functional ROIs were defined using the anatomical automatic labeling (AAL) atlas and generated via the WFU Pickatlas toolbox [ 51 , 101 ], with the exception of one region for which we used a hand-drawn mask from a previous study. Specifically, for motor areas along the medial wall we used a mask consisting of the AAL’s bilateral supplementary motor area and mid-cingulate cortex regions (8662 2×2×2 mm voxels); for the nucleus accumbens (which is not separately represented in AAL), a hand-drawn mask of the bilateral nucleus accumbens used originally in [ 12 ] following the guidelines of [ 7 ] (2374 voxels); and for vmPFC, AAL’s anterior cingulate, medial orbital-frontal, and superior medial-frontal cortex regions (9414 voxels). Functional ROI analyses were performed by averaging estimated regression coefficients across all voxels within an ROI separately for each subject, then performing t-tests across subjects over the resulting averages. All activation maps in figures below, unless otherwise noted, are displayed at  p  < 0.005 uncorrected. 
 
 1. Univariate GLMs 
 We constructed regressors modeling choice- and feedback-related activity using impulse functions at the shape onset and feedback onset times of successfully completed trials. To investigate neural correlates of valuation and reward-driven learning, we used the regressors  V  and δ as parametric modulators of the choice-time and feedback-time events respectively.  V  represents our estimate of the subject’s value of the shape chosen on that trial, while δ is the difference between the actual reward received on that trial and that estimated value. These regressors were generated via simulation from the version of the RL model that we found to best describe the population, using a single set of parameters fit to all subjects simultaneously. A single representative set of parameters were used because we have repeatedly observed, in this and other data sets [ 24 , 93 ], that neural regressors generated using separate maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters produce poorer fMRI results (i.e., noisier neural effect size estimates and diminished sensitivity). This is likely because parameters are not always well identified at the individual level, and variability in the point estimates effectively results in noisy rescaling of regressors between subjects, which in turn suppresses population level significance in fMRI (for additional discussion, see [ 12 ]). We also included as a parametric regressor of no interest at choice time the trial-by-trial estimates of choice history effects ( C  from  equation 3 ). Since subjects more often chose shapes associated with recent rewards, reward-based values are often correlated with choice history effects, so by including the choice history regressors we hoped to disentangle valuation-related activity from activity changes that might be associated with choosing the same options repeatedly. Finally, we also included a regressor modeling shape onsets for missed trials. 
 We used this GLM to identify regions of interest showing choice- and feedback-related activity without distinguishing between trials with different motor actions. This allowed us to subsequently make unbiased comparisons between value-related effects during bimanual, right- and left-handed actions within the selected ROIs. In order to compare value- and RPE-related activity during different motor actions, we fit a second GLM in which we divided single regressors from the above GLM into multiple regressors. To distinguish between different motor actions, we divided the choice-time event regressor into three different regressors modeling different types of trials:  M B  for trials when the participant made a bimanual action,  M R  for unimanual actions taken with the right hand, and  M L  for unimanual actions with the left hand. We did the same with the feedback-time event regressor, splitting it into the three regressors  F B  ,  F R  , and  F L . Similarly, to examine differences in value and RPE signals across the different types of trials we decomposed the chosen value regressor  V  into  V B ,  V R , and  V L  modulating  M B ,  M R , and  M L  respectively, and the δ regressor into δ B , δ R , and δ L  modulating  F B ,  F R , and  F L  respectively. As in the first GLM, we included a regressor for missed trials and regressors for choice history effects (also divided into separate regressors for bimanual, left, and right-handed choice trials) as regressors of no interest. (Note that the first GLM is equivalent to, but simpler to implement than, computing overall value effects by averaging together in a contrast the value estimates for for each of the three motor action types from second GLM. The complexity of the latter approach is that the appropriate weighting for pooling the three trial types’ parameter estimates — bimanual, left and right — depends, for each subject, on the particular number of times they chose left versus right.) 
 Finally, in addition to examining differences in chosen value signals across different motor movements, we also looked specifically for effector-specificity using right- and left- hand action values as defined in [ 66 ], [ 107 ], and [ 29 ]. This model was identical to the second GLM described above, except instead of having chosen values  V R  and  V L  modulating activity on different trials, every trial in the unimanual condition (i.e. both event regressors  M R  and  M L  )was modulated by two regressors, one representing the values of the shapes that could be chosen by the right hand and the other representing the values of the shapes that could be chosen by the left hand. We combined the values of the two shapes choosable by a hand on any given trial into a single ’action value’ regressor by simply averaging them. We used this model to compare only right- and left- handed unimanual actions, but not the unimanual and bimanual conditions, because there was no equivalent way to define action values in the bimanual case. This is because in the bimanual case it is not possible to segregate shape values into effector-specific action values because all actions are bimanual actions. Note that because bimanual and unimanual trials took place in separate sessions, each of which was modeled by distinct sets of regressors for each subject, not modeling the bimanual condition did not influence the estimation of the unimanual condition parameters. 
 
 
 
 8. Psycho-physiological interactions 
 To test for changes in patterns of functional connectivity between unimanual and bimanual choices, we fit two psycho-physiological interaction (PPI) models [ 22 ]. The seed region for the PPI analyses was defined from a population-level  V  > 0 contrast derived from the first GLM described above. We extracted a representative time course of activation from the seed region using SPM8, which takes the first eigenvector from a principle component analysis of all voxels within the seed region. That time course was then deconvolved against the HRF to extract the underlying neural activity, interacted multiplicatively with the (pre-convolution)  M  regressors modeling the choice-related activity at the time of shape onset, and then convolved again with the HRF. The resulting interaction regressors modeled activity related to the influence of the seed region specifically at the time of choice. Our first PPI model included two interaction terms:  S  ×  M B  for seed region influence during bimanual actions, and  S  ×  M U  for seed region influence during all unimanual (combined left and right handed) actions. Alongside the interaction terms we also included as nuisance variables the original seed region time series  S  and the entire set of regressors used in the second GLM described in the section above. The inclusion of every task-related regressor in the PPI model guards against observing spurious correlations between regions due to shared task-related effects rather than functional connectivity [ 63 ]. We then performed a whole-brain GLM, following the same methodology described above, and making population-level inferences using univariate t-tests over the contrasts of interest. 
 To ensure that the results of our first PPI were not being driven by unmodeled differences between seed region connectivity in right and left-handed actions, we performed a second PPI in which we included three interaction terms,  S  × M R ,  S  ×  M L , and  S  ×  M B , modeling seed region influence during each of right, left, and bimanual actions. The model was otherwise identical to the first PPI model described above. For population-level inference, we entered estimates of the three  S  ×  M  interaction terms into a factorial analysis for each voxel. This analysis modeled two factors: motor action type (right, left, or bimanual) and subject. Non-sphericity due to repeated measurements from the same subjects and differing amounts of data for different subjects and conditions was estimated and used to correct the final statistics [ 68 ]. We then examined the conjunction of the  S  ×  M B  >  S  ×  M R  & S  × M B  >  S  ×  M L  contrasts in the supplementary and cingulate motor areas along the medial wall of the brain, assessing significance using the conjunction null [ 58 ]. Significance was assessed using small-volume multiple comparison corrections, the small volume in question being the right and left hemisphere supplementary motor areas and mid-cingulate regions as defined by the Automatic Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 1. Behavior 
 Participants earned an average of $10.81 (sd = $1) and failed to choose a shape in the allotted time on average 8.35 (sd = 5.83) out of 240 trials. We examined the behavioral data for signs that bimanual motions were more difficult than unimanual motions. There was no significant difference in the number of missed trials between conditions (difference mean=0.65 trials, paired t-test,  t  = −0.51,  p  > 0.6). Average reaction time (RT) across participants did differ between motor action types, but rather than finding a consistent difference between unimanual and bimanual actions, we found that RTs on trials with right-handed actions (mean = 720ms, sd = 62ms) were faster than those with both left-handed (left hand RT mean = 763ms, sd = 52ms; paired samples difference,  t (19)  = 3.6 ,  p  < 0.01) and bimanual (bimanual mean = 760ms, sd = 73ms; paired samples difference,  t (19)  = 2.8,  p  < 0.02) actions, with no significant difference found between left-handed and bimanual actions ( t (19)  = 0.3,  p  > 0.75). 
 
 
 2. Reinforcement Learning model fitting 
 Since this study adds multi-effector response requirements to a four-bandit reinforcement learning task that has been well studied previously [ 14 , 86 , 106 ], we first verified that the learning behavior itself was well characterized by the model used in [ 86 ] and not substantially affected by the response manipulation. To compare how well models described the population we used the Bayesian random effects model selection procedure proposed in [ 96 ] (implemented in spm_BMS from SPM8) to estimate the probability that an individual drawn from the population would be best described by a given model from a set. First, we validated the inclusion of both the reward learning parameters and the choice history parameters in our model by comparing the fit to choices of the full model to a model without an RL component (β Q  in  equation 3  set to 0) and a model without a choice history component (β C  in  equation 3  set to 0). The prevalence in the population of the model using both RL learning and choice history was estimated at 0.78, with an exceedance probability (the estimated chance of being the most common of the three models in the population) > 0.99. The model using only RL was estimated as the second most prevalent in the population with a probability of 0.17, while the model using only choice history without reward learning had an estimated prevalence of only 0.05. These results indicated that as in previous studies the model featuring both reward learning and choice history effects was best representative of the population [ 86 , 46 ]. 
 Having established that the model featuring reward learning as well as choice history effects best described the population, we next tested for differences in the learning between conditions by comparing the fit of the RL model to the action-dependent RL model, which uses a separate set of parameters for trials in each condition. This analysis favored the unified model, with its estimated prevalence in the population at 0.95, and an exceedance probability > 0.99. These data suggest that the unified model provided the best description of the population. Accordingly — and in order to assure that any between-condition differences seen in the neuroimaging data were not artifacts of different model parameters used between blocks — we used the unified model with both choice-history and reward learning components as the basis for the fMRI analysis. The distribution across subjects of the unified RL model maximum-likelihood parameters, as well as the parameter values used to generate the fMRI regressors, are shown in  Table 1 . 
 
 
 3. Lateralization and coordination in the frontal cortex 
 In order to investigate the relationship between RL-related neural signals and multi-effector response requirements, we first examined the well-known lateralized organization of movement-related activity [ 49 , 67 , 95 ]. As expected, greater activation during contralateral than ipsilateral hand movements ( Fig 2A ) was found bilaterally in the precentral gyrus and central sulcus, extending backwards across the postcentral sulcus into the superior parietal lobe ( p  < 0.001; unless otherwise noted, fMRI statistics are quoted with cluster-size correction for family-wise error due to whole-brain multiple comparisons). Lateralized motor activity also appeared medial to the central sulcus, stretching across parts of supplementary motor area (SMA) and mid-cingulate cortex (MCC) ( p  < 0.005) (see  Table 2  for a full list of significant activations). 
 While primary motor cortex is associated with effector-specific (lateralized) motor control, evidence from neuropsychology and neuroimaging suggest that motor areas along the medial wall such as the supplementary motor area are recruited in coordinating actions across the hemispheres [ 45 , 8 , 83 , 35 ]. Accordingly, we examined movement-related activity in voxels along the medial wall of the frontal cortex that showed significant activity during the execution of choices regardless of the motor action used. As reported above, movement-related activity is lateralized even here: we found a significant hemisphere (right vs left) by hand (right vs left) interaction between the right and left hemisphere ROIs (paired samples,  t (19)  = 4.6,  p  < 0.001). In addition to this lateralized pattern, we found evidence for augmented activity during bimanual actions. In particular, the right hemisphere ROI showed greater activation during bimanual than both right-handed (one-tailed test,  t (19)  = 3.2,  p  < 0.005) and left-handed actions (one-tailed test,  t (19)  = 2.0,  p  < 0.05). The left hemisphere ROI activation during bimanual actions was greater than during left-handed actions (one-tailed test,  t (19)  = 2.7,  p  < 0.01), though it showed a weaker trend for being higher during right-handed actions (one-tailed test,  t (19)  =1.3,  p  = 0.1) ( Fig 2B ). This pattern was different from activity in more lateralized motor areas (data not shown), where activity for bimanual action was similar to that for the contralateral movement alone. Thus, although regions along the medial wall share with the rest of the motor systems a lateralized structure, these regions may also be disproportionately recruited for coordinated action. 
 
 
 4. Value representations 
 We next searched for value representations complementary to the lateralized organization of the motor system. Lateralized value signals would be appropriate for driving single-effector actions [ 24 , 66 ], whereas value signals agnostic to effector or specific to the coordinated case could potentially be used to guide coordinated, multi-effector actions. Our approach was first to search for activity related to the value of the chosen option regardless of movement type, then examine its effector specificity (see Methods). Note that testing whether activity in different regions is tied to different effectors requires comparing activity across regions (in our case, testing for an interaction of left or right hemisphere by left or right hand), necessitating the ROI approach. 
 We found value correlations in a region of strong prior hypothesis, the vmPFC ( p  < 0.05, small-volume cluster size corrected within a medial prefrontal mask), and in a region of the medial frontal cortex extending from the SMA to the MCC ( p  < 0.001 whole brain) ( Fig 3A ). We also found activations unilaterally in the left hippocampus ( p  < 0.005), the right hemisphere’s lateral sylvian fissure extending ventrally from the rolandic operculum into the superior temporal sulcus ( p  < 0.05), and the lateral prefrontal cortex dorsal to the vmPFC activation ( p  < 0.05) (see  Table 2 ). Although correlates of value in the hippocampus have previously been reported only sporadically, they tend to arise more often in tasks in which value computations require more reasoning about the relations between actions and events, perhaps in this case due to the complex response requirements (see [ 106 ] for a full discussion). 
 We assessed effector-specificity of the value representations in the vmPFC and medial motor cortex by performing ROI analyses in which value was decomposed into regressors specific to particular types of motor actions. Two types of value signals have been used to determine effector-specificity in the fMRI literature; [ 24 ] used chosen values, while [ 66 ] and [ 107 ] used “action” values which model the value of each effector’s actions on every trial, not just the chosen trials. These differ, effectively, in whether they model BOLD activity related to pre-choice values of available options (action values) or post-choice expected value (chosen values); either sort of value signal, to the extent it is present, might (or might not) be expressed in effector-specific regions. To examine effector specificity of value correlates on unimanual trials we used both types of value (see Methods). To compare bimanual and unimanual choices (and for the remaining analyses in the paper, which largely concern the bimanual condition), we used only the chosen value r egressors, since there was no comparable manner to define action values in the bimanual condition. 
 Examining the structure of the SMA/MCC activity, we identified two pairs of peaks aligned across the interhemispheric fissure. Each pair consisted of one peak in each hemisphere, with both peaks in a pair closely aligned with each other along the medial/lateral axis (see  Table 2  for coordinates of the four peaks). Following a procedure analogous to that of [ 24 ], we split the ROI into lateralized pairs — anterior and posterior right and left hemispheres — and tested for hemisphere×hand interactions separately in the anterior and posterior ROI pairs. We found no lateralization in the posterior ROIs (paired samples,  t (19)  = −1.4,  p  > 0.1 Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons). The anterior ROI pair, however, did show value lateralization using both the action values ( t (19)  = 3.8,  p  < 0.005, Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons) and chosen values ( t 19  = 2.5,  p  < 0.05 , Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons), indicating that this region of cortex represented the action values of the contralateral hand more strongly than those of the ipsilateral hand ( Fig 3A , action values shown). Such lateralization for value in regions that also show lateralization for movements is consistent with the notion that the motor system contains effector-specific action value representations overlaid upon movement representations. 
 In contrast, similar lateralization was not detected in the value correlates in the vmPFC. Thresholded at  p  < 0.005 uncorrected, the vmPFC cluster contained no voxels in the left hemisphere, so in order to test for lateralization in the vmPFC, we relaxed the threshold to  p  < 0.01 uncorrected. The resulting cluster in the prefrontal cortex extended dorsally and laterally outside of the medial PFC, so we restricted the final ROI to the medial superior frontal gyrus, the anterior cingulate, and the medial orbital frontal cortex as defined by the AAL atlas. We found no significant hemisphere × hand interaction in the strength of action value representations in the vmPFC ROI using both the action values ( t (19)  = 0.4,  p  > 0.5) and chosen values ( t  = 0.8,  p  = 0.46 ) ( Fig 3B , action values shown). Although null results should be interpreted with caution, this is consistent with our previous data [ 24 ] and with theories that the vmPFC represents value over outcomes or goods rather than having an action- or effector-specific structure. 
 To be certain that we were not missing effector-specific value activations outside of our ROIs, we also examined the contrasts  V R  >  V L  and  V L  >  V R  over the whole brain (using both the action value and chosen value definitions). At whole-brain corrected thresholds, we found no significant difference between right- and left-hand values anywhere in the brain. However, this should not be interpreted as strong evidence against the presence of other lateralized value areas; in addition to the usual difficulties in interpreting null results, our study is underpowered for detecting effector-specificity at the whole-brain level due to our emphasis on the bimanual condition. 
 Finally, we compared value related activity (for chosen values) in the bimanual condition to that from the unimanual conditions. This activity was consistently in the same range as chosen-value related activities unimanual conditions. In neither the medial motor cortex ROI (minimum t-statistic,  t 19  = 0.3,  p  > 0.5 ), the vmPFC ROI ( t 19  = −1.2,  p  > 0.25 ), nor anywhere in the brain did we find value-related activity that was significantly stronger in the bimanual condition than in both unilateral conditions. This suggested that there are not value areas that are differentially recruited for the bimanual case in this task, and led us to examine whether differences between the conditions might instead be observed in functional connectivity. 
 
 
 5. Reward prediction errors 
 We also looked for evidence of effector-specificity in reward prediction error (RPE) signaling in the striatum. BOLD signal in ventral striatum was correlated with RPEs at the time of reward feedback (right hemisphere  p  < 0.05, left hemisphere  p  < 0.05 small-volume cluster corrected within a nucleus accumbens mask) ( Fig 3C ) (see  Table 2  for a complete list of significant activations). Breaking the striatal activity down by effector as in [ 24 ], RPEs in this region showed an interaction between effector and hemisphere ( t (19)  = 3.8,  p  < 0.005) such that prediction errors from unimanual choices were expressed relatively more strongly in the contralateral striatum. The RPE effect-size estimates ( Fig 3C ) did not show a full crossover interaction where each hemisphere represented contralateral RPEs more strongly than ipsilateral RPEs, perhaps because there appeared to be, in addition to the effector × hemisphere interaction, an overall bias towards RPEs from right-hand actions. However, collapsing across both hemispheres, the main effect of right- vs left-hand choice RPEs did not reach significance ( t (19)  =1.5,  p  = 0.14). On bimanual trials, RPE signals fell between unimanual right and left RPE parameter estimates in both hemispheres, with no significant differences from either right or left-hand RPE signals in either hemisphere (minimum t-statistic,  t 19  = −0.7,  p  = 0.49 ). A whole-brain analysis likewise showed no regions exhibiting significant differences between unimanual and bimanual trial prediction error expression. 
 
 
 6. PPI analysis 
 We next examined whether the shift from single- to multi-effector responses was accompanied by a change in functional connectivity. Motivated by the literature suggesting that this region instead codes the values of goals or outcomes more abstractly, and our own inability to detect effector specificity in the vmPFC value correlates in this and a previous study [ 24 ], we hypothesized that these representations might be used preferentially to guide the selection of multi-effector actions. In this case, patterns of functional connectivity between the vmPFC and other regions of cortex should differ between the unimanual and bimanual conditions. More specifically, we predicted that regions involved in bimanual motor control, notably the supplementary motor and mid-cingulate cortices along the dorsal medial wall of the frontal cortex, would show stronger connectivity with the vmPFC during bimanual choices than unimanual choices. 
 To test this hypothesis we fit a whole-brain psycho-physiological interaction model with the vmPFC value ROI as the seed region, and contrasted the strength of functional connectivity with vmPFC in bimanual choices,  S  ×  M B , with the connectivity strength in unimanual choices,  S  ×  M U . In a targeted analysis of the medial motor regions, we found vmPFC connectivity was higher during bimanual relative to unimanual choices in the right anterior MCC ( p  < 0.05, small-volume cluster size corrected within a medial motor region mask) ( Fig 4 A ). Additionally, at whole brain correction thresholds, the left lateral prefrontal cortex showed the same change in connectivity with vmPFC ( p  < 0.001) (see  Table 2 ). 
 This analysis maximized our power to find differences between bimanual and unimanual actions by pooling all unimanual actions together into a single trial type for which we had as many trials as we had bimanual trials. However, in principle this analysis might also incorrectly identify voxels where vmPFC connectivity changes depending only on whether or not a particular hand was being used. For example, a voxel might exhibit equivalent connectivity during both right-hand and bimanual actions and less connectivity during left-handed actions. Such a voxel might be detected by the  S  ×  M B  >  S  ×  M U  contrast due to pooling across right and left hand trials. To rule out that explanation for our finding we ran a second analysis testing more conservatively for the conjunction of higher vmPFC connectivity during bimanual actions than each of right and left hand actions separately. Again, we found higher vmPFC connectivity during bimanual choices in the right anterior MCC ( p  < 0.05, small volume cluster corrected within a medial motor region mask) ( Fig 4B ). This analysis also revealed a trend towards condition-dependant connectivity in the left preSMA, though it did not reach significance (peak [0 −2 64],  T =3.53;  p  = 0.07 , small-volume cluster corrected within a medial motor region mask; not reported in  Table 2 ). However, under this analysis the lateral prefrontal cortex no longer showed significant connectivity changes. 
 Taken in conjunction with the other results, these motor-action dependant changes in functional connectivity suggest that communication between medial motor areas and the vmPFC increases during multi-effector actions. Although it is important to stress that a functional connectivity analysis of this sort does not speak to the direction or causality if the functionality connectivity, this change in connectivity patterns may facilitate the flexible mapping of decisions or decision variables from the vmPFC onto complex multi-effector actions. 
 A further question is whether the medial area identified in the PPI analysis is the same area identified above, for lateralized value. At the threshold we examined, we did not find these two effects significant in the same voxels. The ROI exhibiting lateralized value signals ( Fig 3A ) lies approximately 16 mm posterior to the site of vmPFC connectivity, with no overlap between them. Of course a lack of overlapping voxels is not sufficient evidence to claim a dissociation between these two areas [ 33 ], and we therefore cannot draw strong conclusions as to whether or not the unimanual value and bimanual connectivity signals share precisely the same neural substrate in the medial motor regions. However, the site of bimanual vmPFC connectivity does fall within the mid-cingulate region showing greater overall bimanual than unimanual motor activity ( Fig 2B ), suggesting a convergence of motor signals and motor-dependant connectivity in this area. More generally, the proximity of the motor, value, and connectivity results reported here suggests a convergence along the medial wall of motor functions and signals that could be used to guide them. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 In this study we examined how models of action evaluation by reinforcement learning in the brain, which have typically been formulated in the context of choices made using single effectors, scale up to richer, more realistic settings in which multiple effectors must act in concert to achieve a single goal. Beyond the problems of high dimensional movement control and coordination per se, reinforcement learning in this setting requires assigning values to a large space of actions, and updating all these values from experience. This is a classic curse of dimensionality. We [ 24 ] have previously examined a special case of this problem: multi-effector actions arising from responses that, although simultaneous, are rewarded independently, which would allow the brain evaluate and choose actions separately for each effector. 
 In the present study, we examine the opposing case where both hands must be used in an inseparable fashion by having subjects chose among options in a bandit task via bimanual button presses. This defeats the effector-specific mechanisms posited by [ 24 ] by making it impossible to evaluate the reward expected for a movement with one hand separate from the other hand’s movement. We contrasted neural activity during this bimanual condition against a more traditional unimanual condition, in which each option corresponded to a single button press using one or the other hand. Consistent with previous reports that sensorimotor and motor-planning regions contain effector-specific values [ 76 , 24 , 107 ], we found that value signals in the medial motor cortex showed contralateral biases indicating effector specificity, whereas value signals in the vmPFC did not exhibit any such effector-specific laterality effects. We also found, as in [ 24 ], that reward prediction error signaling in the ventral striatum reflects more strongly choices executed by the contralateral hand, providing further evidence that the brain contains decision and reward learning systems that are subdivided by effectors. Though right medial motor cortex was overall more active during bimanual movements, we found no evidence there or elsewhere for neural representations of value that were unique or preferential for bimanual actions. However, bimanual and unimanual conditions were associated with different patterns of connectivity between another area with value correlates and motor control regions, with the vmPFC showing greater connectivity with the medial motor cortex during bimanual choices than during choices that could be executed by single effectors. This change in connectivity suggests that the brain may, in this task, have resolved the challenge of evaluating multi-effector actions by performing valuation in the space of abstract “goods” and using top-down connectivity with motor planning areas to convert these decisions into movements. It is important to keep in mind that this interpretation of the observed changes in functional connectivity remains speculative, as our functional connectivity measures do not assess whether information is being communicated from the vmPFC to the MCC, in the opposite direction, or indeed in both directions simultaneously or from a common afferent. Future experiments in multi-effector decision making using single-unit electrophysiology or imaging methods with higher temporal resolution, such as EEG or MEG, may help resolve this issue, as well as determine the nature of the information being communicated. 
 Of course we do not rule out the possibility that motor and motor control areas also contain substrates for multi-effector action value representations. Though in this task we did not find evidence for differential representation of multi-effector value at the level of BOLD signaling, such representations are plausible. For instance, the brain’s motor systems do contain neurons tuned for particular multi-effector actions [ 99 , 19 ], and such representations would also be a natural substrate or precursor for values over these actions as well. However, the curse of dimensionality makes this impractical as a general solution for all possible multi-effector actions, so we speculate that such coding would be most useful for small groups of effectors that are often coupled during normal behavior (such as hands and eyes), or for familiar, well-practiced multi-effector actions. Consistent with this proposal, several studies have indicated that representations of novel actions in motor cortex develop over the course of motor learning and practice, while prefrontal involvement decreases with practice [ 38 , 36 , 91 , 21 ], suggesting a shift from top-down control for novel actions to explicit motor representations for familiar ones. Thus, decision making over very familiar or well-practiced bimanual actions in particular might plausibly involve action-specific, if not effector-specific, motor representations. 
 
 1. Separability and coordination in bimanual actions 
 The present study is far from the first in psychology and neuroscience to investigate bimanual action. However, the present study builds on work on decision-making to investigate valuation over multi-effector movements, and so it concerns rather different questions and phenomena than much of the literature on bimanual motor coordination. The classic and most commonly studied topic in bimanual action in psychology concerns overcoming biases that oppose and impair coordinated action. Specifically, the common finding is that asymmetric bimanual actions are, compared to unimanual actions, slower and more prone to error [ 39 ]. This has been interpreted as evidence that cross-talk, or possibly shared motor plans between the two hands, biases isomorphic muscle groups in both hands to be activated together in ’mirrored’ actions [ 39 , 98 , 62 ]. We consider this issue to be distinct from that investigated here because impairments for bimanual actions are not universal, appearing only during particular circumstances and motor action types [ 57 , 98 , 80 , 62 ], and indeed we do not observe any such impairments in performance or reaction times in the current study. Bimanual penalties occur reliably when actions are self-generated or cued by arbitrary symbols, but simple manipulations like introducing visual cues or targets can eliminate such penalties, perhaps by allowing actions to be guided by ocular-motor pathways or encouraging unified representations of an action [ 18 , 62 ]. The current task may have not elicited bimanual penalties because the shapes acted as visual targets, because the choosing of a shape was represented as a “unified” motor action, or because the motor actions involved were sufficiently simple. In any case, the challenge motivating the current study is not at the level of generating hand-specific movements but instead, given the ability to do so, at the level of evaluation: how the brain evaluates and decides between options when action values cannot be separated into hand-specific terms. 
 
 
 2. Prefrontal value regions in unimanual and bimanual actions 
 By design, our experiment does not produce a true curse of dimensionality, since there are only four options in either condition. Indeed, this is key to our interpretation of our results, since we envision that the low dimensionality of the options is what enables the brain to evaluate the options, even though the movements required to execute a choice couple multiple effectors. It is worth considering several caveats to this interpretation. 
 First, in line with much work on vmPFC and OFC value correlates across species, we assume that these systems represent value more abstractly — perhaps relative to particular goals, goods, or options, such as shapes here — rather than over actions per se [ 104 , 65 , 25 , 81 , 108 , 47 ]. Consistent with this (and with our previous effort, [ 24 ]), we do not detect a bias toward contralateral value representations in vmPFC, of the sort that we detect in more posterior cortices and associate with effector-specific valuation. However, as this is ultimately a null result, it is particularly important to consider two previous studies that do appear to detect some effector specificity in vmPFC. 
 Notably, [ 66 ], using a task similar to the unimanual condition in the current study, reports value-signal lateralization in the ventral PFC and OFC. An important aspect of these data, however, is that laterality measures are pooled over areas of ventral PFC comprising both a medial activation similar to that reported here (and those that are the focus of most of the work in neuroeconomics discussed above), plus another set of distinct activations in the bilateral lateral OFC (and not detected in the current study). From the activation maps presented, it appears as though this more lateral region comprises the bulk of the ROI used and thus may be the primary source of effector specificity in the [ 66 ] data, whereas the medial site, as in our hands (see also [ 24 ]), may not show such an effect. Indeed, recent evidence from electrophysiology, lesion, and imaging studies suggest that the lateral OFC and vmPFC are functionally distinct subregions, with the former involved in associated stimuli and outcomes and the latter representing values of available options and driving decisions [ 105 , 60 , 103 ], so it is possible that these regions also differ in their effector-specificy. 
 Also consistent with this interpretation are the results of [ 29 ], which also had participants choosing between two options by pressing a button with either their right or left hand. As in the current study, they found action value signals only in vmPFC and not in lateral OFC, and find no indication of effector-specificity in the vmPFC signals. Finally, [ 107 ] demonstrated adjacent, but somewhat disjoint, activation maps for value in vmPFC, depending whether the values were associated with a hand or eye movement. However, the temptation to interpret these activations as evidence for an effector-specific dissociation in this region does not appear to be supported statistically by a significant interaction of region by effector. If the apparent difference in effects between these subregions is not itself significant, then the data would in fact be consistent with the effector-nonspecific interpretation given here [ 33 , 78 , 59 ]. 
 A second subtlety about the present task is that although we manipulate the response mode to require either one- or two-handed button presses, in both conditions value is tied to the shapes, whose button mappings permute from trial to trial, rather than to the hand movements themselves. Because of this, even in our unimanual condition, learning and evaluation can’t logically take place entirely at the level of effector-specific value maps, but must be grounded in a shape-value mapping to carry value from trial to trial. Under our interpretation, this mapping could implicate vmPFC in both conditions. However, a potentially key difference between the conditions is that in the unimanual condition — but not the bimanual one — learned action values could be projected onto an effector-specific value map, and decision ultimately conducted inthat action value space [ 26 ]. (As discussed further below, such a decision would involve competition across the hemispheres to determine whether the left or right hand responded, but, again, unlike in the bimanual case, these interactions could be grounded in effector-specific value maps.) This is consistent with work on saccadic decision making in primates [ 97 ], in which the value of a saccade to a location is typically signaled by some feature of the target other than its location, such as color. Although neurons in posterior parietal area LIP correlate with the value of saccades to particular locations, these values likely are communicated from elsewhere in these tasks because LIP neurons are not generally tuned for the information about color that is required to determine the value of different actions. Notwithstanding its origin, though, this “value map” over saccade locations is widely viewed as a candidate causal contributor to saccadic decisions [ 97 , 26 ]. In the case of the present study, even if vmPFC contributes the shape-value mapping in both conditions, its top-down involvement may be relatively stronger in the bimanual condition, since in this case the decision itself also can’t be conducted within or across posterior effector-specific representations. A broader point is that many studies support the idea that the relative involvement of prefrontal (e.g., outcome-based) and more posterior (e.g., action-based) decision mechanisms differ depending on circumstances; what our results here suggest is that a multi-effector response requirement also impacts this balance. For instance, unlike in the present study, [ 29 ] emphasize connectivity between the vmPFC and SMA in guiding even unimanual actions. Although this is not inconsistent with our finding of greater connectivity in a bimanual than unimanual conditions, increased involvement of top-down, “goal-directed” valuation might also arise from that study’s use of choices between different types of juice conveyed symbolically rather than acquired by reinforcement learning, as in the current study. Indeed, value correlates in vmPFC are famously sensitive to subjective preferences that are grounded in very high-level, symbolically cued information such as branding [ 55 , 74 , 30 ]. Evidence from rats and humans indicates that goal-directed decision-making relies on value signals originating in the prefrontal cortex, while decisions guided by reinforcement learning may not [ 11 , 56 , 82 ]. Similarly, the prefrontal cortex is known to play a major role in decision-making that requires executive control or working memory capacity, regardless of the number of effectors used [ 55 , 64 , 20 , 28 ], while imaging results from a reinforcement learning task indicated the presence of decision variables in the SMA and preSMA rather than vmPFC [ 107 ]. 
 A related set of studies showed that the roles of prefrontal cortex and medial motor cortex in single-effector choice also depend on whether rewards are associated with visual stimuli versus particular motor actions without any accompanying stimuli. BOLD correlates of value in SMA and mid-cingulate cortex are stronger during pure action choices than choices over visual stimuli [ 25 ]. Similarly, lesions of dorsal ACC and anterior mid-cingulate cortex impaired reward learning from pure actions but not visual stimuli, whereas OFC lesions impaired only learning of stimulus values [ 42 , 81 , 25 ]. These studies emphasize the importance of medial motor regions in action valuation and selection, as well as suggest that a number of variables can modulate the relative contributions of motor and prefrontal areas during even unimanual action. 
 All these results are broadly consistent with our interpretation here, but they do underline the question why, if the bimanual condition implicates ’top-down’ control differentially, we did not detect differential recruitment of vmPFC (or any other) value correlates in a univariate sense, but instead only changes in functional connectivity. One explanation for the lack of a difference in vmPFC value correlates in the bimanual and unimanual conditions is that while ’top-down’ influences on value may require the vmPFC, the vmPFC is still capable of representing values in simpler conditions in which it may not be required. Indeed, a “goods-based” valuation system can represent everything an effector-specific action value representation can. The vmPFC may track value in parallel to other systems, even when the other systems are preferentially controlling actual choices, for instance in order to facilitate behavioral flexibility should a change in environment render such flexibility necessary and the vmPFC’s representations more useful. (See [ 13 ] and [ 93 ] for further discussion of valuation systems working in parallel.) 
 Overall, the broader literature appears to be consistent with the suggestion, as here, that these systems support action- vs outcome-based decision making, and the current results thus are consistent with the idea that the latter should be preferentially engaged for multi-effector action. In the present study we have not directly modulated all the factors that would be necessary to directly test the involvement of action- or outcome-tied representations, per se, e.g. by manipulating the presence or absence of value-carrying stimuli, or testing goal-directedness via outcome devaluation [ 17 ]. These investigations are left for future work. 
 
 
 3. Medial motor regions in bimanual actions and action selection 
 The medial motor cortex is commonly associated with bimanual coordination [ 8 , 45 , 83 , 35 ]. However, lesion studies suggest that in addition to their involvement in bimanual actions, the medial motor cortex mediates communication between hemispheres during unimanual actions as well [ 8 , 45 ]. Lesions to the SMA and preSMA often result in impairments in which the hand contralateral to the lesioned hemisphere mirrors the actions of the other. Thus, one reason these areas might be implicated in even the unimanual condition of our task — and also those of [ 66 ] and [ 29 ] — is that all these tasks involve a choice entered with one hand or the other. Thus, although each effector could determine the values of its actions independently, ultimately one hand must move and the other must not. Such competitive interactions clearly implicate communication across the hemispheres — presumably less than in our bimanual condition, in which both hands must move in concert, and perhaps more than in other bandit tasks (e.g., [ 14 ]) in which only right hand responses were used. These considerations may also explain why in the present task we find effector-specific value correlates in medial motor regions (see also [ 107 ]), whereas in [ 24 ] we found similar effects in the parietal lobe. The difference may be that although [ 24 ] used only bimanual movements, these were built up by combining two independent unilateral decisions, and thus does not involve the same sort of competitive interactions as the unimanual task here. Having effector-specific values in the medial motor cortex may facilitate the communication necessary for these interactions. 
 Given the association between the medial motor cortex and bimanual action, which we replicate here, one possible interpretation of our results is that the vmPFC communicates with medial motor areas preferentially in the bimanual condition specifically because those areas are responsible for generating bimanual actions. However, recent imaging studies have emphasized that rather than being specialized for bimanual actions, these medial motor areas, particularly those more anterior, contribute generally to planning complex motor actions and higher cognitive functions. For instance, [ 29 ] view them as a comparator and decision region, and a relay between frontal valuation regions and primary motor cortex, while [ 44 ] and [ 31 ] find them implicated in monitoring rewards and signaling exploration during foraging tasks. The preSMA in particular is thought to be involved in relatively abstract motor planning and planning in general, such as in preparing sequences of actions and encoding stimulus-action associations [ 72 , 92 ], while the mid-cingulate cortex has a wide array of cognitive and motor functions which we survey briefly below. One recent study of bimanual reaching [ 18 ] found that the preSMA and anterior MCC showed increased activation not during bimanual actions generally, but only non-symmetric actions that were not spatially guided. This led the authors to propose that the role of these areas in bimanual motor control is an extension of their roles in motor control and cognitive control generally. Thus, the vmPFC-preSMA/aMCC connectivity observed here may not be specific to bimanual choices. Coupling between value and motor-planning regions may instead be common to any decision making situation in which the motor actions involved are complex enough to require preSMA and aMCC engagement. 
 The region of medial motor cortex where we find strongest action-dependent connectivity to frontal value regions is the mid-cingulate cortex. Cingulate cortex contains a number of anatomical and functional subdivisions. The area identified here is commonly referred to as rostral cingulate zone (RCZ) or anterior mid-cingulate cortex (aMCC) in the motor literature [ 72 , 89 ], and sometimes the dorsal anterior cingulate in the decision-making literature [ 44 ]. Anatomical and functional connectivity analyses indicate that this region is connected to lateral and medial prefrontal cortex, subcortical nuclei including the striatum and amygdala, and primary and premotor cortices [ 4 , 110 ]. Functional MRI studies have implicated this region in a number of different processes, most prominently cognitive control, processing of aversive, emotional, and rewarding stimuli, and motor action selection [ 9 , 71 , 88 , 109 , 102 , 52 , 89 ]. This has led to the hypothesis that this region serves as a hub linking value and affect signals from prefrontal and subcortical regions to cognitive and motor control systems [ 89 ]. Consistent with this view, during decision making tasks, neurons in the primate homologue of the aMCC carry information both about decision variables and motor actions, though reports differ as to whether motor and value signals coexist in single neurons or in distinct populations [ 53 , 41 , 50 , 32 ]. The aMCC thus seems ideally situated functionally and anatomically to act as a conduit through which decision variables can exert control over the motor system. 
 
 
 4. Conclusions 
 Together with previous studies of value correlates and connectivity during decision-making, our results suggest that the roles of different cortical areas in guiding actions depend on the details of the task at hand. When valuation depends on current goals and internal states, as in goal-directed choice, or cannot be represented easily by effector-specific actions, as in bimanual coordination, frontal representations appear to be critical for guiding choice. When values can be mapped directly onto stimulus-action associations, value representations in posterior visuo-motor and motor control areas may play a more prominent role in action selection. Adaptively subdividing decision problems appropriate to their structure may help to ameliorate the curse of dimensionality problems that arise for decisions over multiple effectors. However, if the brain indeed adapts its approach and systems used to task circumstances, a further question is what are the mechanisms and principles by which it does so. Although there exist proposals for how the brain might arbitrate between distinct decision-making systems with overlapping domains [ 77 , 13 , 16 ], the general problem of adaptive dimensionality reduction for reinforcement learning remains largely open. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This work was supported by National Institue of Mental Health Grant R01 MH07882 as part of the National Science Foundation — National Institutes of Health Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience Program, by Human Frontiers Science Program Grant RGP0036/2009-C, a Scholars Award from The McKnight Foundation and a Scholars Award from The McDonnell foundation. The authors would like to thank Dylan Alex Simon for helpful comments and discussion. 
 
 
 References 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 DeLong 
 MR 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex 
 Annual review of neuroscience 
 1986 
 9 
 357 
 381 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 Buneo 
 CA 
 
 
 Intentional maps in posterior parietal cortex 
 Annual review of neuroscience 
 2002 
 25 
 189 
 220 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Batista 
 AP 
 
 
 Buneo 
 CA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 LH 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 Reach Plans in Eye-Centered Coordinates 
 Science 
 1999 
 285 
 5425 
 257 
 260 
 10398603 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 M 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Connectivity-based parcellation of human cingulate cortex and its relation to functional specialization 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 4 
 1175 
 1190 
 19176826 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Berns 
 GS 
 
 
 McClure 
 SM 
 
 
 Pagnoni 
 G 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 Predictability modulates human brain response to reward 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2001 
 21 
 8 
 2793 
 2798 
 11306631 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 Blanke 
 O 
 
 
 Spinelli 
 L 
 
 
 Thut 
 G 
 
 
 Michel 
 CM 
 
 
 Perrig 
 S 
 
 
 Landis 
 T 
 
 
 Seeck 
 M 
 
 
 Location of the human frontal eye field as defined by electrical cortical stimulation: anatomical, functional and electrophysiological characteristics 
 Neuroreport 
 2000 
 11 
 9 
 1907 
 1913 
 10884042 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Breiter 
 HC 
 
 
 Gollub 
 RL 
 
 
 Weisskoff 
 RM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DN 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Berke 
 JD 
 
 
 Goodman 
 JM 
 
 
 Kantor 
 HL 
 
 
 Gastfriend 
 DR 
 
 
 Riorden 
 JP 
 
 
 Mathew 
 RT 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Hyman 
 SE 
 
 
 Acute effects of cocaine on human brain activity and emotion 
 Neuron 
 1997 
 9 
 19 
 3 
 591 
 611 
 9331351 
 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 Brinkman 
 C 
 
 
 Supplementary motor area of the monkey’s cerebral cortex: short- and long-term deficits after unilateral ablation and the effects of subsequent callosal section 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 1984 
 4 
 4 
 918 
 929 
 6716131 
 
 
 
 9 
 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Bornhovd 
 K 
 
 
 Quante 
 M 
 
 
 Glauche 
 V 
 
 
 Bromm 
 B 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 Dissociable Neural Responses Related to Pain Intensity, Stimulus Intensity, and Stimulus Awareness within the Anterior Cingulate Cortex: A Parametric Single-Trial Laser Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2002 
 22 
 3 
 970 
 976 
 11826125 
 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 
 Calton 
 JL 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 AR 
 
 
 Snyder 
 LH 
 
 
 Non-spatial, motor-specific activation in posterior parietal cortex 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2002 
 5 
 6 
 580 
 588 
 
 
 
 11 
 
 
 
 Camille 
 N 
 
 
 Griffiths 
 CA 
 
 
 Vo 
 K 
 
 
 Fellows 
 LK 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 Ventromedial frontal lobe damage disrupts value maximization in humans 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 20 
 7527 
 7532 
 21593337 
 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Trial-by-trial data analysis using computational models 
 Affect, learning and decision making, attention and performance XXIII 
 2011 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 13 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Uncertainty-based competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2005 
 8 
 12 
 1704 
 1711 
 
 
 
 14 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans 
 Nature 
 2006 
 441 
 7095 
 876 
 879 
 16778890 
 
 
 
 15 
 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 J 
 
 
 Hutton 
 C 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Optimized EPI for fMRI studies of the orbitofrontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 2 
 430 
 441 
 12814592 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 Actions and habits: The development of behavioural autonomy 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 
 1985 
 308 
 1135 
 67 
 78 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 Balleine 
 B 
 
 
 
 
 Gallistel 
 CR 
 
 
 The Role of Learning in the Operation of Motivational Systems 
 Stevenâ€™s handbook of experimental psychology: Learning, motivation and emotion 
 2002 
 3rd Edition 
 New York 
 John Wiley & Sons 
 497 
 534 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 Grafton 
 S 
 
 
 Albert 
 N 
 
 
 Hazeltine 
 E 
 
 
 Ivry 
 RB 
 
 
 Goal-selection and movement-related conflict during bimanual reaching movements 
 Cerebral cortex 
 2006 
 16 
 12 
 1729 
 1738 
 16400162 
 
 
 
 19 
 
 
 
 Donchin 
 O 
 
 
 Gribova 
 A 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 O 
 
 
 Mitz 
 AR 
 
 
 Bergman 
 H 
 
 
 Vaadia 
 E 
 
 
 Single-unit activity related to bimanual arm movements in the primary and supplementary motor cortices 
 Journal of neurophysiology 
 2002 
 88 
 6 
 3498 
 3517 
 12466464 
 
 
 
 20 
 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Sherman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Understanding decision-making deficits in neurological conditions: insights from models of natural action selection 
 Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 
 2007 
 362 
 1485 
 1641 
 1654 
 
 
 
 21 
 
 
 
 Franz 
 EA 
 
 
 Waldie 
 KE 
 
 
 Smith 
 MJ 
 
 
 The effect of callosotomy on novel versus familiar bimanual actions: a neural dissociation between controlled and automatic processes? 
 Psychological Science 
 2000 
 11 
 1 
 82 
 86 
 11228850 
 
 
 
 22 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 23 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Assessing the significance of focal activations using their spatial extent 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1993 
 1 
 3 
 210 
 220 
 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 
 Gershman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Pesaran 
 B 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Human reinforcement learning subdivides structured action spaces by learning effector-specific values 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 43 
 13524 
 13531 
 19864565 
 
 
 
 25 
 
 
 
 Gläscher 
 J 
 
 
 Hampton 
 AN 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Determining a role for ventromedial prefrontal cortex in encoding action-based value signals during reward-related decision making 
 Cerebral cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2 
 483 
 495 
 18550593 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Camerer 
 CF 
 
 
 Fehr 
 E 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Choice: towards a standard back-pocket model. Ch. 31 
 Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain 
 2008 
 San Diego, CA 
 Academic Press 
 503 
 521 
 
 
 
 27 
 
 
 
 Grootoonk 
 S 
 
 
 Hutton 
 C 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Howseman 
 AM 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Characterization and correction of interpolation effects in the realignment of fMRI time series 
 NeuroImage 
 2000 
 11 
 1 
 49 
 57 
 10686116 
 
 
 
 28 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Camerer 
 CF 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Self-control in decision-making involves modulation of the vmPFC valuation system 
 Science 
 2009 
 324 
 5927 
 646 
 648 
 19407204 
 
 
 
 29 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Camerer 
 CF 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Transformation of stimulus value signals into motor commands during simple choice 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2011 
 108 
 44 
 18120 
 18125 
 22006321 
 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 
 Harvey 
 AH 
 
 
 Kirk 
 U 
 
 
 Denfield 
 GH 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 Monetary favors and their influence on neural responses and revealed preference 
 The Journal of neuroscience 
 2010 
 7 
 30 
 28 
 9597 
 9602 
 20631188 
 
 
 
 31 
 
 
 
 Hayden 
 BY 
 
 
 Pearson 
 JM 
 
 
 Platt 
 ML 
 
 
 Neuronal basis of sequential foraging decisions in a patchy environment 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 7 
 933 
 939 
 
 
 
 32 
 
 
 
 Hayden 
 BY 
 
 
 Platt 
 ML 
 
 
 Neurons in anterior cingulate cortex multiplex information about reward and action 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2010 
 30 
 9 
 3339 
 3346 
 20203193 
 
 
 
 33 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 R 
 
 
 What can functional neuroimaging tell the experimental psychologist ? 
 The Quarterly journal of experimental psychology 
 2005 
 58A 
 2 
 193 
 233 
 15903115 
 
 
 
 34 
 
 
 
 Inati 
 S 
 
 
 Velasco 
 P 
 
 
 Vessel 
 E 
 
 
 A new method for robust functional to structural alignment using multi-echo GRE B0 and R2* mapping 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2011 
 Quebec City (Canada) 
 
 
 
 35 
 
 
 
 Jäncke 
 L 
 
 
 Peters 
 M 
 
 
 Himmelbach 
 M 
 
 
 Nösselt 
 T 
 
 
 Shah 
 J 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 fMRI study of bimanual coordination 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2000 
 38 
 2 
 174 
 164 
 
 
 
 36 
 
 
 
 Jenkins 
 I 
 
 
 Brooks 
 D 
 
 
 Nixon 
 P 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 R 
 
 
 Passingham 
 R 
 
 
 Motor sequence learning: a study with positron emission tomography 
 J. Neurosci 
 1994 
 14 
 6 
 3775 
 3790 
 8207487 
 
 
 
 37 
 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 The neural correlates of subjective value during intertemporal choice 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2007 
 10 
 12 
 1625 
 1633 
 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 
 Karni 
 A 
 
 
 Meyer 
 G 
 
 
 Jezzard 
 P 
 
 
 Adams 
 MM 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Functional MRI evidence for adult motor cortex plasticity during motor skill learning 
 Nature 
 1995 
 377 
 6545 
 155 
 158 
 7675082 
 
 
 
 39 
 
 
 
 Kelso 
 JA 
 
 
 Southard 
 DL 
 
 
 Goodman 
 D 
 
 
 On the coordination of two-handed movements 
 Journal of experimental psychology. Human perception and performance 
 1979 
 5 
 2 
 229 
 238 
 528935 
 
 
 
 40 
 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Diedrichsen 
 J 
 
 
 Hazeltine 
 E 
 
 
 Semjen 
 A 
 
 
 Ivry 
 RB 
 
 
 Callosotomy patients exhibit temporal uncoupling during continuous bimanual movements 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2002 
 5 
 4 
 376 
 381 
 
 
 
 41 
 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 Encoding of reward and space during a working memory task in the orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate sulcus 
 Journal of neurophysiology 
 2009 
 102 
 6 
 3352 
 3364 
 19776363 
 
 
 
 42 
 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Optimal decision making and the anterior cingulate cortex 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2006 
 9 
 7 
 940 
 947 
 
 
 
 43 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Westdorp 
 A 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 E 
 
 
 Hommer 
 D 
 
 
 FMRI visualization of brain activity during a monetary incentive delay task 
 NeuroImage 
 2000 
 12 
 1 
 20 
 27 
 10875899 
 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 
 Kolling 
 N 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Mars 
 RB 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Neural Mechanisms of Foraging 
 Science 
 2012 
 336 
 6077 
 95 
 98 
 22491854 
 
 
 
 45 
 
 
 
 Laplane 
 D 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Meininger 
 V 
 
 
 Bancaud 
 J 
 
 
 Orgogozo 
 J 
 
 
 Clinical consequences of corticectomies involving the supplementary motor area in man 
 Journal of the Neurological Sciences 
 1977 
 34 
 3 
 301 
 314 
 591992 
 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 
 Lau 
 B 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Dynamic Response-by-Response Models of Matching Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys 
 Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 
 2005 
 84 
 3 
 555 
 579 
 16596980 
 
 
 
 47 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 DJ 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Comparing Apples and Oranges: Using Reward-Specific and Reward-General Subjective Value Representation in the Brain 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 41 
 14693 
 14707 
 21994386 
 
 
 
 48 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 I 
 
 
 Schluppeck 
 D 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Specificity of human cortical areas for reaches and saccades 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 17 
 4687 
 4696 
 17460081 
 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 
 Leyton 
 ASF 
 
 
 Sherrington 
 CS 
 
 
 Observations on the excitable cortex of the chimpanzee, orangutan, and gorilla 
 Q J Exp Physiol 
 1917 
 11 
 2 
 135 
 222 
 
 
 
 50 
 
 
 
 Luk 
 C-H 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 Dynamic encoding of responses and outcomes by neurons in medial prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 23 
 7526 
 7539 
 19515921 
 
 
 
 51 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 3 
 1233 
 1239 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 LN 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 The influence of emotion regulation on decision-making under risk 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 9 
 2569 
 2581 
 21254801 
 
 
 
 53 
 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 K 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 W 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 K 
 
 
 Neuronal correlates of goal-based motor selection in the prefrontal cortex 
 Science 
 2003 
 301 
 5630 
 229 
 232 
 12855813 
 
 
 
 54 
 
 
 
 Mazaika 
 P 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Methods and software for fMRI analysis for clinical subjects 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009 
 
 
 
 55 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 SM 
 
 
 Laibson 
 DI 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards 
 Science 
 2004 
 306 
 5695 
 503 
 507 
 15486304 
 
 
 
 56 
 
 
 
 McDannald 
 Ma 
 
 
 Lucantonio 
 F 
 
 
 Burke 
 Ka 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Schoenbaum 
 G 
 
 
 Ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex are both required for model-based, but not model-free, reinforcement learning 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 7 
 2700 
 2705 
 21325538 
 
 
 
 57 
 
 
 
 Mechsner 
 F 
 
 
 Kerzel 
 D 
 
 
 Knoblich 
 G 
 
 
 Prinz 
 W 
 
 
 Perceptual basis of bimanual coordination 
 Nature 
 2001 
 414 
 6859 
 69 
 73 
 11689944 
 
 
 
 58 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 J-B 
 
 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 25 
 3 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 59 
 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 BU 
 
 
 Wagenmakers 
 E-J 
 
 
 Erroneous analyses of interactions in neuroscience: a problem of significance 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 9 
 1105 
 1107 
 
 
 
 60 
 
 
 
 Noonan 
 MP 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Sallet 
 J 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Separate value comparison and learning mechanisms in macaque medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 47 
 20547 
 20552 
 21059901 
 
 
 
 61 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Neural Responses during Anticipation of a Primary Taste Reward 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 33 
 5 
 815 
 826 
 11879657 
 
 
 
 62 
 
 
 
 Oliveira 
 FTP 
 
 
 Ivry 
 RB 
 
 
 The Representation of Action: Insights From Bimanual Coordination 
 Current directions in psychological science 
 2008 
 17 
 2 
 130 
 135 
 19606276 
 
 
 
 63 
 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 JX 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Tools of the trade: psychophysiological interactions and functional connectivity 
 Social cognitive and affective neuroscience 
 2012 
 6 
 7 
 5 
 604 
 609 
 22569188 
 
 
 
 64 
 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 Making working memory work: a computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia 
 Neural computation 
 2006 
 18 
 2 
 283 
 328 
 16378516 
 
 
 
 65 
 
 
 
 Padoa-Schioppa 
 C 
 
 
 Assad 
 Ja 
 
 
 Neurons in the orbitofrontal cortex encode economic value 
 Nature 
 2006 
 441 
 7090 
 223 
 226 
 16633341 
 
 
 
 66 
 
 
 
 Palminteri 
 S 
 
 
 Boraud 
 T 
 
 
 Lafargue 
 G 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 Pessiglione 
 M 
 
 
 Brain hemispheres selectively track the expected value of contralateral options 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 43 
 13465 
 13472 
 19864559 
 
 
 
 67 
 
 
 
 Penfield 
 W 
 
 
 Jasper 
 H 
 
 
 Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain 
 1954 
 Little Brown, Boston 
 
 
 
 68 
 
 
 
 Penny 
 WD 
 
 
 Henson 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 JT 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Penny 
 WD 
 
 
 Analysis of Variance. Ch 13 
 Statistical Parametric Mapping: The analysis of functional brain images 
 2006 
 London 
 Academic Press 
 166 
 177 
 
 
 
 69 
 
 
 
 Pesaran 
 B 
 
 
 Nelson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 Dorsal premotor neurons encode the relative position of the hand, eye, goal during reach planning 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 51 
 1 
 125 
 134 
 16815337 
 
 
 
 70 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Overlapping and distinct neural systems code for subjective value during intertemporal and risky decision making 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 50 
 15727 
 15734 
 20016088 
 
 
 
 71 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nearing 
 KI 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Extinction learning in humans: : Role of the amygdala and vmPFC 
 Neuron 
 2004 
 43 
 6 
 897 
 905 
 15363399 
 
 
 
 72 
 
 
 
 Picard 
 N 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 Imaging the premotor areas 
 Current opinion in neurobiology 
 2001 
 11 
 6 
 663 
 672 
 11741015 
 
 
 
 73 
 
 
 
 Plassmann 
 H 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal cortex encodes willingness to pay in everyday economic transactions 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 37 
 9984 
 9988 
 17855612 
 
 
 
 74 
 
 
 
 Plassmann 
 H 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Shiv 
 B 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Marketing actions can modulate neural representations of experienced pleasantness 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2008 
 1 
 105 
 3 
 1050 
 1054 
 18195362 
 
 
 
 75 
 
 
 
 Platt 
 M 
 
 
 Padoa-Schioppa 
 C 
 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Camerer 
 CF 
 
 
 Fehr 
 E 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Neuronal representations of value. Ch. 29 
 Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain 
 2008 
 San Diego, CA 
 Academic Press 
 441 
 462 
 
 
 
 76 
 
 
 
 Platt 
 ML 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex 
 Nature 
 1999 
 400 
 6741 
 233 
 238 
 10421364 
 
 
 
 77 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Clark 
 J 
 
 
 Paré-Blagoev 
 EJ 
 
 
 Shohamy 
 D 
 
 
 Creso Moyano 
 J 
 
 
 Myers 
 C 
 
 
 Gluck 
 MA 
 
 
 Interactive memory systems in the human brain 
 Nature 
 2001 
 414 
 6863 
 546 
 550 
 11734855 
 
 
 
 78 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Guidelines for reporting an fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 40 
 2 
 409 
 414 
 18191585 
 
 
 
 79 
 
 
 
 Rescorla 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AR 
 
 
 
 
 Black 
 AH 
 
 
 Prokasy 
 WF 
 
 
 A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and non-reinforcement 
 Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory 
 1972 
 Appleton-Century-Crofts 
 64 
 99 
 
 
 
 80 
 
 
 
 Rosenbaum 
 DA 
 
 
 Dawson 
 AM 
 
 
 Challis 
 JH 
 
 
 Haptic tracking permits bimanual independence 
 Journal of experimental psychology. Human perception and performance 
 2006 
 32 
 5 
 1266 
 1275 
 17002536 
 
 
 
 81 
 
 
 
 Rudebeck 
 PH 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Kennerley 
 SW 
 
 
 Baxter 
 MG 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Frontal cortex subregions play distinct roles in choices between actions and stimuli 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 51 
 13775 
 13785 
 19091968 
 
 
 
 82 
 
 
 
 Rudebeck 
 PH 
 
 
 Murray 
 EA 
 
 
 Dissociable effects of subtotal lesions within the macaque orbital prefrontal cortex on reward-guided behavior 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 29 
 10569 
 10578 
 21775601 
 
 
 
 83 
 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Yonekura 
 Y 
 
 
 Waki 
 A 
 
 
 Yamada 
 H 
 
 
 Ishii 
 Y 
 
 
 Role of the supplementary motor area and the right premotor cortex in the coordination of bimanual finger movements 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 24 
 9667 
 9674 
 9391021 
 
 
 
 84 
 
 
 
 Scherberger 
 H 
 
 
 Andersen 
 Ra 
 
 
 Target selection signals for arm reaching in the posterior parietal cortex 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 8 
 2001 
 2012 
 17314296 
 
 
 
 85 
 
 
 
 Schlag 
 J 
 
 
 Schlag-Rey 
 M 
 
 
 Evidence for a supplementary eye field 
 J Neurophysiol 
 1987 
 57 
 1 
 179 
 200 
 3559671 
 
 
 
 86 
 
 
 
 Schönberg 
 T 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Joel 
 D 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Reinforcement learning signals in the human striatum distinguish learners from nonlearners during reward-based decision making 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 47 
 12860 
 12867 
 18032658 
 
 
 
 87 
 
 
 
 Schwarz 
 G 
 
 
 Estimating the Dimension of a Model 
 The Annals of Statistics 
 1978 
 6 
 2 
 461 
 464 
 
 
 
 88 
 
 
 
 Seo 
 H 
 
 
 Lee 
 D 
 
 
 Temporal filtering of reward signals in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex during a mixed-strategy game 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 31 
 8366 
 8377 
 17670983 
 
 
 
 89 
 
 
 
 Shackman 
 AJ 
 
 
 Salomons 
 TV 
 
 
 Slagter 
 Ha 
 
 
 Fox 
 AS 
 
 
 Winter 
 JJ 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 The integration of negative affect, pain and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex 
 Nature reviews. Neuroscience 
 2011 
 12 
 3 
 154 
 167 
 
 
 
 90 
 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 Newsome 
 WT 
 
 
 Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey 
 Journal of neurophysiology 
 2001 
 86 
 4 
 1916 
 1936 
 11600651 
 
 
 
 91 
 
 
 
 Shadmehr 
 R 
 
 
 Neural Correlates of Motor Memory Consolidation 
 Science 
 1997 
 277 
 5327 
 821 
 825 
 9242612 
 
 
 
 92 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 DA 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 
 
 Shawe-Taylor 
 J 
 
 
 Zemel 
 RS 
 
 
 Bartlett 
 P 
 
 
 Pereira 
 FCN 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 KQ 
 
 
 Environmental statistics and the trade-off between model-based and TD learning in humans 
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
 2011a 
 24 
 127 
 135 
 
 
 
 93 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 DA 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Neural correlates of forward planning in a spatial decision task in humans 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2011b 
 31 
 14 
 5526 
 5539 
 21471389 
 
 
 
 94 
 
 
 
 Snyder 
 L 
 
 
 Batista 
 A 
 
 
 Andersen 
 R 
 
 
 Coding of intention in the posterior parietal cortex 
 Nature 
 1997 
 386 
 6621 
 167 
 170 
 9062187 
 
 
 
 95 
 
 
 
 Sperry 
 RW 
 
 
 Cerebral Organization and Behavior: The split brain behaves in many respects like two separate brains, providing new research possibilities 
 Science 
 1961 
 133 
 3466 
 1749 
 1757 
 17829720 
 
 
 
 96 
 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Penny 
 WD 
 
 
 Daunizeau 
 J 
 
 
 Moran 
 RJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Bayesian model selection for group studies 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 46 
 4 
 1004 
 1017 
 19306932 
 
 
 
 97 
 
 
 
 Sugrue 
 L 
 
 
 Corrado 
 G 
 
 
 Matching behavior and the representation of value in the parietal cortex 
 Science 
 2004 
 304 
 6 
 1782 
 1787 
 15205529 
 
 
 
 98 
 
 
 
 Swinnen 
 S 
 
 
 Wenderoth 
 N 
 
 
 Two hands, one brain: cognitive neuroscience of bimanual skill 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2004 
 8 
 1 
 18 
 25 
 14697399 
 
 
 
 99 
 
 
 
 Tanji 
 J 
 
 
 Okano 
 K 
 
 
 Sato 
 KC 
 
 
 Neuronal activity in cortical motor areas related to ipsilateral, contralateral, and bilateral digit movements of the monkey 
 Journal of neurophysiology 
 1988 
 60 
 1 
 325 
 343 
 3404223 
 
 
 
 100 
 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 Fox 
 CR 
 
 
 Trepel 
 C 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 The neural basis of loss aversion in decision-making under risk 
 Science 
 2007 
 315 
 5811 
 515 
 518 
 17255512 
 
 
 
 101 
 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 Papathanassiou 
 D 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Delcroix 
 N 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Joliot 
 M 
 
 
 Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 15 
 1 
 273 
 289 
 11771995 
 
 
 
 102 
 
 
 
 Venkatraman 
 V 
 
 
 Rosati 
 AG 
 
 
 Taren 
 AA 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 Resolving response, decision, and strategic control: evidence for a functional topography in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 42 
 13158 
 13164 
 19846703 
 
 
 
 103 
 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 Cross-species studies of orbitofrontal cortex and value-based decision-making 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2012 
 15 
 1 
 13 
 19 
 
 
 
 104 
 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Neuronal activity in primate dorsolateral and orbital prefrontal cortex during performance of a reward preference task 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2003 
 18 
 7 
 2069 
 2081 
 14622240 
 
 
 
 105 
 
 
 
 Walton 
 ME 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rudebeck 
 PH 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Separable learning systems in the macaque brain and the role of orbitofrontal cortex in contingent learning 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 65 
 6 
 927 
 939 
 20346766 
 
 
 
 106 
 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 GE 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Shohamy 
 D 
 
 
 Generalization of value in reinforcement learning by humans 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 35 
 7 
 1092 
 1104 
 22487039 
 
 
 
 107 
 
 
 
 Wunderlich 
 K 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Neural computations underlying action-based decision making in the human brain 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2009 
 106 
 40 
 17199 
 17204 
 19805082 
 
 
 
 108 
 
 
 
 Wunderlich 
 K 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Economic choices can be made using only stimulus values 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 34 
 15005 
 15010 
 20696924 
 
 
 
 109 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Ghahremani 
 DG 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Neural substrates for reversing stimulus-outcome and stimulus-response associations 
 Journal of neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 44 
 11196 
 11204 
 18971462 
 
 
 
 110 
 
 
 
 Yu 
 C 
 
 
 Zhou 
 Y 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Dong 
 H 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Walter 
 M 
 
 
 Functional segregation of the human cingulate cortex is confirmed by functional connectivity based neuroanatomical parcellation 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 54 
 4 
 2571 
 2581 
 21073967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental task. ( A ) The sequence of events during a task trial. Subjects chose a shape within 1.5 seconds of shape onset, whereupon the unchosen shapes dimmed and, after a fixed ISI, subjects saw either a dollar coin indicating they had won money or a scrambled dollar coin indicating they had not. After a variable ITI the next trial began, with the shapes appearing in different positions. The amount of time between when a choice was made and the time limit was added to ITI to ensure consistent timing. ( B ) The two experimental conditions, bimanual and unimanual. Both conditions required that participants press buttons with their middle and index fingers on each hand to select shapes. A button, or combination of buttons, corresponded to a particular location on the screen and selected whatever shape occupied that location on that trial. The correspondence between buttons and choices is shown above for both conditions, with the sets of four yellow icons representing the four available buttons. The filled-in icons indicate which buttons would be used to select the neighboring shape. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Motor-related activity. ( A ) Regions of the bilateral precentral gyrus and medial motor cortex showing an effect of right versus left-handed actions. ( B ) The medial motor cortex ROI (SMA and MCC voxels showing activity across all motor conditions; see methods) showed greater activation during bimanual than either type of unimanual movement in the right hemisphere, with a similar trend in the left hemisphere. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Correlates of value and lateralization thereof. We found correlates of chosen value in the ( A  left) SMA and MCC and in the ( B  left) ventral-medial prefrontal cortex, as well as ( C  left) RPE signals in the ventral striatum. The medial motor activation contained two distinct pairs of contralateral peaks, so we divided the activation into four ROIs and tested for lateralization between contralateral ROIs. At our default threshold only the right vmPFC contained significant voxels, so in order to perform a similar test of value laterality we relaxed the threshold to  p  < 0.01 (voxels active only at the lower threshold are displayed as semi-transparent). Examining both chosen value and action value effect sizes in these ROIs (action values shown), we find in the anterior SMA/MCC a significant hemisphere×effector interaction ( A  right), but not in the vmPFC ( B  right). We also find an effector×hemisphere interaction in the striatal RPE responses ( C  right). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Functional connectivity with the vmPFC. ( A ) Voxels in the SMA/MCC showing higher vmPFC connectivity during bimanual choices than unimanual choices overall, collapsing across right and left-handed choices. ( B ) The conjunction of bimanual connectivity greater than right and bimanual greater than left-hand action connectivity, verifying that the effects are not driven by asymmetries between right and left action connectivity strengths. While we find activity in both the MCC and SMA, only the MCC survives small-volume cluster correction. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 RL model parameter estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Individual fits – mean (s.e.m.) 
 Fixed effects fit – for fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 α 
 0.54 (0.06) 
 0.56 
 
 
 β Q 
 2.94 (0.44) 
 1.8 
 
 
 κ 
 0.52 (0.07) 
 0.48 
 
 
 β C 
 1.16 (0.3) 
 1.69 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 fMRI activations. Maps were generated at  p  < 0.005 uncorrected, and all activations that survived cluster-size whole-brain or small-volume correction at  p  < 0.05 are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Cluster size (2^3 mm voxels) 
 Peak (MNI) 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right > Left Choices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precentral Sulcus & Supplementary 
 
 -40 - 
 
 
 
 
 Motor Area L 
 5626 
 18 66 
 10.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 -48 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum & Occipital Lobe R 
 12397 
 -20 
 10.38 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 -16 
 - 
 
 
 
 Precentral Sulcus R 
 3995 
 60 
 11.57 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 -8 
 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area R 
 582 
 56 
 -6.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 -22 - 
 - 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum L 
 761 
 52 -22 
 11.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 -18 
 
 
 
 
 Rolandic Operculum R 
 861 
 18 
 -8.08 
 
 
 
 
 
 -16 - 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital Lobe L 
 360 
 94 20 
 -6.94 
 
 
 Chosen Value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolandic Operculum & Superior 
 
 54 2 
 
 
 
 
 Temporal Gyrus R 
 456 
 10 
 5.66 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area & Mid- 
 
 -12 - 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate Cortex posterior L 
 1332 
 14 50 
 5.15 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area & Mid- 
 
 12 -16 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate Cortex posterior R 
 
 50 
 4.13 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area & Mid- 
 
 -4 -2 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate Cortex anterior L 
 
 46 
 4.94 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area & Mid- 
 
 14 2 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate Cortex anterior R 
 
 56 
 5.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 -10 54 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Prefrontal Cortex L 
 381 
 34 
 4.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 60 - 
 
 
 
 
 Medial Prefrontal Cortex R • 
 195 
 12 
 4.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 -40 - 
 
 
 
 
 Hippocampus L 
 582 
 12 -18 
 5.07 
 
 
 Reward Prediction Error 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 -36 - 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital L 
 2554 
 84 -10 
 10.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 -90 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital R 
 2343 
 0 
 9.61 
 
 
 
 
 
 -52 - 
 
 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Lobe L 
 1256 
 56 48 
 9.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 46 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Orbitalfrontal Cortex R 
 657 
 -14 
 7.63 
 
 
 
 
 
 -44 50 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Orbitalfrontal Cortex L 
 510 
 -10 
 6.58 
 
 
 
 
 
 -46 16 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus L 
 581 
 50 
 5.88 
 
 
 
 
 
 -10 8 - 
 
 
 
 
 Striatum L • 
 188 
 6 
 9.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 10 
 
 
 
 
 Striatum R • 
 420 
 -8 
 5.98 
 
 
 vmPFC Functional Connectivity -- Bimanual > Unimanual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 14 
 
 
 
 
 Mid-cingulate Cortex R • 
 337 
 42 
 6.46 
 
 
 
 
 
 52 30 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus R 
 772 
 18 
 5.03 
 
 
 vmPFC Functional Connectivity -- Bimanual > Right & Bimanual > Left 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 16 
 
 
 
 
 Mid-cingulate Cortex R • 
 259 
 40 
 4.77 
 
 
 
 
 
 • 
 indicates small-volume correction used 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 fMRI study comparing single effector and coordinated multi-effector decision making 
 
 
 We find effector-specific value signals in supplementary motor and cingulate cortex. 
 
 
 Value signals in pre frontal cortex (PFC) show no evident effector-specific structure. 
 
 
 Connectivity between PFC and cingulate increases in multi-effector actions. 
 
 
 Suggests multi-effector choices involve top-down control from abstract valuations. 
 
 
 
 
