
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8102140 
 5035 
 J Neurosci 
 J. Neurosci. 
 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 
 0270-6474 
 1529-2401 
 
 
 23283347 
 3711626 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0919-12.2013 
 NIHMS431158 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Impulsivity and self-control during intertemporal decision-making linked to the neural dynamics of reward value representation 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 Koji 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Chushak 
 Maria S. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 Todd S. 
 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 1 Precision and Intelligence Laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology 
 2 Imaging Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin 
 3 Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis 
 4 Department of Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis 
 
 Correspondence should be addressed to: Koji Jimura Precision and Intelligence Laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-J3-10 Nagatsutacho Midoriku, Yokohama, 226-8503, Japan  jimura@cns.pi.titech.ac.jp  Phone: +81-45-924-5054 Fax: +81-45-924-5085 
 
 
 9 
 1 
 2013 
 
 
 2 
 1 
 2013 
 
 
 15 
 7 
 2013 
 
 33 
 1 
 344 
 357 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 A characteristic marker of impulsive decision-making is the discounting of delayed rewards, demonstrated via choice preferences and choice-related brain activity. However, delay discounting may also arise from how subjective reward value is dynamically represented in the brain when anticipating an upcoming chosen reward. In the current study, brain activity was continuously monitored as human participants freely selected an immediate or delayed primary liquid reward and then waited for the specified delay before consuming it. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) exhibited a characteristic pattern of activity dynamics during the delay period, as well as modulation during choice, that is consistent with the time-discounted coding of subjective value. The ventral striatum (VS) exhibited a similar activity pattern, but preferentially in impulsive individuals. A contrasting profile of delay-related and choice activation was observed in the anterior PFC (aPFC), but selectively in patient individuals. Multilevel statistical modeling indicated that both vmPFC and aPFC exerted modulatory, but opposite, influences on VS activation. These results link behavioral impulsivity and self-control to dynamically evolving neural representations of future reward value not just during choice, but also post-choice delay periods. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH066078 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Intertemporal decision-making requires evaluation of future outcomes that vary both in their magnitude and time of delivery. A reliable finding is that individuals discount the value of rewards that are delayed in time ( Mischel et al., 1989 ;  Frederic et al., 2002 ;  Ainslie, 2005 ). This phenomenon, known as delay discounting, also exhibits substantial individual differences, reflecting a critical aspect of behavioral impulsivity ( Madden and Bickel, 2009 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2011 ). While impulsivity is characterized by steep discounting of delayed rewards, and/or over-valuation of immediate rewards ( Kirby et al., 1999 ;  Kable and Glimcher, 2007 ), patience may arise from self-control processes that bias attention towards, and/or enhance the valuation of, delayed rewards. ( Figner et al., 2010 ;  Luo et al., 2009 ;  McClure et al., 2004 ). 
 Prior studies of intertemporal decision-making have identified brain regions associated with the time-discounted coding of subjective value, such as ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and ventral striatum (VS), but have focused exclusively on activation occurring at the time of choice (see  Montague et al., 2006 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010a ;  Carter et al., 2010  for reviews). In contrast, the examination of post-choice neural activity has been neglected, although the choice of a delayed reward is, by definition, always followed by a waiting period. This may be because prior work has utilized hypothetical rewards and/or delay timescales that were not amenable to examination in a controlled manner. The current study directly addresses these limitations by utilizing a decision-making paradigm for primary rewards that were delivered and consumed after an experienced, unfilled delay interval of 30–60 seconds ( Jimura et al., 2009 ;  2011 ;  Figs 1A/B ). A key goal of the study was to monitor the dynamics of delay-related activation unconfounded by residual decision-related activity (c.f.,  Berns et al., 2006 ;  McClure et al., 2007 ). 
 An important reason for examining post-decision brain activity is that the subjective value of a future reward might be continuously estimated during this delay interval. Specifically, it seems likely that subjective value is represented in a temporally evolving manner, with value estimates increasing in a non-linear fashion as the time to reward delivery decreases ( Green and Myerson, 2004 ;  Kalenscher and Pennartz, 2008 ;  Montague and Berns, 2002 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ). Additionally, the post-decision period may engage a distinct dynamic valuation component related to anticipation of the chosen reward. In particular, some economic models postulate that anticipation of a future reward itself confers current utility ( Loewenstein, 1987 ;  Berns et al., 2006 ). This component, known as anticipatory utility, entails complementary characteristics to the time-discounted goal value, because of the intertemporal trade-off between them ( Loewenstein, 1987 ). 
 The examination of post-decision neural activity dynamics provides an important opportunity to explore how impulsivity and self-control are related to the dynamic representation of reward value. Specifically, the patience needed to select delayed over immediate rewards might be associated with the representations of anticipatory utility during the post-decision period, which become more prominent in patient individuals. Conversely, impulsivity in decision-making might be reflected in a steeper rise of reward valuation while awaiting future chosen rewards. 
 
 
 Materials & Methods 
 Human participants performed an intertemporal decision-making task that we have demonstrated evokes a robust and stable form of delay-discounting across short timescales (i.e., 10–60 sec), in prior behavioral studies ( Jimura et al., 2009 ;  Jimura et al., 2011 ). We utilized this paradigm in conjunction with fMRI, to focus on individual differences in delay discounting and associated brain activity dynamics, testing whether impulsivity and self-control are reflected in the evolving pattern of subjective value representation occurring during the window between choice and reward delivery. 
 
 Participants 
 Participants (N = 43; mean age = 23.0 years; range 18–35 years; 20 male, 23 female) were right-handed and free from any history of psychiatric or neurological disorders. Each participant provided written informed consent after additional screening for physical or medical condition affecting eligibility for fMRI. The study protocol was approved in accordance with guidelines instituted by the Washington University Human Research Protection Office. Participants were compensated for their participation ($10/hour for the behavioral session, and $25/hour for the fMRI session). Of the 45 participants recruited into the study, two were eliminated due to the small number of choices (< 10) for the delayed option in the fMRI session. No participants who participated in our prior experiments ( Jimura et al., 2009 ;  2011 ) were recruited. 
 
 
 Apparatus 
 E-Prime programs (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.) controlled the behavioral task as well as the delivery of liquid rewards via a syringe pump (SP210iw, World Precision Instruments, Inc.). Liquids from two 60-ml plastic syringes mounted on the pump were merged into one tube and then delivered to the participant's mouth through a plastic tube. The simultaneous use of two syringes allowed for a comfortable flow rate of 2.0 ml/sec. The reward was delivered in 0.4-ml squirts but was experienced as a continuous flow. The amount of reward a participant received in a given trial was determined by the number of squirts. 
 
 
 Behavioral procedure 
 The experiment consisted of two sessions (behavioral and fMRI) administered on separate days. In both of the sessions, participants were instructed not to drink any liquid for 4 hours prior to the experiment. The behavioral session provided an estimate of each participant's delay discounting rate. Prior work has demonstrated that discounting behavior in this task is stable across sessions ( Jimura et al., 2011 ). The results of the behavioral session were used for characterization of individual differences and optimization of the amount of immediate reward in the fMRI session (see below). Prior to the experiment, participants were asked to choose one favorite drink that would serve as the reward from a list consisting of apple, orange, grape, grapefruit and cranberry juices, lemonade, and water. No participants requested to change the reward drink in the fMRI session. 
 
 
 Behavioral task 
 In both of the behavioral and fMRI sessions, participants performed the intertemporal decision-making task that we recently developed ( Fig. 1A/B ;  Jimura et al., 2009 ;  2011 ). At the beginning of each trial, two alternatives were presented at left and right locations on the screen: one involving a larger amount reward (20 or 40 squirts) available after a delay (10, 30 or 60 seconds) and a variable smaller amount available immediately. Participants were instructed to press one of two corresponding response buttons to indicate their preference. If the smaller, immediate amount was chosen, then a message appeared on the screen indicating that reward delivery could now begin. If the delayed reward was chosen, the participant had to wait to receive the reward. The choice period lasted from the onset of the choice presentation until participants' response, with the delay period starting immediately after the response. During the delay, a fixation cross was presented on the center of the screen. The background color of the screen was blue while the remaining time was 30–60 seconds, and red while 0–30 seconds. This was aimed to minimize the error of time estimation of reward outcome in the long delay condition. 
 At the time of reward delivery, participants saw a visual message indicating the reward was ready. Importantly, participants were able to control the rate of liquid flow. Reward delivery continued as long as the button was held down; if the button was released, delivery paused, and resumed when the button was pressed again. During reward delivery, the amount remaining (in squirts) was displayed below a red horizontal bar whose length corresponded to the number of squirts still available. After the participant finished drinking, a fixation cross was presented. 
 Task trials had a constant onset asynchrony of 150 sec independent of participants' choices. This procedure was implemented to prevent participants from selecting a strategy of repeatedly choosing the immediate option in order to maximize the reward attained per unit time ( Fig. 1B ). Because of this constant onset asynchrony, the optimal strategy to maximize reward rate is to always choose the delayed option. The duration of each trial thus varied, depending on participants' choice, and the length of the delay period, from ~24 sec to ~84 sec. Then, a variable inter-trial interval (ITI) occurred, comprised of both fixation and distractor task periods distributed across the ITI. The distractor tasks were included to minimize the effects of prior decisions, i.e., encouraging the treatment of each trial as a “one-shot” decision. Specifically, each task trial was followed by four pseudo-randomized distractor trials, two trials of a Sternberg-type working memory task ( Jimura et al., 2010 ;  2011 ) and two trials of a second delay-discounting task using hypothetical monetary rewards ( Jimura et al., 2011 ). To inform participants of the type of task to be performed on the upcoming trial, a cue (i.e., “MONEY”, “JUICE”, or “MEMORY”) was presented for 2 seconds before each trial. Data from these distractor trials, concerning the relationship between working memory and delay discounting, will be described in a forthcoming report. 
 
 
 Behavioral session procedure 
 The participants performed the task sitting on a chair. To estimate individuals' delay discounting rate, the current study used three delay conditions (10, 30, 60 sec) for the larger amount (40 squirts), and two delay conditions (10, 30 sec) for the smaller amount (20 squirts) ( Jimura et al., 2009 ). The conditions were presented pseudorandomly, and the participants made three choices for each of the delay conditions. On the first trial of each delay condition, the choice was between a larger delayed amount, and an immediate reward that was half of the delayed amount. For each delay condition, after the first trial, the amount of immediate reward was adjusted based on the participant's preceding choice. If the participant had chosen the smaller, immediate reward on the preceding trial, then the amount of the immediate reward was decreased by half (i.e., 10 and 5 squirts for the 40- and 20-squirt conditions, respectively); if the participant had chosen the larger, delayed reward on the preceding trial, then the amount of the immediate reward was increased by half ( Jimura et al., 2009 ;  2011 ). The adjustment amount was 5 squirts in the third trial in the 40-squirt condition. The subjective value for the delayed reward was estimated to be equal to 1 ml (i.e., 2.5 squirts) more or less than the amount of immediate reward available on the last trial (third and second trials in 40- and 20-squirt conditions, respectively), depending on whether the delayed or immediate reward had been chosen on that trial. Although satiety and timing constraints resulted in only a few trials used at each delay and amount level for subjective value estimation, our prior work suggests that delay discounting in this paradigm is both robust and highly reliable at the individual level (test-retest reliability: r = .92;  Jimura et al., 2011 ). 
 Each experimental session began with two forced-choice trials and two practice trials, which familiarized participants with the choice procedure as well as with the rewards and delays. The syringes were refilled after every six trials, and the maximum amount of liquid that could be obtained in the session was 248 ml. 
 After the participants completed the task, they practiced drinking liquid though a plastic tube in a supine position in a mock-scanner. They were instructed not to move their head while drinking, but encouraged to move jaws and use muscles around the mouth to swallow the liquid. It is important that participants could fully control liquid flow into their mouth by holding down and releasing the button (see above), which enabled flow-rate to be kept at a level that was comfortable, without excess movement. After they completed five practice trials (3 16-ml and 2 8-ml trials), they were asked if they had any difficulties in drinking, and if the practice drink was comfortable. No participants reported difficulties in drinking in the supine position, or significant changes in comfort relative to a sitting position. 
 
 
 fMRI session procedure 
 During fMRI scanning, participants engaged in intertemporal decision-making trials that were similar to those of the behavioral session. The primary difference was that the choice options for each trial were pre-specified (rather than adjusted across the session), but set in an individualized manner based on discounting profile estimated from the behavioral session. Three conditions (60sec/40squirts; 30sec/40squirts; 30sec/20squirts) were used to measure brain activity during the delay period. The value of the immediate reward (IR) was systematically manipulated, such that, across trials, its value, was one of the four different levels, 20, 40, 60 or 80% of the subjective value of the delayed reward, estimated for each participant based on their choice profile in the behavioral session. This IR manipulation biased decisions towards delayed options, as the IR value was always smaller than the subjective value of delayed reward, providing more opportunity to measure brain activity during the delay period. Additionally, because the IR value was parametrically manipulated, it allowed examination of the effect of this variable on choice performance and brain activation. 
 When drinking liquid rewards, the participants were encouraged to use jaw movements and mouth muscles for swallowing, but not to move their head (a skill that had been previously practiced in a mock scanner set-up; see above). Analyses of drinking related movements and their effects on image quality indicated that these were minimal (see below). 
 Each scanning run included 6 trials, with 3 or 4 scanning runs performed in the session, depending on the satiety of the participant. All trial variables (IR value, delay, amount of delayed rewards) were pseudo-randomly intermixed within and across scans, with the constraint that the 2 middle IR levels were presented twice for each condition. Each experimental session began with two forced-choice trials and two practice trials, which familiarized participants with the choice procedure as well as with the rewards and delays. The maximum amount of liquid that could be obtained in the fMRI session was 344 ml. 
 It is important to note that the experimental design and procedure minimized any trial-by-trial learning and adjustment of choice biases across trials within the session. First, at the time of the scanning session, participants were highly familiar with the decision-making paradigm and associated reward consumption, having already experienced a prior behavior session, mock-scanner training, and pre-session familiarization trials. Second, as described above, we have previously found choice preferences to be highly stable across sessions ( Jimura et al, 2011 ). Finally, the ITI (duration from the offset of the consumption and onset of the next choice) was long (> 1 min), and filled with distractor trials, that disrupted memory for prior trial choices, and encouraged participants to treat each trial as a “one-shot” decision. 
 
 
 Imaging procedures 
 fMRI scanning was conducted on a whole-body Siemens 3T Trio System (Erlangen, Germany). A pillow and tape were used to minimize head movement in the head coil. Headphones dampened scanner noise and enabled communication with participants. Both anatomical and functional images were acquired from each participant. High-resolution anatomical images were acquired using an MP-RAGE T1-weighted sequence [repetition time (TR) = 9.7 sec; echo time (TE) = 4.0 msec, flip angle (FA) = 10 deg, slice thickness = 1 mm; in-plane resolution = 1 × 1 mm 2 ]. Functional (blood oxygen level dependent; BOLD) images were acquired using an asymmetric spin-echo echo-planar imaging (TR = 2.0 sec; TE = 27 msec; FA = 90 deg; slice thickness = 4 mm; in-plane resolution = 4 × 4 mm 2 ; 34 slices) in parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure line, allowing complete brain coverage at a high signal-to-noise ratio. Each functional run involved 512 volume acquisitions. 
 
 
 Liquid delivery in fMRI session 
 Liquid was delivered from the outside of the scanner room through a plastic tube, which enabled participants to consume the liquid during fMRI administration. The liquid consumption period partially covers the BOLD window associated with the (end of) delay period (c.f.,  Fig. 1C ). Head motion was in fact greater during liquid consumption as compared to button pressing during the money discounting distractor task. However, the absolute magnitude of head motion during consumption was small, with maximum translations of (0.06, 0.09, 0.28) ± (0.05, 0.05, 0.19) [mean ± SD] mm, and maximum rotations of (0.25, 0.08, 0.06) ± (0.17, 0.06, 0.03) degree, along X, Y, Z axes respectively. 
 Nonetheless, it is known that jaw movements can yield significant instability in EPI images, as based on non-human primate scanning ( Keliris et al., 2007 ). However, inspections of our pilot scan showed such effects were minimal, due to the instructions and practice participants had with drinking in a supine position. In fact, instability may not have been present in the current study, as comparable EPI quality was present during consumption, when compared to the fixation period. Finally, when examining BOLD activation during the consumption period, robust activations were observed, with prominent foci in somatotopic regions of mouth in the primary motor and sensory cortices, and in primary gustatory cortex. Given these results, we felt confident in assuming that movement-derived contamination during liquid consumption was minimal in the current study. Detailed results and activation maps of movement-related effects and consumption-related activity can be provided upon request. 
 
 
 Assessment of individual differences in delay discounting effects 
 From the behavioral session, the main effect of delay discounting was analyzed, first by conducting a repeated-measures one-way ANOVA with delay as a factor. A planned contrast on (log−) delay was then tested ( Jimura et al., 2009 ,  2010 ). Participants were sorted into three groups steep (STP), shallow (SHL) and intermediate (INT), based on visual inspection of their different discounting rates. The group effect was formally tested by entering group as an additional factor in the ANOVA. This test for group differences is more stringent than those based on model-fits of the data (see below) because it directly tests delay discounting (i.e., that the delay effect on subjective value will interact with group) without relying on any assumption regarding the direction or form of the effect. 
 Individual differences in delay discounting were quantified by calculating the area under the discounting curve (AuC;  Jimura et al., 2011 ;  Myerson et al., 2001 ;  Sellitto et al., 2010 ). The AuC represents the area under the observed subjective values at a given delay; more specifically, AuC is calculated as the sum of the trapezoid areas under the indifference points normalized by the amount and delay ( Myerson et al, 2001 ). Both subjective value and delay are normalized for purposes of calculating AuC, which, as a result, ranges between 0.0 (maximally steep discounting) and 1.0 (no discounting). It has been argued that AuC is the best measure of delay discounting to use for individual difference analyses, because it is a theoretically-neutral (i.e., assumption-free), and also psychometrically reliable ( Myerson et al., 2001 ). 
 An alternate approach to characterizing delay discounting profile is to fit the discount function (either at the group or individual level) to a specific theoretical model. For example, the hyperbolic model of delay discounting, which is very popular and well-validated (e.g.,  Rachlin et al., 1991 ;  Green and Myerson, 2004 ;  Kable and Glimcher 2007 ), specifies that delay discounting can be characterized by the k parameter in the function A / (1+kD), where A is amount and D is delay. The current study used AuC rather than k to characterize individual differences in delay discounting, because AuC is more psychometrically stable than k ( Myerson et al., 2001 ; see also above). Nevertheless, the two measures tend to be highly similar in their characterization of individual differences in delay discounting profiles. Indeed, this assumption was validated by a Spearman's rank-ordered correlation coefficient of .99 individuals' discounting factor k and AuC for the current study. We did fit the group average discounting function with the hyperbolic model (using maximum likelihood estimation), so that a group-level k-value could also be estimated; this value was subsequently used for model-based fMRI analyses of delay-period activity dynamics. However, the k-value was not employed in any individual difference analyses. 
 The AuC was smaller in the smaller amount (20 squirts) condition than in the larger amount (40 squirts) condition [t(42) = 2.31; P < .05; based on 2 choices ( Jimura et al., 2009 )], replicating the amount effect observed in our previous report ( Jimura et al., 2009 ). However, the AuCs for the larger and smaller amount also correlated across participants [r = .61; t(41) = 4.91; P < .001], suggesting that individual differences in AuC were unrelated to the amount effect. Thus, for each participant, we averaged the AuCs for the larger and smaller amount conditions, and this averaged AuC was used in the imaging analysis to represent individual differences in delay discounting. Finally, it is important to note that AuC values and assignment to discounting group were determined solely by performance in the behavioral session; therefore individual differences analyses of the fMRI data (that were based on AuC), were unbiased. 
 
 
 Imaging analysis 
 All functional images were first temporally aligned across the brain volume, corrected for movement using a rigid-body rotation and translation correction, and then registered to the participant's anatomical images in order to correct for movement between the anatomical and function scans. The data were then intensity normalized to a fixed value, resampled into 3-mm isotropic voxels, and spatially smoothed with a 9-mm FWHM (full width, half maximum) Gaussian kernel. Participants' anatomical images were transformed into standardized Talairach atlas space ( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ) using a 12-dimensional affine transformation. The functional images were then registered to the reference brain using the alignment parameters derived for the anatomical scans. 
 A general-linear model (GLM) approach was used to separately estimate parameter values for each event occurring in the task. Events were further convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function. The focus of the analysis was on trials in which the delayed option was chosen. Consequently, both the distractor tasks and choice trials in which the immediate option was chosen were coded by events of no interest, and not analyzed further. 
 On delayed option trials, a set of independent regressors coded for each of three trial periods: choice, delay, and reward delivery. The choice period was estimated by an event beginning with visual presentation of choice options and ending when the choice response was made. The duration of this period was thus equivalent to the choice reaction time. An additional parametric regressor during this period was used to code the IR value associated with the trial (4 levels, normalized). Reward delivery was estimated with two events, a first transient event of no interest that coded the period during presentation of the instruction screen that indicated liquid was available, and a second longer event that coded (with a boxcar function) when the liquid was consumed (beginning with the first button press and ending when liquid delivery was completed). 
 The delay period prior to reward delivery was estimated by an event coded with two model-based regressors [ Fig. 1C ; additionally, on 60-second delay trials, a transient event of no interest [not shown] was used to code the change in display color that occurred at the 30-second delay point]. The first modeled a hypothesized dynamic increase in subjective value across the delay period, consistent with many neurocomputational and neuroeconomic models ( Kalenscher and Pennartz, 2008 ,  Montague and Berns 2002 ,  Berns, 2006 ). We utilized a hyperbolic function to capture this pattern of delay-related increase, since this function has been used successfully in many theoretical accounts of delay discounting ( Rachlin et al., 1991 ;  Green and Myerson, 2004 ). To model delay-related SV dynamics with this function, we used  SV  = 1/(1- kt ), where  t  represents the time to reward delivery. The  k  parameter value was taken from group mean discounting data in the behavioral session, in order to provide a more stable fit of the model to delay period activity. As illustrated in  Fig. 1C , the subjective value function gradually increases from the start of the delay toward the reward outcome. The second regressor coded anticipatory utility (AU), which reflects the positive utility derived from anticipation of a future reward ( Loewenstein, 1987 ). Prior empirical and theoretical studies have postulated that AU is a complementary construct to SV, and thus maximal at the start of the waiting period, and decreasing as the time to reward delivery grows near ( Berns et al., 2006 ;  Loewenstein, 1987 ). For simplicity, and to reflect the complementarity between AU and SV, we defined  AU  = 1 −  SV . Importantly, although  SV  and  AU  are anti-correlated, when convolved with a hemodynamic response function, they produce dissociable BOLD regression functions ( Fig. 1C ). Specifically, the correlations between the SV and AU regressors were .18 and .51 for the 60- and 30-sec conditions, respectively, allowing reasonable dissociation (c.f., Otten et al., 2002). We also empirically double-checked the dissociability in separate control GLM analyses in which only one of the two components was modeled. Highly similar results obtained when compared to the primary analyses, confirming that multi-collinearity was not an issue. 
 It is worth noting that the form of the SV and AU representations incorporated in the analysis reflects a theoretical assumption, as some alternative models have postulated alternate functions to describe delay discounting phenomena such as exponential ( Green and Myerson, 2004 ;  Rachlin et al., 1991 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ) or subadditive ( Kable and Glimcher, 2010 ;  Read, 2001 ), rather than hyperbolic. Likewise, some accounts of AU postulate a linearly decreasing ( Berns et al, 2006 ) or nonmonotonic delay function (i.e., peaking at some mid-delay point;  Loewenstein, 1987 ). Further, some computational models do not even postulate that value representations are continuously maintained during delay periods (e.g.,  Brown et al., 1999 ;  O'Reilly, 2006 ), and/or that value-updates occur only in a cue-triggered fashion ( O'Doherty et al., 2003 ;  Redish, 2004 ;  Seymour et al., 2004 ). Unfortunately, in the current dataset we did not have sufficient statistical power to appropriately test and compare these alternative models in terms of their respective fits to the data. Thus, our use of the hyperbolic SV model, and the complementary AU model, is one of convenience, since these capture the broad qualitative characteristics of the functions we are interested in; we do not make any strong claims about the fit. Nevertheless, given theoretical importance ascribed to distinctions between different discounting models, future research efforts could optimize the experimental design pioneered here to specifically focus on model comparison. 
 Parameter estimates for each subject were submitted to a group analysis using a voxel-wise random-effect model. Whole-brain exploratory analysis was first performed to identify brain regions exhibiting subjective value and anticipatory utility effects during the delay period. Specifically, at each voxel, parameter estimates were identified that were significantly greater than zero at the group level (i.e., increased relative to baseline; P < .001), using cluster size thresholding to correct for multiple comparisons via the AlphaSim Monte Carlo procedure ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni/ ). Significant voxel clusters were identified that surpassed a whole-brain corrected threshold of P < 0.05. Since this approach identified a large cluster that included both the vmPFC and VS (see also Results and  Table 1 ), the VS effect was separately tested within an anatomically defined region of interest in VS created from TTatlas+tlrc Dataset ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni/doc/misc/afni_ttatlas ). Specifically, the VS was defined by voxels that fell within the region labeled as nucleus accumbens. Significance was then assessed by the threshold P < .05, corrected within the VS volume. 
 The analysis of IR value effects aimed to test whether the regions showing delay period effects also showed choice-related effects in inter-temporal decision-making, as the IR manipulation provides a good estimate of decision value. Accordingly, to test for IR value effects, voxel clusters (P < .05 uncorrected) were identified within the regions of interest (ROIs) that showed delay effects. The vmPFC and VS ROIs were defined as regions showing the subjective value effect (P < .05 uncorrected), and aPFC ROIs were defined as regions showing the anticipatory utility effect (P < .05 uncorrected). Then, the size of the cluster was tested, correcting for multiple comparison within each ROI using a Monte Carlo procedure. Significant clusters were then reported using a volume-corrected threshold of P < 0.05. For individual difference effects, voxel-wise Pearson correlation coefficients were computed between behavioral measurements of delay discounting profile (i.e., AuC) and BOLD GLM parameter estimates for the choice period, IR value, delay period, and reward delivery effects. The significance of these voxel clusters was assessed using the same method as just described for IR value (see also  Jimura and Braver, 2010 ;  Jimura et al., 2010  for similar approaches). 
 In order to illustrate the subjective value and anticipatory utility effects and their individual differences, the delay-related time courses were directly estimated (rather than fit to a specific model function;  Figs. 3  and  4 ). This was done via an independent first-level GLM analysis that removed the subjective value and anticipatory utility regressors from the model. After removing these regressors, the residual timecourses were extracted from the delay period, in order to visualize the effects that were present during this period. Prior to visualization, the timeseries was first subjected to a band-pass filter (high cut: 15 sec, low cut: 150 sec), to remove transient activity and low-frequency signal drifts. 
 
 
 Multi-level mixed-effect GLM: Primary model 
 A multi-level mixed effect general linear model ( Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002 ) was used to examine functional connectivity relationships between vmPFC, VS, and aPFC. This type of multiple regression analysis does not directly test the causal pathway linking the regions, but instead assumes a particular connectivity pattern in which VS receives inputs from aPFC and vmPFC. We think this pattern is more plausible than other logically possible patterns. Specifically, as suggested by prior work, VS may represent the reward-related estimation error or discrepancy ( Daw et al., 2011 ;  Hare et al., 2008 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010b ,  Rolls et al., 2008 ) between the representation of SV signaled from vmPFC ( Kable and Glimcher, 2007 ;  Ballard and Knutson, 2009 ;  Sellitto et al., 2010 ), and the current utility due to anticipation (i.e., the AU) signaled by aPFC ( Benoit et al., 2011 ;  Glimcher, 2009 ;  Koechlin and Hyafil, 2007 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010b ;  Schacter et al., 2007 ). 
 The model included two levels, one for within-subject effects (i.e., IR value), and the other for between-subject effects (i.e., AuC). The within-subject level was modeled as:
 (1) X VS = β aPFG X aPFC + β aPFC − IR X aPFC Y IR + β vmPFC X vmPFC + β vmPFC − IR X vmPFC Y IR + β IR Y IR + β const + ε VS 
where βs indicate regression coefficients,  X s indicate brain activity of each trial (see also below),  Y IR  denotes the amount of the immediate reward (IR) on each trial, and ε is an error term. In this level, the VS activation was predicted by the aPFC and vmPFC activations (i.e.,  X aPFC  and  X vmPFC ), the immediate reward ( Y IR ), and their interactions with IR (i.e.,  Y IR  X aPFC  and  Y IR  X vmPFC ). 
 Then the higher-level between-subject effects were modeled as
 (2) β aPFC = γ aPFC − AuC X Auc + γ aPFC − const + ε aPFC 
 (3) β aPFC − IR = γ aPFC − AuC − IR X AuC + γ aPFC − IR − const + ε aPFC − IR 
 (4) β vmPFC = γ vmPFC − const + ε vmPFC 
 (5) β vmPFC − IR = γ vmPFC − IR − const + ε vmPFC − IR 
 (6) β IR = γ IR − AuC X AuC + γ IR − const + ε IR 
 (7) β const = γ const − AuC X AuC + γ const − const + ε const 
where γs indicate regression coefficients that were decomposed into interactions of AuC and constant terms from the βs modeled in the lower level model in  eq. (1) . In this level, the modeled parameters in  eq (4)  were further predicted by the degree of delay discounting (AuC) of individuals. Because vmPFC did not show any individual differences effect of AuC (see Results), AuC-related influences were not included in  eqs (4)  and  (5) . 
 The ROIs were defined in a manner that was unbiased with respect to these effects: VS was defined anatomically in the left hemisphere based on the TTatlas+tlrc Dataset (see above); aPFC was defined in the left hemisphere, as a sphere with 6mm radius from the peak voxel of mean signal magnitude for the group-level AU effect; vmPFC was defined similarly, but for the SV effect (see also  Jimura et al., 2010  for a similar approach). 
 Then in those ROIs, the fMRI time courses relative to fixation baseline were extracted from a 92 second epoch (62 seconds in short delay trials): 62 sec (32 sec) before the start of reward delivery, to 30 sec after the start of reward delivery. This time window fully covered the trial period from the onset of choices to when liquid consumption was complete. The activation data was high-pass filtered (cutoff: 150sec) to remove low frequency signal drift. In the first analysis, all the time points within the epoch were averaged together to create a single value for each trial. These values were extracted for each ROI, in each trial, and for each participant, and then included into the model, along with relevant coefficients coding the IR value for that trial, and the AuC for that participant. 
 In a separate analysis, different models were constructed for each trial period separately (choice, delay, reward delivery). The choice period was defined as an epoch spanning from 62 sec (or 32 sec in short delay trials) to 52 sec (or 22 sec in short delay trials) before the start of reward delivery. The delay period was defined as 50 sec (20 sec) before the start of reward delivery to the start of reward delivery. The reward delivery period was defined as 2 seconds after the start of reward delivery to 30 sec after the start of reward delivery. In the delay and reward delivery models, IR value effects were excluded as coefficients in the model (under the assumption that IR value effects did not influence these epochs). For each of the models, unknown parameters were all simultaneously estimated using the lme4 procedure in R ( http://www.r-project.org ). 
 
 
 Multi-level mixed-effect GLM: Control models 
 In order to examine specificity of model predictors in the multi-level mixed-effect analysis, the original model (i.e., VS activation influenced by aPFC and vmPFC inputs, and further modulated by IR and AuC: Model I; see above) was modified in the following ways and then tested. 
 In the first modification (Model II), vmPFC activation and interaction effects involving vmPFC were eliminated from the original model. In the second modification (Model III), aPFC activation and interaction terms were instead eliminated from the original model. These control models allowed to us examine if the observed effects were due to the multicollinearity between the vmPFC and aPFC effects. It also allowed us to test whether inclusion of the aPFC and vmPFC improved the model fitness in terms of Akaike's and Bayesian information criteria ( Akaike, 1974 ;  Shuwarz, 1978 ). 
 A second set of control models tested whether the results could be explained by averaging the epoch into a single value, or by the high degrees of freedom present in the model. To examine this, we tested models that involved replacement of aPFC- and vmPFC-related terms with plausible “substitute” brain regions that could serve as controls. Model IV replaced vmPFC with a lateral occipitotemoral (LOT) region that showed the SV effect during delay period, with a similar pattern to vmPFC ( Table 1 ). Model V replaced aPFC instead, with a medial temporal lobe (MTL) region that showed the AU effect during delay period, with a similar pattern to aPFC ( Table 1 ). The regions of interest in LOT and MTL were defined by a homologous procedure used in the original model, as a sphere with 6mm radius from the peak voxel of mean signal magnitude in the subjective value (LOT) or anticipatory utility (MTL) effect across the participants. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral results 
 In the behavioral session, participants showed significant delay discounting for liquid rewards, that occurred on the order of seconds [delay effect: F(1,42) = 20.2, P < .0001;  Fig 2a ], consistent with our prior reports ( Jimura et al., 2009 ;  2011 ). The group mean data were then fit to a standard hyperbolic model of delay discounting, and  k  was estimated at 0.015 (based on a maximum likelihood estimation fitting procedure). This  k -value was used in model-based analyses of the fMRI data from the delay period (see below). 
 Participants were then classified into three groups, based on their delay discounting pattern, as quantified by AuC (see Materials & Methods), and assessed in the behavioral session ( Fig. 2A ): steep discounters (STP; N=15), shallow discounters (SHL; N=15) and an intermediate group (INT; N=13). A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with group (STP, INT, and SHL) and delay (10, 30, and 60 sec) as factors, confirmed a significant main effect of group [F(2, 40) = 54.0, P < .0001] and interaction of delay and group [F(2, 40) = 4.01, P < .05]. Although the groups significantly also differed in AuC [STP: AuC = 0.58 ± 0.10 (mean ± SD); INT: AuC = 0.76 ± 0.04; SHL: AuC = 0.88 ± 0.04; F(2, 40) = 78.6, P < .0001], it is important to note that group classification was done only for ease of description and visualization; the groups were arbitrarily defined. As such, primary analyses of individual differences utilized continuous correlations with AuC as the independent variable. 
 The fMRI session focused on activation associated with selection of delayed rewards; consequently, in order to bias participant choice behavior toward the delayed option, the liquid amount associated with the immediate option was individually adjusted according to the subjective value of delayed reward estimated in the behavioral estimation session (see Materials & Methods). This manipulation was successful, as participants exhibited a significant preference for the delayed option [t(42) = 15.6, P < .001]. However, this choice bias was modulated by the relative value of the immediate reward (IR; expressed as a proportion of the delayed reward estimated subjective value; see Materials & Methods): in trials with higher IR, the preference for the delayed option was lower [t(42) = 3.21, P < .01;  Fig. 1D ]. Nevertheless, IR effects on choice bias did not interact with individual differences in discounting (r = .22, P = .16). This finding indicates that the individualized adjustment procedure was successful in equating the subjective value of the IR amount across participants. 
 
 
 Delay-period activation 
 Most models of intertemporal choice behavior postulate that subjective value of a delayed reward decays rapidly as the time to its delivery increases, following a nonlinear function ( Green and Myerson, 2004 ;  Rachlin et al., 1991 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ). A corollary of this postulate is that individuals can continuously estimate the subjective value of a future reward (often referred to as the goal value;  Peters and Buchel, 2010b ;  Hare et al., 2008 ). This value estimate may dynamically evolve from the time of choice until reward delivery in a non-linear manner, as suggested by delay discounting models ( Kalenscher and Pennartz, 2008 ;  Montague and Berns, 2002 ). Thus, such brain regions may show a dynamic increase in activation while waiting for the chosen delayed reward ( Gregorios-Pippas et al., 2009 ;  Kalenscher and Pennartz 2008 ;  Roech et al., 2006 ). 
 The current study directly tested this hypothesis by continuously monitoring brain activation while participants waited for their upcoming reward ( Fig. 1B ). Although the exact form of the time-dependent anticipation function has been controversial ( Green and Myerson, 2004 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ;  Read, 2001 ), hyperbolic functions have been repeatedly shown to describe discounting patterns well ( Kable and Glimcher, 2007 ;  Rachlin et al., 1991 ). Thus, we used a model-based approach to explore whether activation dynamics could be explained by a hyperbolically increasing pattern during the delay period. Each of the two delay durations (30 and 60 seconds) was modeled by a standard hyperbolic delay discounting function, convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function ( Fig. 1C ; see also Methods). 
 A number of brain regions were identified, including predominant foci within the vmPFC and VS ( Fig. 3A/B  and  Table 1 ). Even when defining the VS through anatomical rather than functional criteria, the effect was still significant (left: Z = 4.13, P < .001 corrected; right: Z = 3.66, P < .001 corrected). The timecourses of the delay period activations confirmed that in both the VS and vmPFC there was a gradual increase in activation, that accelerated in magnitude towards the reward consumption period, and was present for both long and short delay durations ( Fig. 3A/B 
 right ). 
 Examination of the post-decision period also enabled identification of a distinct dynamic component of subjective value related to anticipation. It has been suggested that anticipation of a future reward can provide positive utility that involves complementary characteristics to the time-discounted goal value ( Loewenstein, 1987 ;  Berns et al., 2006 ;  2007 ;  Prelec and Loewenstein, 1991 ; see Materials & Methods). Therefore, in brain regions coding for anticipatory utility, the pattern of activation dynamics would be expected to be maximal at the beginning of the delay when anticipation is strongest, and decreasing thereafter as the time to reward delivery approaches ( Loewenstein, 1987 ;  Prelec and Loewenstein, 1991 ;  Berns et al., 2007 ). We tested for regions fitting a delay-related function modeled as the complement of the subjective value function ( Fig. 1C , see also Methods). This formulation is simple, but still retains the basic characteristics of an anticipatory utility function. A whole-brain exploratory analysis identified multiple brain regions fitting this pattern, including ventral parts of the anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) bilaterally ( Fig. 3C , and  Table 1 ). The timecourses exhibited an initial uprising of activation, followed by a gradual decrease during the delay period ( Fig. 3C 
 right ). 
 These timecouses are based on residuals after removing choice- and consumption-related effects (see also Materials & Methods). Nonetheless, it is important to emphasize that the interpretability of the delay-period effects is strengthened by the delay lengths utilized in the design (i.e., 30, 60 seconds), since these are substantially longer than the canonical hemodynamic response epoch (c.f.,  Gregorious-Pippas, et al., 2009 ). Specifically, while the subjective value effect showed the primary acceleration of activity beginning at least 20 seconds after the cue, the anticipatory utility effect was still continuing to decay during this period. By this point in the delay period, all residual cue-related (i.e., choice-period) hemodynamic activity would have dissipated. 
 
 
 Individual differences effects 
 The identification of regions demonstrating delay-related activation dynamics that are consistent with the coding of subjective value (vmPFC and VS) and anticipatory utility (aPFC) raises the additional possibility that these regions reflect individual differences in impulsivity and self-control, respectively. If this hypothesis is correct, patient (self-controlled) individuals should show increased activation in brain regions coding for anticipatory utility during post-choice delay periods. Conversely, impulsive individuals should exhibit a steeper activity rise in value-related brain regions while waiting for a delayed reward, as they show steeper discounting effects in those brain regions during choice ( Mischel et al., 1989 ;  Madden et al., 2009 ;  Kirby et al., 1999 ;  Kable and Glimcher 2007 ;  2010 ;  Ballard and Knutson 2009 ;  Green and Myerson 2004 ;  Berns et al., 2007 ). 
 To test this hypothesis, we examined whether the ROIs showing delay-related activity also showed sensitivity to individual differences in delay discounting pattern, quantified as the AuC value in the delay discounting plot (see Methods). It is important to note that these analyses were unbiased, since individual differences were assessed purely on the basis of discounting behavior in the out-of-scanner behavioral session, and thus were independent of in-scanner behavior and brain activity. 
 No individual differences effects were observed in vmPFC; however, in the left VS region, a significant negative correlation was observed between AuC and delay period activation dynamics [ Fig. 4A ; (−13, 8, −6); 12 voxels, P < .001 corrected within the anatomically defined VS region]. The negative direction of the correlation indicates that the increasing pattern of activation dynamics was preferentially present in steep discounters. As shown in the timecourses displaying the patterns in the three discounting groups ( Fig. 4A 
 right ), steep discounters showed a more prominent increase during both the long and short delay period trials. This pattern is consistent with the interpretation that individual differences in impulsivity are associated with a more strongly discounted subjective value representation ( Madden and Bickel, 2009 ;  Kirby et al., 1999 ;  Kable and Glimcher, 2007 ,  2010 ;  Ballard and Knutson, 2009 ;  Berns et al., 2007 ), which then increases during the delay period. 
 Interestingly, the anticipatory utility effect in aPFC was also modulated by individual differences in delay discounting, with a significant positive correlation in left aPFC observed between AuC and the anticipatory effect [(−31, 47, −10), 27 voxels, P < .05 corrected;  Fig. 4B , See also Method]. This positive correlation suggests a larger anticipatory utility effect in shallower discounters. Critically, this individual difference effect was opposite to that observed in the VS region, in that the delay-related aPFC activity was associated with greater patience rather than impulsivity. 
 
 
 Choice period effects 
 In order to test whether these regions play a central role in intertemporal decision-making, we next examined whether the vmPFC, VS and aPFC ROIs also exhibited consistent patterns of activation and individual difference effects during choice periods. We first focused on the effects of decision value, by focusing on the trial IR variable, since this factor was found to significantly modulate choice bias ( Fig 2B ). It is important to note that because this analysis was restricted to the ROIs previously identified solely on the basis of delay-related activity (i.e., unbiased by choice effects; see also above and Methods), any further modulation by choice would provide strong indication of functional involvement in  both  choice and post-choice delay-related processes. 
 It was found that during choice of the delayed option, relative IR value modulated both VS and vmPFC, with stronger activation on trials with higher IR [vmPFC: (1, 36, −2), 75 voxels, P < .05, corrected,  Fig. 5A ; left VS: (−12, 7, −7), 17 voxels, P < .001, corrected,  Fig. 5B ]. This pattern is again consistent with the interpretation that the IR manipulation reflected a change in the subjective value of the immediate reward ( Madden and Bickel, 2009 ;  Kirby et al., 1999 ;  Kable and Glimcher, 2007 ,  2010 ;  Ballard and Knutson, 2009 ;  Berns et al., 2007 ) or the total reward available on the trial ( Cai et al., 2011 ). 
 In the left VS, choice-related activation was also sensitive to individual differences in delay discounting, such that steep discounters showed stronger choice-related activation [(−13, 9, −7), 17 voxels, P < .01, corrected;  Fig. 5C ]. However, the individual differences effects were related to IR, such that on high IR trials individual differences were significant (AuC correlation: r = −.32; P < .05), while on low IR trials the effects were not (r = −.12; P = .45;  Fig. 5D ). One possible interpretation of this pattern is that impulsive individuals respond more strongly to the value of the immediate reward, but that this effect is particularly prominent when the immediate reward is close in subjective value to the delayed reward (i.e., on high IR trials). 
 Finally, choice-related individual difference effects were also observed in left aPFC [(−29, 54, −4), 44 voxels, r = .42; P < .05 cluster-size corrected;  Fig. 5E ]; however, the correlation was in the opposite direction to that seen in VS, such that shallow discounters showed increased choice-related activation relative to steep discounters ( Fig. 5F ). 
 
 
 Multi-level mixed-effect analysis 
 The complementary patterns of activation dynamics and individual differences found in aPFC, VS, and vmPFC suggest that these regions subserve distinct functional roles during inter-temporal decision-making. First, the aPFC data are consistent with an anticipatory utility account ( Loewenstein et al., 1987 ). Second, the results also suggest that vmPFC and VS may code different aspects of subjective value, since only the VS showed consistent effects associated with impulsivity. This finding is consistent with recent reports indicating that vmPFC appears to reliably track goal value, i.e., the forecasted and time-discounted value of the reward outcome, while VS might be more accurately characterized as coding the discrepancy between prior expectations regarding the goal value and the currently experienced reward utility ( Daw et al., 2011 ;  Hare et al., 2008 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010b ,  Rolls et al., 2008 ). Putting these hypotheses together, one possible model of functional connectivity related to valuation is that VS activity dynamics arises from modulation by both vmPFC and aPFC inputs, reflecting both the goal value and potential sources of utility derived from anticipation of a delayed reward. 
 We directly examined this hypothesis in a multiple regression analysis, implemented with a hierarchical mixed-effect general linear model ( Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002 ), that tested whether VS activation could be predicted by joint inputs from aPFC and vmPFC, along with their modulation by both trial-by-trial variability related to IR value, and between-subjects variability related to delay discounting (see Materials & Methods). As shown in  Table 2 , the following predictors explained significant variance in VS activation: 1) vmPFC activation [t(651) = 5.87, P < .001]; 2) the interaction of vmPFC activity and IR value [t(651) = 3.28, P < .01]; 3) the interaction of aPFC and IR value [t(651) = −3.80, P < .001]; and 4) the interaction of aPFC and AuC [t(651) = −2.30, P < .01].  Figure 6  also provides a graphical depiction of the statistical model. The first two effects indicate that VS activation was increased when vmPFC activation increased, and this effect was further amplified on high IR trials. The last two effects were negative terms indicating that VS activation was  decreased  when aPFC activity increased, with amplified effects on high IR trials and in high AuC individuals (shallow discounters). 
 In a second stage of the analysis, we examined functional interactions between the three regions when considering just the choice and delay periods separately (i.e., in two separate mixed-level models;  Table 2 ). Although this second-stage analysis was much lower-powered and thus more highly conservative, very similar patterns were nevertheless obtained. Specifically, in both the choice and delay periods it was found that vmPFC provided a significant positive influence on VS activity, while aPFC showed a significant negative influence. 
 A key implication of the mixed-level model findings is that aPFC and vmPFC exert the same modulatory influence on VS activation during decision-making (the choice period) as they do during the delay period after the decision has been made. In particular, the results suggest that these regions have similar functional roles during the delay-period and during decision-making  per se . As such, they provide clearer evidence for continuity in the representation of value information during different phases of the decision-making process. The functional role of such value representations during the post-choice delay may be to maintain on-going signals of both the utility associated with anticipation, and a continuously updated prediction of the value of the upcoming reward. 
 
 
 Control analyses: Alternate models 
 A series of control models were tested to examine the specificity of the effects observed in the mixed-effect analysis from the primary model (i.e., full-trial model; hereafter termed Model I). In one set of control models, one of the input regions was removed, to examine its effect on VS activity prediction. These models indicated that when the vmPFC input was removed (Model II), the aPFC effects were still present [aPFC by AuC: t(653) = −3.34, P < .001; aPFC by IR: t(653) = −2.00, P < .05], and when the aPFC input was removed (Model III) the vmPFC effects were still present [vmPFC: t(656) = 5.01, P < .001; vmPFC by IR: t(656) = 2.56, P < .01]. This result confirms that the inputs from these two regions were statistically independent predictors of VS activation, and the observed effects from the full model were not a result of multicollinearity artifacts introduced by jointly including the two predictors. More importantly, we used the tests of model fitness, AIC (Akaike's Information Criterion;  Akaike, 1974 ) and BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion;  Schwarz, 1978 ), to quantitatively compare these control models to the original (Model I); poorer fits were found in both cases (i.e., higher AIC/BIC values; Model I: AIC=1889, BIC=1996; Model II: AIC = 2020, BIC = 2074; Model III: AIC = 2001, BIC = 2038). 
 In a second set of control models, we replaced each of the regions with a control region that also showed a similar dynamic activation effect during the delay period (see Materials & Methods). Thus, we replaced the vmPFC region with a region in extrastriate visual cortex (lateral occipitotemporal region, LOT; Model IV) that was also identified in the SV analysis (see  Table 1 ). In a separate model we replaced the aPFC region with a medial temporal lobe (MTL; Model V) region that was also identified in the AU analysis ( Table 1 ). In both of these models, the replaced region did not predict significant VS activation, while the effects associated with the non-replaced region remained unchanged [Model IV: aPFC by AuC: t(651) = −2.78, P < .01; aPFC by IR: t(651) = −2.50, P < .05; LOT-related effects: |t|s < 1.00, Ps > .32; Model V: vmPFC: t(651) = 6.11, P < .001; vmPFC by IR: t(651) = 3.62, P < .001; MTL-related effects: t|s < 1.38, Ps > .17]. These control results suggest that the significant effects observed in the original model were not attributable to using an averaged value for the trial epoch, or to the high degrees of freedom present in the model, but instead were specifically related to the trial-by-trial and between-subject variability in aPFC and vmPFC activation. Lastly, in this second set of control models (Models IV and V), AIC and BIC were again greater than those in the original model (Model IV: AIC = 1912; BIC = 1989; Model V: AIC = 2010; BIC = 2087), confirming that the combination of vmPFC, aPFC and AuC was needed to explain maximal variance in the observed data. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The current study provides new insights regarding the core neural mechanisms of inter-temporal decision-making, by focusing on brain activity dynamics during the post-choice delay period, in addition to choice-related activity. Impulsivity in decision-making was associated with increased VS activation not only during choice, but also during the delay period, while waiting for the chosen future reward. In contrast, patient individuals exhibited increased aPFC activity both during choice, and also during the early periods of waiting. Lastly, the time-discounted subjective value of delayed rewards corresponded with a pattern of vmPFC activity that dynamically tracked the time to reward delivery. These three brain regions were also found to show a particular pattern of functional interactions, in which VS activity was positively influenced by vmPFC input, but negatively by aPFC, with the nature of this influence further dependent on trial-by-trial (immediate reward value) and individual difference (delay discounting rate) factors. Importantly, these effects were observed during not just during the delay period, but also during choice, suggesting functional continuity in the role of these regions in value representation. Taken together, the findings provide support for the idea that intertemporal decision-making involves complementary neural mechanisms in the vmPFC, VS, and aPFC. 
 Many prior investigations have suggested key roles for vmPFC and VS in valuation-related processes ( Hare et al., 2009 ;  Kim et al., 2008 ;  Montague and Berns, 2002 ;  O'Doherty, 2004 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ), which are corroborated but also extended here. Replicating previous findings, both of these regions were sensitive to changes in reward value during the choice-phase of decision-making, exhibiting greater activation on trials in which the value of the immediate (or total) reward was increased. The data are thus consistent with standard accounts of goal value representations, in which the subjective value of rewards is represented in a “common currency” code can be accessed on the basis of predictive cues ( Montague and Berns, 2002 ;  Padoa-Schioppa, 2011 ;  Rangel et al., 2008 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010a ). Critically, however, the results provide novel support for the idea that such value representations are not just available at the time of choice, but also dynamically increase during the interval while waiting for that reward, peaking at the time of reward delivery. This pattern, though previously predicted by neuroeconomic models ( Kalenscher and Pennartz, 2008 ,  Montague and Berns 2002 ,  Berns, 2006 ), provides the first direct evidence in humans that subjective reward value is coded in a time-discounted and continuously evolving manner. 
 The findings also support and extend prior research indicating a link between VS activation and behavioral impulsivity, both in terms of intertemporal decision-making ( Ballard and Knutson, 2009 ;  Hariri et al., 2006 ;  Kable and Glimcher 2007 ;  Tanaka et al., 2004 ) and other trait markers ( Buckholtz et al., 2010 ;  Dalley et al., 2007 ;  Forbes et al., 2009 ). Consistent with this prior research, we found that impulsive individuals (indexed by steep discounting), exhibited greater VS activation during inter-temporal choice, particularly on trials in which the immediate reward had high relative subjective value. This pattern suggests that impulsive individuals were more sensitive to immediate reward value. Yet an additional, novel finding of our study was that these individuals also exhibited a differential pattern of VS activation dynamics (i.e., more sharply accelerated) during the post-choice period. This pattern would be expected if impulsive individuals more steeply discounted the subjective value of the chosen delayed reward at the time when it was selected. 
 A novel contribution of the current study is the finding that ventral aPFC regions may encode an anticipatory utility signal associated with delayed rewards – that is, the extra utility derived from the pleasure of waiting for a reward delivered in the future ( Lowenstein, 1987 ;  Berns et al., 2006 ,  2007 ). Prior economic models have postulated a role for anticipatory utility in intertemporal choice, but this is the first demonstration that such utility has a direct neural correlate during human reward-based decision-making. Support for the role of aPFC in anticipatory utility was demonstrated not only in terms of the characteristic pattern of delay-related activation dynamics, but also in the finding that this signal was stronger in more patient individuals. Importantly, the increased aPFC activity was associated with reduced VS activity observed in such individuals, suggesting functional interaction between aPFC and VS during intertemporal choice behavior. Interestingly, this finding is consistent with prior work demonstrating negative functional connectivity from this same ventral aPFC region to VS, with connectivity strength predicting both behavioral success at resisting impulsive choices and reduced trait impulsivity ( Diekhof and Gruber, 2010 ). 
 The localization of an anticipatory utility signal within aPFC is consistent with prior work and theoretical accounts of aPFC function. In particular, there is a growing consensus that anterior regions of PFC play a critical role in the process of episodic prospection – that is, consideration of future outcomes ( Benoit et al., 2011 ;  Glimcher, 2009 ;  Koechlin and Hyafil, 2007 ). Lateral aPFC regions are reliably engaged by prospective memory (i.e., maintenance of intentions to be carried out in the future;  Burgess et al., 2011 ;  Reynolds et al., 2009 ), while medial/polar regions are engaged by episodic future thought (i.e., mental time travel;  Benoit et al., 2011 ;  Peters and Buchel, 2010b ;  Schacter et al., 2007 ). These processes are thought to be a major component of planning, imagination, and affective forecasting ( Koechlin and Hyafil, 2007 ). Anterior PFC may thus enable the internal representation of anticipated future states within working memory ( Shamosh et al., 2008 ), such that these can be evaluated in order to bias action selection (c.f.,  Braver et al., 2003 ;  Sakai and Passingham 2006 ;  Jimura and Braver, 2010 ). To speculate, this aPFC effect on decision-making could occur not only in the current trial, but also in later trials, as delay-period aPFC activity may leave some kind of trace, either in terms of persistent activity or plasticity, which may influence subsequent decisions. Our data suggest that the current aPFC region, located at the intersection of medial and lateral sectors, might enable mental simulation of future states expected from delivery of an upcoming reward. 
 Thus, a plausible interpretation of the aPFC findings is that, in patient individuals, the current utility experienced from anticipation of a future reward matched well with the current estimate of subjective value of the reward, while waiting for the chosen reward ( Lowenstein, 1987 ;  Berns et al., 2007 ). In other words, individuals showing delay-related aPFC activity may have experienced greater anticipatory utility during the delay period (i.e., stronger hedonic benefits conferred by the act of waiting; c.f.,  Kahneman et al., 1997 ). Nevertheless, additional evidence would be needed to directly support this putative functional role of delay-related aPFC activation. Moreover, as the current study did not examine causal relations between decision- and delay-related effects, it is still unclear whether the delay period activations influence decision per se. Such evidence could be obtained through delay-of-gratification paradigms (e.g.,  Mischel et al, 1989 ) in which participants have an opportunity to “defect” to an immediate reward after making an initial choice to wait. Alternatively, perturbation studies (e.g., with TMS; cf.  Figner et al, 2010 ), would be useful for demonstrating that delay-related aPFC activity (or its disruption) alters choice preferences towards immediate rewards. Finally, it is possible that aPFC signals of anticipatory utility could be examined equally well, or even more sensitively, with conventional delay discounting paradigms that focus more intensively on choice-period effects using abstract (e.g. monetary) rewards delivered at longer time-scales in the future. 
 At a minimum, the characteristic pattern of activation dynamics and individual differences observed during the post-choice delay period in both aPFC and VS indicate unique and dissociable neural signatures in these two regions, that are linked to individual differences in impulsivity and self-control. Although further work is certainly needed, the current study clearly highlights the utility and productivity of experimental approaches to decision-making that shift focus towards the previously neglected temporal window between choices and their subsequent outcomes. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgement 
 The present research was supported NIH R01 MH66078 to TSB, and Research Fellowship from the Uehara Memorial Foundation to KJ. We thank Drs. Russell A. Poldrack, Paul W. Glimcher, Antonio Rangel, Camillo Padoa-Schioppa, Junichi Chikazoe, and Teppei Matsui for comments and advice on early drafts of the manuscript. We also thank Bruna Martins, Carol Cox, Joseph Hilgard, and Dionne Clarke for administrative and technical assistance. 
 
 
 
 The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Ainslie 
 G 
 
 
 Precis of breakdown of will 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 2005 
 28 
 635 
 650 
 16262913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Akaike 
 H 
 
 
 A new look at the statistical model identification 
 IEEE Trans Autom Cont 
 1974 
 19 
 716 
 723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ballard 
 K 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Dissociable neural representation of future reward magnitude and delay during temporal discounting 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 45 
 143 
 150 
 19071223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 SJ 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 A neural mechanis mediating the impact of episodic prospection on farsighted decisions 
 J Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 6771 
 6779 
 21543607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berns 
 GS 
 
 
 Chappelow 
 J 
 
 
 Cekic 
 M 
 
 
 Zink 
 CF 
 
 
 Pagnoni 
 G 
 
 
 Martin-Skusrki 
 ME 
 
 
 Neurobiological substrates of dread 
 Science 
 2006 
 312 
 754 
 758 
 16675703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berns 
 GS 
 
 
 Laibson 
 D 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Intertemporal choice - toward an integrative framework 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2007 
 11 
 482 
 488 
 17980645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Raynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of transient and sustained cognitive control during task switching 
 Neuron 
 2003 
 39 
 713 
 726 
 12925284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 J 
 
 
 Bullock 
 D 
 
 
 Grossberg 
 S 
 
 
 How the basal ganglia use parallel excitatory and inhibitory learning pathway to selectively respond to unexpected rewarding cues 
 J Neurosci 
 1999 
 19 
 10502 
 10511 
 10575046 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckholtz 
 JW 
 
 
 Treadway 
 MT 
 
 
 Cowan 
 RL 
 
 
 Woodward 
 ND 
 
 
 Li 
 R 
 
 
 Ansari 
 MS 
 
 
 Baldwin 
 RM 
 
 
 Schwartzman 
 AN 
 
 
 Shelby 
 ES 
 
 
 Smith 
 CE 
 
 
 Kessler 
 RM 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 Dopaminergic network differences in human impulsivity 
 Science 
 2010 
 329 
 532 
 20671181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Gonen-Yaacovi 
 G 
 
 
 Volle 
 E 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of prospective memory: what have we learnt so far? 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2011 
 49 
 2246 
 2257 
 21329712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 X 
 
 
 Kim 
 S 
 
 
 Lee 
 D 
 
 
 Heterogeneous coding of temporally discounted values in the dorsal and ventral striatum during intertemporal choice 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 69 
 170 
 182 
 21220107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carter 
 RM 
 
 
 Meyer 
 JR 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging of intertemporal choice models: a review 
 J Neurosci Psychol Econ 
 2010 
 3 
 27 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dalley 
 JW 
 
 
 
 Nucleus accumbens D2/3 receptors predict trait impulsivity and cocaine reinforcement 
 Science 
 2007 
 315 
 1267 
 1270 
 17332411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Gershman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Model-based influences on humans' choices and striatal prediction errors 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 69 
 1204 
 1215 
 21435563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diekhof 
 EK 
 
 
 Gruber 
 O 
 
 
 When desire collides with reason: functional interactions between anteroventral prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens underlie the human ability of resist impulsive desires 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 27 
 1488 
 1493 
 20107076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figner 
 B 
 
 
 
 Lateral prefrontal cortex and self-control in intertemoral choice 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2010 
 13 
 538 
 539 
 20348919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frederic 
 S 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 O'Donoghue 
 T 
 
 
 Time discounting and time preference: a critical review 
 J Econ Lit 
 2002 
 40 
 351 
 401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Brown 
 SM 
 
 
 Kimak 
 M 
 
 
 Ferrell 
 RE 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Genetic variation in component of dopamine neurotransmission impacts ventral striatal reactivity associated with impulsivity 
 Mol Psychiat 
 2009 
 14 
 60 
 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 
 Neuroeconomics: Decision and the Brain 
 2009 
 503 
 522 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Green 
 L 
 
 
 Myerson 
 J 
 
 
 A discounting framework for choice with delayed and probabilistic rewards 
 Psychol Bull 
 2004 
 130 
 769 
 792 
 15367080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gregorios-Pippas 
 L 
 
 
 Tobler 
 PN 
 
 
 Shultz 
 W 
 
 
 Short-term temporal discounting of reward value in human ventral striatum 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2009 
 101 
 1507 
 1523 
 19164109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Camerer 
 CF 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Self-control in decision-making involves modulation of the vmPFC valuation system 
 Science 
 2009 
 324 
 646 
 648 
 19407204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 Camerer 
 C 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Dissociating the role of the orbitofrontal cortex and the striatum in the computation of goal values and prediction errors 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 5623 
 5630 
 18509023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 
 Preference for immediate over delayed reward is associated with magnitude of ventral striatal activity 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 13213 
 13217 
 17182771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Myerson 
 J 
 
 
 Hilgard 
 J 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Green 
 L 
 
 
 Are people really more patient than other animals? Evidence from human discounting of real liquid rewards 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 2009 
 16 
 1071 
 1075 
 19966257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Age-related shifts in brain activity dynamics during task switching 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 1420 
 1431 
 19805420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Locke 
 HS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex mediation of cognitive enhancement in rewarding motivational contexts 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2010 
 107 
 8871 
 8876 
 20421489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Myerson 
 J 
 
 
 Hilgard 
 J 
 
 
 Keighley 
 J 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Green 
 L 
 
 
 Domain independence and stability in young and older adults' discounting of delayed rewards 
 Behav Proc 
 2011 
 87 
 253 
 259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jocham 
 G 
 
 
 Klein 
 TA 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Dopamine-mediated reinforcement learning signals in the striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex underlie value-based choices 
 J Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 1606 
 1613 
 21289169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 The neural correlates of subjective value during intertemporal choice 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2007 
 10 
 1625 
 1633 
 17982449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 Glimcher 
 PW 
 
 
 An “as soon as possible” effect in human intertemporal decision making: behavioral evidence and neural mechanisms 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2010 
 103 
 2513 
 2531 
 20181737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kahneman 
 D 
 
 
 Wakker 
 PP 
 
 
 Sarin 
 R 
 
 
 Back to Bentham? Explorations of experienced utility 
 Q J Econ 
 1997 
 112 
 375 
 405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kalenscher 
 T 
 
 
 Pennartz 
 CM 
 
 
 Is a bird in the hand worth two in the future? The neuroeconomics of intertemporal decision-making 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 2008 
 84 
 284 
 315 
 18207301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keliris 
 GA 
 
 
 Shmuel 
 A 
 
 
 Ku 
 SP 
 
 
 Pfeuffer 
 J 
 
 
 Oeltermann 
 A 
 
 
 Steudel 
 T 
 
 
 Logothetis 
 NK 
 
 
 Robust controlled functional MRI in alert monkeys at high magnetic field: effect of jaw and body movements 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 550 
 570 
 17509896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 S 
 
 
 Hwang 
 J 
 
 
 Lee 
 D 
 
 
 Prefrontal cording of temporally discounted values during intertemporal choice 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 59 
 161 
 172 
 18614037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirby 
 KN 
 
 
 Petry 
 NM 
 
 
 Bickel 
 WK 
 
 
 Heroin addicts have higher discount rates for delayed rewards than non-drug-using controls 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 1999 
 128 
 78 
 87 
 10100392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koechlin 
 E 
 
 
 Hyafil 
 A 
 
 
 Anterior prefrontal function and the limits of human decision-making 
 Science 
 2007 
 318 
 594 
 598 
 17962551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Anticipation and the valuation of delayed consumption 
 Econ J 
 1987 
 97 
 666 
 684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luo 
 S 
 
 
 Ainslie 
 G 
 
 
 Giragosian 
 L 
 
 
 Monterosso 
 JR 
 
 
 Behavioral and neural evidence of incentive bias for immediate rewards relative to preference-matched delayed rewards 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 14820 
 14827 
 19940177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 GJ 
 
 
 Bickel 
 WK 
 
 
 Impulsivity: the behavioral and neurological science of discounting 
 2009 
 American Psychological Association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 SM 
 
 
 Laibson 
 DI 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards 
 Science 
 2004 
 306 
 503 
 507 
 15486304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 SM 
 
 
 Ericson 
 KM 
 
 
 Laibson 
 DI 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Time discounting of primary rewards 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 5796 
 5804 
 17522323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mischel 
 W 
 
 
 Shoda 
 Y 
 
 
 Rodriguetz 
 ML 
 
 
 Delay of gratification in children 
 Science 
 1989 
 244 
 933 
 938 
 2658056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 Berns 
 GS 
 
 
 Neural economics and the biological substrates of valuation 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 36 
 265 
 284 
 12383781 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 King-Casas 
 B 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Imaging valuation models in human choice 
 Ann Rev Neurosci 
 2006 
 29 
 417 
 448 
 16776592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Myerson 
 J 
 
 
 Green 
 L 
 
 
 Warusawitharana 
 M 
 
 
 Area under the curve as a measure of discounting 
 J Exp Anal Behav 
 2001 
 76 
 235 
 243 
 11599641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Critchley 
 H 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Temporal difference models and reward related learning in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 2003 
 38 
 329 
 337 
 12718865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Reward represnation and reward-related learning in the human brain: insights from neuroimaging 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2004 
 14 
 769 
 776 
 15582382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Biologically based computational models of high-level cognition 
 Science 
 2006 
 314 
 91 
 94 
 17023651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Padoa-Schioppa 
 C 
 
 
 Neurobiology of economic choice: a goal-based model 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2011 
 34 
 333 
 359 
 21456961 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 Neural representation of subjective reward value 
 Behav Brain Res 
 2010a 
 213 
 135 
 141 
 20420859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 Episodic future thinking reduces reward delay discounting through an enhancement of prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions 
 Neuron 
 2010b 
 66 
 138 
 148 
 20399735 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 The neural mechanisms of inter-temporal decision-making: understanding variability 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2011 
 15 
 227 
 239 
 21497544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pine 
 A 
 
 
 Syemour 
 B 
 
 
 Roiser 
 JP 
 
 
 Bossaerts 
 P 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Curran 
 HV 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Encoding of marginal utility across time in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 9575 
 9581 
 19641120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prelec 
 D 
 
 
 Loewenstein 
 G 
 
 
 Decision-making over time and under uncertainty: A common approach 
 Manag Sci 
 1991 
 37 
 770 
 786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rachlin 
 H 
 
 
 Raineri 
 A 
 
 
 Cross 
 D 
 
 
 Subjective probability and delay 
 J Exp Anal Behav 
 1991 
 55 
 233 
 244 
 2037827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rangel 
 A 
 
 
 Camerer 
 C 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 A framework for studying the neurobiology of value-based decision making 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2008 
 9 
 545 
 556 
 18545266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raudenbush 
 SW 
 
 
 Bryk 
 AS 
 
 
 Hierarchical Linear Models 
 2002 
 Sage 
 Second Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read 
 D 
 
 
 Is time-discounting hyperbolic or subadditive? 
 J Risk Uncertain 
 2001 
 23 
 5 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redish 
 AD 
 
 
 Addiction as a computational process gone awry 
 Science 
 2004 
 306 
 1944 
 1947 
 15591205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 West 
 R 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Distinct neural circuits support transient and sustained processes in prospective memory and working memory 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 1208 
 1221 
 18854581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roesch 
 MR 
 
 
 Taylor 
 AR 
 
 
 Schoenbaum 
 G 
 
 
 Encoding of time-discounted rewards in orbitofrontal cortex is independent of value representation 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 51 
 509 
 520 
 16908415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roesch 
 MR 
 
 
 Bryden 
 DW 
 
 
 Cerri 
 DH 
 
 
 Haney 
 ZR 
 
 
 Schoenbaum 
 G 
 
 
 Willingness to wait and altered encoding of time-discounted reward in the orbitofrontal cortex with normal aging 
 J Neurosci 
 2012 
 32 
 5525 
 5533 
 22514314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolls 
 ET 
 
 
 McCabe 
 C 
 
 
 Redoute 
 J 
 
 
 Expected value, reward outcome, and temporal difference error representations in a probabilistic decision task 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 652 
 663 
 17586603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Prefrontal set activity predicts rule-specific neural processing during subsequent cognitive performance 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 1211 
 1218 
 16436608 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Koltzenburg 
 M 
 
 
 Jones 
 AK 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Temporal difference models describe higher-order learning in humans 
 Nature 
 2004 
 429 
 664 
 667 
 15190354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Remembering the past to imaging the future: the prospective brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 8 
 657 
 661 
 17700624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shamosh 
 NA 
 
 
 Deyoung 
 CG 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Reis 
 DL 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MR 
 
 
 Conway 
 AR 
 
 
 Engle 
 RW 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Individual difference in delay discounting: relation to intelligence, working memory, and anterior prefrontal cortex 
 Psychol Sci 
 2008 
 19 
 904 
 911 
 18947356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwarz 
 G 
 
 
 Estimating the dimension of a model 
 Ann Statist 
 1978 
 6 
 461 
 464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sellitto 
 M 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 di Pellegrino 
 G 
 
 
 Myopic discounting of future rewards after medial orbitofrontal damage in humans 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 16429 
 16436 
 21147982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 SC 
 
 
 
 Prediction of immediate and future rewards differentially recruits cortico-basal ganglia loops 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2004 
 7 
 887 
 893 
 15235607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 Thieme 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsuchida 
 A 
 
 
 Doll 
 BB 
 
 
 Fellows 
 LK 
 
 
 Beyond reversal: a critical role for human orbitofrontal cortex in flexible learning from probabilistic feedback 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 16868 
 16875 
 21159958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Behavioral paradigm. A) Participants made a choice between larger amount of liquid available after seconds and smaller amount of liquid available immediately. B) In each trial, participant waited for the delay indicated after making a decision, and then drank the liquid before the next trial. The procedure was identical in the behavioral and fMRI sessions. C) Model-based value representation of future reward during delay period. The subjective value model (orange) represents gradual increase from the start of the delay towards reward outcome, whereas the anticipatory utility (blue) models an inverse pattern, gradual decrease. The dotted and solid lines indicate economic and BOLD convoluted models, respectively. SV: subjective value. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 A) In the behavioral session, the participants showed robust delay discounting. Each participant was classified into each of the three groups based on the steepness of the discounting [SHL (shallow: self-controlled), STP (steep: impulsive), INT (intermediate)]. B) In the fMRI session, participants' choices were consistently biased toward delayed option, but choice probability was modulated by the relative value of the immediate reward. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Brain regions showing dynamic activation related to subjective value and anticipatory utility effects during delay period. Statistical significance maps ( left ) illustrate ventromedial prefrontal cortex (A), and ventral striatum (B) showing the subjective value effect, and anterior prefrontal cortex (C) showing the anticipatory utility effect. Time courses ( right ) demonstrate gradual increase (A and B) and decrease (C) toward the reward outcome in both of the short and long delay trials. Note that choice-and consumption-related effects are subtracted out of these time courses. The color bars indicate significance levels. Grey arrowheads indicate background color changes in 60 second conditions. A: anterior; L: left. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Individual differences in delay period dynamics. A) Ventral striatum showed a correlation between the subjective value effect and individual delay discounting rates. The statistical map ( left ) showed a negative correlation, indicating a larger subjective value effect in steep discounters. The time courses ( right ) demonstrate larger subjective value effects in steep discounters (STP) in both of the delay conditions. B) Anterior prefrontal cortex showed a correlation between anticipatory utility effect and individuals' delay discounting. Complementary to the ventral striatum, the statistical maps ( left ) showed a positive correlation, indicating the larger effect in shallow discounters. White closed lines indicate brain regions that showed anticipatory utility effect (P < .05 uncorrected). The time courses ( right ) demonstrate greater activation in the initial part of the delay period in shallow discounters (SHL). Note that choice- and consumption-related effects are subtracted out of these time courses. Grey arrowheads indicate background color changes in 60 second conditions. SFG: superior frontal gyrus; MFG: middle frontal gyrus; IFG: inferior frontal gyrus; GR: gyrus rectus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Brain activity during choice period. Choice-period activations correlated with immediate reward value in ventral striatum (A) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (B). Ventral striatum activity also showed a negative correlation with individual differences in delay discounting rate (C). These ventral striatum patterns are illustrated by presenting estimated signal magnitudes for the high and low immediate reward value (HIGH IR, LOW IR) in each of the discounting groups (D). Conversely, anterior prefrontal cortex showed positive correlation between activation and degree of delay discounting (blue arrowhead), indicating larger activation in shallower discounting individuals. The formats are similar to those in  Fig. 4B  ( left ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Path diagram indicating the relationship between VS activation and vmPFC and aPFC activations. All within- and between-subject effects were estimated in a multi-level mixed-effect GLM model. The numbers besides the paths indicate parameter estimates and their standard error of means in parenthesis (from the full-trial model). The vmPFC inputs (solid line) have a positive influence on VS activation, with the effects further amplified by IR value (stronger influences on high IR trials). Conversely, the aPFC inputs (dashed line) have a negative influence on VS activation, with the effects also amplified by IR value, and further individual differences in delay discounting rate (stronger influences for high AuC individuals). ***: P < .001; **: P < .01; *: P < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brain regions showing significant effects of subjective value and anticipatory utility during delay period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinate 
 
 
 
 
 Effect 
 Area 
 BA 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Cluster size 
 z-value 
 
 
 
 
 Subjective value 
 Medial temporal Medial frontal / 
 20/36 
 −42 
 −38 
 −32 
 28 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 Ventral striatum Visual / 
 25/32/24 
 1 
 26 
 −5 
 906 
 5.4 
 
 
 
 Medial temporal 
 19 
 29 
 −86 
 0 
 695 
 5.6 
 
 
 
 Visual 
 19 
 −23 
 −93 
 −4 
 474 
 5.9 
 
 
 
 Lateral frontal 
 44/45 
 −41 
 27 
 8 
 41 
 3.8 
 
 
 
 Lateral frontal 
 6/4 
 34 
 −5 
 52 
 34 
 3.6 
 
 
 
 Medial frontal 
 6 
 −10 
 3 
 64 
 61 
 4.1 
 
 
 Anticipatory utility 
 Anterior frontal 
 10/47/11 
 28 
 54 
 −7 
 42 
 4.1 
 
 
 
 Anterior frontal 
 10/47/11 
 −31 
 55 
 −7 
 32 
 4.4 
 
 
 
 Medial temporal 
 37/19 
 −19 
 −64 
 −7 
 102 
 3.9 
 
 
 
 Medial temporal 
 37/19 
 18 
 −60 
 −5 
 63 
 3.5 
 
 
 
 Medial parietal 
 19/7 
 5 
 −81 
 30 
 49 
 3.4 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates are the center of the cluster and listed in the Tarairach space (17). BA is the Brodmann area near the coordinates and is approximate. The size of cluster was indicated by the number of voxel. 
 
 
 
 Tables 2 
 
 Statistical values of predicting effects modeled in mixed effect GLM analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 All trial periods 
 Choice period 
 Delay period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Effect 
 df 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 df 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 df 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 
 
 
 
 aPFC 
 651 
 0.86 
 .40 
 
 651 
 0.35 
 .72 
 
 656 
 .30 
 .77 
 
 
 
 vmPFC 
 651 
 5.87 
 .0000 
 
 *** 
 
 651 
 4.52 
 .0000 
 
 *** 
 
 656 
 4.40 
 .0000 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 AuC 
 41 
 0.82 
 .42 
 
 41 
 −1.99 
 .05 
 
 * 
 
 41 
 −2.05 
 .04 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 IR 
 651 
 −0.13 
 .90 
 
 651 
 0.21 
 .83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aPFCx AuC 
 651 
 −3.80 
 .0002 
 
 *** 
 
 651 
 −2.76 
 .006 
 
 ** 
 
 656 
 −2.86 
 .004 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 aPFC x IR 
 651 
 −2.30 
 .02 
 
 * 
 
 651 
 0.53 
 .57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 vmPFC x IR 
 651 
 3.28 
 .001 
 
 ** 
 
 651 
 1.48 
 .14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 AuC x IR 
 651 
 −1.97 
 .05 
 
 * 
 
 651 
 −2.15 
 .03 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aPFC x IR xAuC 
 651 
 1.15 
 .25 
 
 651 
 1.21 
 .23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constant 
 651 
 2.20 
 .02 
 
 * 
 
 651 
 −1.67 
 .10 
 
 656 
 −1.66 
 .10 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS activation is predicted by vmPFC and aPFC activations with delay discounting (AuC) and immediate reward (IR) value modulations. Separate models were tested for the full-trial, choice, and delay periods. For the delay period model, IR-related effects were not included because their potential impact on decision value should occur only during the choice period. 
 
 *** 
 P < .001; 
 
 
 ** 
 P < .01; 
 
 
 * 
 P < .05. 
 
 
 
 
