
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0100725 
 3187 
 Cortex 
 Cortex 
 
 Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior 
 
 0010-9452 
 1973-8102 
 
 
 23514929 
 3759546 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.02.003 
 NIHMS447780 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Training verb argument structure production in agrammatic aphasia: Behavioral and neural recovery patterns 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 Cynthia K. 
 
 a 
 b 
 c 
 
 
 
 Riley 
 Ellyn A. 
 
 d 
 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 Dirk-Bart 
 
 e 
 
 
 
 Meltzer-Asscher 
 Aya 
 
 f 
 g 
 * 
 
 
 
 Lukic 
 Sladjana 
 
 a 
 
 
 a Aphasia and Neurolinguistics Research Laboratory, Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
 
 b Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
 
 c Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
 
 d Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Bowling Green State University, USA
 
 e Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of South Carolina, USA
 
 f Linguistics Department, Tel Aviv University, Israel
 
 g Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Israel
 
 
 * Corresponding author . Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.  ameltzer@post.tau.ac.il .
 
 
 
 30 
 4 
 2013 
 
 
 19 
 2 
 2013 
 
 
 10 
 2013 
 
 
 01 
 10 
 2014 
 
 49 
 9 
 2358 
 2376 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Neuroimaging and lesion studies indicate a left hemisphere network for verb and verb argument structure processing, involving both frontal and temporoparietal brain regions. Although their verb comprehension is generally unimpaired, it is well known that individuals with agrammatic aphasia often present with verb production deficits, characterized by an argument structure complexity hierarchy, indicating faulty access to argument structure representations for production and integration into syntactic contexts. Recovery of verb processing in agrammatism, however, has received little attention and no studies have examined the neural mechanisms associated with improved verb and argument structure processing. In the present study we trained agrammatic individuals on verbs with complex argument structure in sentence contexts and examined generalization to verbs with less complex argument structure. The neural substrates of improved verb production were examined using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
 
 
 Methods 
 Eight individuals with chronic agrammatic aphasia participated in the study (four experimental and four control participants). Production of three-argument verbs in active sentences was trained using a sentence generation task emphasizing the verb’s argument structure and the thematic roles of sentential noun phrases. Before and after training, production of trained and untrained verbs was tested in naming and sentence production and fMRI scans were obtained, using an action naming task. 
 
 
 Results 
 Significant pre- to post-training improvement in trained and untrained (one- and two-argument) verbs was found for treated, but not control, participants, with between-group differences found for verb naming, production of verbs in sentences, and production of argument structure. fMRI activation derived from post-treatment compared to pre-treatment scans revealed upregulation in cortical regions implicated for verb and argument structure processing in healthy controls. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 Training verb deficits emphasizing argument structure and thematic role mapping is effective for improving verb and sentence production and results in recruitment of neural networks engaged for verb and argument structure processing in healthy individuals. 
 
 
 
 Neuroplasticity 
 Agrammatic aphasia 
 Verb argument structure 
 fMRI 
 Aphasia treatment 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders : NIDCD 
 R01 DC007213 || DC 
 
 
 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders : NIDCD 
 R01 DC001948 || DC 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Individuals with agrammatic aphasia often present with verb production deficits. Notably, recent research indicates that verbs with greater ( vs  lesser) linguistic complexity are more difficult for these patients to produce. Verbs with more complex argument structure entries (i.e., a greater number of thematic roles and/or theta grids encoded within the verbs’ representation) are more difficult compared to verbs with less complex entries. For example, ditransitive verbs like  deliver  and transitive verbs like  fix  are more difficult to produce than intransitive verbs like  laugh .  Deliver  selects for three arguments: someone who delivers (i.e., an agent), something being delivered (i.e., the theme), and the receiver of the thing being delivered (i.e., the goal). In contrast, the verb  kick  only requires two arguments: an agent and a theme, and the verb  laugh  only requires one argument: an agent. This pattern (i.e., a verb argument structure complexity hierarchy) has been found in English, Dutch, German, Italian, and Russian agrammatic speakers ( Bastiaanse and Jonkers, 1998 ;  De Bleser and Kauschke, 2003 ;  Dragoy and Bastiaanse, 2010 ;  Kemmerer and Tranel, 2000 ;  Kim and Thompson, 2000 ,  2004 ;  Kiss, 2000 ;  Luzzatti et al., 2002 ;  Thompson et al., 1997 ), leading to the Argument Structure Complexity Hypothesis, stating that as the number of arguments increases for a verb, the more difficult it becomes to produce ( Thompson, 2003 ). 
 In contrast to verb production deficits, individuals with agrammatic aphasia show retained ability to understand verbs in off-line auditory comprehension tasks ( Kim and Thompson, 2000 ,  2004 ; but see  Miceli et al., 1983 ) and show normal access to the subcategorization frames of verbs (i.e., encoded information pertaining to the syntactic environments in which the verb may appear) in on-line sentence processing tasks. That is, reaction times (RTs) are longer for verbs with multiple subcategorization options (e.g., the verb  send  ) versus those with only one such option (e.g., the verb  fix ), as they are in healthy volunteers ( Shapiro et al., 1993 ;  Shapiro and Levine, 1990 ). Further, in a neuroimaging study using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we ( Thompson et al., 2010a ) found normal activation patterns associated with argument structure complexity in four (of five) individuals with agrammatism, albeit some showed unilateral (right hemisphere – RH) activation because of necrosed tissue in relevant left hemisphere (LH) regions. Notably, patients with anomic aphasia typically present with greater difficulty producing nouns (objects) compared to verbs (actions), and in on-line sentence processing tasks, Wernicke’s aphasic individuals do not show differential reactions times (RTs) to verbs based on linguistic complexity, indicating a lack of sensitivity to subcategorization information associated with verbs ( Kim and Thompson, 2004 ;  Shapiro et al., 1993 ;  Shapiro and Levine, 1990 ). Given the convention that patients with agrammatic aphasia present with lesions in frontal regions and those with anomic aphasia present with temporoparietal lesions, these neurolinguistic studies point to unique roles for anterior and posterior portions of the LH in verb and verb argument structure processing. 1 
 Neuroimaging studies examining verb processing in healthy individuals coincide with these general aphasic deficit patterns. Studies of verb ( vs  noun) processing using positron emission tomography (PET) and fMRI, as well as repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) indicate left frontal convexity activation for verb processing and left temporal activation for nouns (e.g.,  Damasio and Tranel, 1993 ;  Shapiro et al., 2005 ;  Tyler et al., 2004 ), although inconsistent results across studies have been noted (see  Crepaldi et al., 2011 , for review). In addition, recent studies examining brain mechanisms involved in verb argument structure computation (i.e., processing of thematic roles encoded within the lexical representation of verbs) suggest that the posterior perisylvian region is also part of the network involved in verb processing. Using fMRI and a lexical decision task,  Thompson et al. (2007)  and  Thompson et al., 2010a  found that an increase in the number of arguments engenders increased activation in the angular and supramarginal gyri, bilaterally, in both young and older normal listeners.  Ben-Shachar et al. (2003)  found a similar pattern using a sentence processing task, with posterior superior temporal sulcus activation associated with increases in the number of arguments selected by verbs embedded in sentences. Further, in a verb production study,  Den Ouden et al. (2009)  found posterior activation associated with argument structure complexity (i.e., angular and supramarginal gyri, as well as bilateral fusiform, middle occipital, and superior parietal cortex). In addition, they identified activation for transitive compared to intransitive verbs in LH Broca’s area – Brodmann areas (BAs) 44 and 45 – and surrounding areas. These findings suggest a LH network for verb processing, involving both frontal and temporoparietal regions. 
 Despite pervasive verb deficits in patients with agrammatic aphasia, few studies have addressed recovery of verb processing, either in behavioral or neuroimaging studies. Of the few behavioral studies published, most have used semantic and/or phonological word retrieval cues to improve action naming, reporting little (or no) generalization from trained to untrained verbs resulting from this approach ( Raymer and Ellsworth, 2002 ;  Wambaugh et al., 2004 ). Studies training verbs in sentence contexts also report limited across-verb generalization. However, improved sentence production has been noted following treatment (e.g.,  Bastiaanse et al., 2006 ;  Conroy et al., 2009 ;  Marshall et al., 1998 ;  Schneider and Thompson, 2003 ). One variable that has not been manipulated (or controlled) in treatment for verb deficits is verb argument structure. Indeed, studies focused on recovery of other aphasic deficits (e.g., object naming, sentence comprehension and production deficits) have shown that treatment of complex structures results in generalization to untrained, linguistically related, structures of lesser complexity ( Kiran and Thompson, 2003 ;  Thompson et al., 2003 ; also see  Riley, 2011 ;  Maas et al., 2002 ), resulting in a principle known as the Complexity Account of Treatment Efficacy (CATE;  Thompson et al., 2003 ). Given the relevance of verb argument structure complexity to verb deficits in aphasia as well as the CATE principle, it is possible that training complex verbs may not only enhance production of trained verbs but also improve untrained verbs of lesser complexity. Further, because of the central role that verbs play in sentence computation, such treatment also should impact sentence production. 
 Treatment which improves production of verbs with complex argument structures also may impact the neural networks that subserve verb processing. In recent years, a number of studies have shown that language training affects brain processing. Although mixed findings have derived from these studies, this literature shows shifts in activation from pre- to post-training in contralesional (typically RH) homologs of damaged left brain regions and/or in perilesional (typically LH) regions (e.g.,  Belin et al., 1996 ;  Breier et al., 2007 ;  Cao et al., 1999 ;  Crosson et al., 2005 ;  Davis and Harrington, 2006 ;  Leger et al., 2002 ;  Meinzer et al., 2008 ;  Perani et al., 2003 ;  Raboyeau et al., 2008 ;  Rosen et al., 2005 ;  Saur et al., 2006 ; for reviews, see  Crinion and Leff, 2007 ;  Thompson and den Ouden, 2008 ). Notably, studies examining the neural mechanisms of treatment-induced improvements in word retrieval are constrained to noun or object naming studies (see  Thompson and den Ouden, 2008 , for review), with no studies to date exploring the neural correlates of improved verb production. However, even for object naming variable recovery patterns have been seen, a finding which, as noted by  Thompson and den Ouden (2008) , likely relates to a number of factors, including differences in lesion size and location, as well as the language deficits that participants present across studies. In addition, differences in the type of treatment provided, the neuroimaging task used and methods of data analysis utilized have led to variability in this literature (see  Crinion et al., 2012 ;  Kiran et al., 2012 ;  Meinzer et al., 2012 ;  Rapp et al., 2012 , a recent series of papers addressing factors relevant to research examining the neural mechanisms of language recovery in aphasia). 
 The present study examined the effects of training three-argument verbs on production of trained verbs as well as untrained verbs of lesser complexity, i.e., two- and one-argument verbs, testing pre- to post-training performance in verb naming and sentence production conditions. We also examined the neural correlates of improved verb production using fMRI, comparing pre- to post-training activation patterns to those derived from a healthy age-matched cohort performing a verb naming task. We predicted that treated, but not untreated (control) participants, would show improved three-argument verb naming as well as production of sentences with correct argument structure. In addition, following CATE, we predicted generalization to less complex verbs. We also surmised that, if training results in improved verb naming and sentence production, this should be reflected in changes in patterns of neural activation, anticipating treatment-induced recruitment of spared left and right perisylvian tissue associated with verb and verb argument structure processing in healthy individuals [i.e., the posterior perisylvian regions bilaterally, in particular the angular and supramarginal gyri and the superior parietal region, as well as left frontal regions (i.e., the pars triangularis and pars opercularis)]. 
 
 
 2. Method 
 
 2.1. Examining the behavioral effects of treatment 
 
 2.1.1. Participants 
 Eight participants with agrammatic aphasia were recruited from the greater Chicago area. Four were assigned to the treatment group (T1–T4) (3 females) and four served as controls (C1–C4) (1 female). Although participants in the treatment group were younger, there was no significant difference between groups for age (treatment group age range 46–60 years,  M  = 55 years; control group age range 57–79 years,  M = 67 years, Mann–Whitney  Z =−1.162,  p  = .245). All aphasic participants were right-handed, monolingual English speakers, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, hearing within normal limits, and at least a high school education. None reported any history of psychiatric, developmental speech-language, learning or neurological disorders other than stroke. All participants suffered a single, LH stroke, and were enrolled in the study at least 1 year post-stroke (control group: 1.5–15 years,  M  = 6.8 years; treatment group: 1.5–11 years,  M  = 4.5 years). All participants provided informed consent, and the study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Northwestern University. 
 Structural magnetic resonance (MR) (T1-weighted) scans obtained for participants in the treatment group, who also participated in the imaging portion of the study, and for two of the participants in the control group (C3 and C4) 2  revealed differences in lesion size and localization in the LH across patients. Selected T1 slices are shown in  Fig. 1  for these participants. Lesions were outlined and measured using MRIcro. Lesion size measurement was carried out independently by two investigators, with reliability greater than 95%. We also conducted a region of interest (ROI) analysis for participants T1–T4 to examine the extent of lesioned tissue in the left IFG [BA 44 and 45], middle and superior temporal gyri [MTG (BA 21) and STG (BA 22), respectively], angular (AG, BA 39) and supramarginal (SMG, BA 40) gyri and superior parietal lobule (SPL, BA 7). To do this we imported ROIs from the WFU-Pickatlas v2.4 ( Maldjian et al., 2003 ) and measured the volume of the lesion within each. This number was divided by the volume of each ROI in a standard brain to compute the percent of lesioned tissue in each ROI. The results of this analysis are presented in  Table 1 . Participant 1 (T1) presented with a large lesion, including both anterior and posterior regions of the brain: parts of the IFG, MTG, STG, AG, and SMG. T2’s lesion involved mostly posterior regions, in particular the STG, SMG, and SPL, with the lesion encompassing only 2.1% of tissue in the IFG. T3 presented with a lesion incorporating parts of the IFG, MTG and STG, extending to the SMG, and T4’s lesion included the IFG, MTG and STG as well as subcortical tissue. As for the control participants, C3 evinced a large, mostly posterior lesion, including portions of the inferior, middle and superior temporal gyri as well the pars opercularis; whereas C4’s lesion was subcortical, extending to frontal regions, including the premotor cortex and pars opercularis. 
 
 
 2.1.2. Language testing 
 All participants with aphasia presented with a diagnosis of mild to moderately severe Broca’s aphasia based on performance on the  Western Aphasia Battery  (WAB,  Kertesz, 2007 ), with Aphasia Quotients (AQs) ranging from 54 to 81 ( M  = 69.15), and no significant differences found between groups [Treatment group:  M  = 64.8 (SD = 9.09); Control group:  M  = 73.5 (SD = 6.59);  Z  = −1.732,  p  = .114 (Man-n–Whitney)]. They also showed language patterns consistent with agrammatism based on administration of the  Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences  (NAVS,  Thompson, 2011 ). All showed better comprehension and production of canonical sentences (i.e., actives and subject relatives) compared to noncanonical sentences (i.e., passives and object relatives) [canonical sentence comprehension  M  = 77.50% correct, noncanonical sentence comprehension  M  = 55.88% correct,  t  (7) = 5.0,  p  = .002; canonical sentence production  M  = 45.83% correct, noncanonical sentence production  M  = 22.18% correct,  t  (14) = 2.097,  p  = .05]. Additionally, as shown in  Table 2 , verb naming and argument structure production deficits were prevalent for all participants (verb naming:  M  = 58.75% correct; argument structure production:  M  = 77.38% correct). Treatment and control participants did not differ significantly on their verb naming or argument structure production scores (verb naming: treatment group  M  = 51.5% correct, control group  M  = 66% correct, Mann–Whitney  Z  = −.577,  p  = .686; argument structure production: treatment group  M  = 64.25% correct, control group  M  = 90.50% correct, Mann–Whitney  Z  = −.581,  p  = .686). In addition, a complexity effect was found in the argument structure production task such that sentences with 3 arguments were produced correctly less than those with 2 arguments and 1 argument [1-arg  M  = 87.5% correct, 2-arg  M  = 80.88% correct, 3-arg  M  = 65.63% correct, Friedman test  χ ( 2 ) 2 = 7.714 ,  p  = .021]. A trend in the same direction was seen in the verb naming condition, such that 3-argument verbs were named accurately to a lesser degree than 2- and 1-argument verbs [1-arg  M  = 66.38% correct, 2-arg  M  = 62.13% correct, 3-arg  M  = 48.0% correct, Friedman test  χ ( 2 ) 2 = 3.714 ,  p  = .156]. Importantly, all treated and control participants showed lower accuracy on 3-argument verbs than on both 2- and 1-argument verbs in at least one of the tasks (i.e., verb naming/argument structure production). 
 Narrative language samples were obtained by asking participants to tell the story of Cinderella and analyzed using a coding system developed by  Thompson et al. (1995 ; also see  Thompson et al., 2012 ). All participants presented with effortful speech, consisting of simple phrases and sentences as well as ungrammatical word strings, with omission of grammatical morphemes. As shown in  Table 3 , all participants produced verb-less utterances (e.g., ‘Cinderella bye bye’, ‘stepsisters terrible’), with a significant difference between patients and a sample of eight healthy participants on the proportion of verb-less utterances produced (two-tailed  t -test,  p  < .001). Aphasic participants also exhibited an argument structure effect in verb production, with most producing no 3-argument verbs in their narratives. Again, a significant difference was found between healthy and aphasic participants, such that aphasic individuals produced fewer 3-argument verbs than controls (two-tailed  t -test,  p  < .001). There were no significant differences between the treatment and control aphasic groups on proportion of verb-less utterances produced or use of different verb types (Mann–Whitney, all  p ’s > .05). 
 Screening for motor speech impairments revealed a mild apraxia of speech for one participant (C1), with no other participants showing any such deficits (either speech apraxia or dysarthria). 3  Finally, a reading screening test showed that all participants had good oral reading and reading comprehension for single words and simple phrases. 4 
 
 
 2.1.3. Materials 
 For the behavioral portion of the study, 50 verbs were selected: 10 three-argument verbs, 20 two-argument verbs and 20 one-argument verbs (see  Appendix A ). Verbs by argument structure type were matched for lexical frequency, word length, and animacy of arguments. Action pictures depicting each target verb were developed to elicit verb naming and sentence generation. Pictures were matched for visual complexity such that, in addition to depiction of all verb arguments, one- and two-argument action scenes included additional participants. For each three-argument verb utilized for treatment, two picture stimuli were developed, providing two sentence contexts for each. For example, the verb  give  was trained in the following contexts with corresponding pictures: “the boy is giving the flowers to the woman” and “the boy is giving the apple to the teacher”. The one- and two-argument verbs were used only for generalization testing. All trained and generalization items were arranged into two sets of probes for verb naming and two sets of probes for sentence production. All four sets contained the same 60 items [20 three-argument targets (two picture stimuli for each of 10 trained three-argument verbs), 20 two-argument targets, and 20 one-argument targets], but were designed to prevent participants from always receiving these items in the same order. Within each probe set, items were presented in a pseudorandomized order such that no more than two verbs from the same argument structure category were presented consecutively. Probe stimulus pictures consisted of black and white line drawings of actions presented either on a computer screen (verb naming probes) or on an 8.5 × 11″ card (sentence generation probes). Pictures used for verb naming probes contained only line drawings, whereas pictures used for sentence generation probes contained the same line drawings as well as all content nouns printed along the bottom of the card to reduce lexical retrieval difficulties. 
 
 
 2.1.4. Baseline testing 
 For all participants with aphasia, two sets of behavioral probes (one for verb naming and one for sentence production), each consisting of the same 60 items described above, were administered during a single session. During a second session, two additional sets of behavioral probes (one for verb naming and one for sentence production) were administered. These two baseline probe scores were averaged to provide an initial measurement of performance on trained and untrained verbs for the treated and control participants. For the verb naming task, pictures were presented on a computer screen, using Superlab (Cedrus Corporation, version 2.0, Phoenix, AZ). Each trial began with a 1000 msec blank screen, followed by a fixation cross presented for a 1000 msec, before the picture was presented. Participants were required to provide a single action word for each target picture within 10 sec and, following this, to press a button to advance to the next trial. To examine sentence production, participants were asked to produce an active sentence for each examiner-presented picture stimulus. For each item, participants were given 15 sec to respond. Both naming and sentence responses were recorded using Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2005). Naming responses were scored as correct if participants produced the target verb, or a semantically plausible substitution with the same number of arguments as the target (e.g.,  donate  for  give ). For the sentence generation task, responses were scored for: (a) production of the verb (or a licit substitution as described above) and (b) argument structure production, scored as correct if all verb arguments were produced in the correct order. Responses with inflection errors and phonological paraphasias were scored as correct. 
 
 
 2.1.5. Verb argument structure training 
 Treatment, focused only on production of three-argument verbs in sentence contexts, was provided for two 1.5 h sessions per week for a maximum of 20 sessions or until participants reached a criterion of 80% correct production of trained verbs on both verb naming and sentence generation probes for two consecutive sessions. These probe tasks, testing all trained verbs as well as a subset of untrained (two- and one-argument) verbs, were administered prior to each treatment session. Untrained verbs were pseudorandomly distributed across four lists containing five verbs of each type, and participants were tested with one list for verb naming and a different list for sentence production per session. Participants were exposed to each of the untrained items in the probe tasks up to five times throughout treatment and no feedback regarding response accuracy was provided for any items during probe tasks. 
 During each training session line drawings for three-argument verbs were presented together with a sentence production template consisting of place-holders for all verb arguments and the target verb (see  Appendix B ). For each item, the examiner first identified all nouns in the picture and the participant was asked to name the action and generate a sentence. Following this, word cards for the target verb and its arguments were presented and thematic role training was provided. For example, for the sentence “the boy is giving the apple to the teacher”, separate word cards (i.e.,  is giving, the boy, the apple , and  to the teacher ) were presented. The examiner named the verb, the agent, the theme, and the goal, explaining the role of each argument as it was presented, e.g., for the aforementioned target sentence, the examiner explained: “The action is  give . Giving requires someone doing the giving:  the boy is giving . Giving also involves something being given:  the boy is giving the apple . Giving also involves someone being given something:  the boy is giving the apple to the teacher .” As each argument was named, the examiner placed the corresponding word card in the appropriate template slot. The participant then was asked to point to the verb, agent, theme, and goal (word cards) as named by the examiner and to read the sentence aloud. Next, the word cards were removed from the template slots and scrambled for the participant to rearrange in correct order and read aloud once again. Finally, the word cards were removed from the picture and the participant was asked to produce the target sentence. 
 
 
 2.1.6. Post-treatment testing 
 Behavioral probes examining verb and sentence production, identical to those used to evaluate baseline performance, were administered within one week following completion of treatment as a post-treatment measurement for treated participants. As in the baseline, two full probes were obtained and scored on separate days (occurring within the same week). For the control participants, scores on two full sets of treatment probes were obtained 10 weeks after baseline testing (the maximum length of treatment) as a final measurement. 
 
 
 2.1.7. Data analysis 
 For each treated and control participant, the two baseline probe scores for each dependent variable (verb naming, verb production in sentence context, and argument production in sentence context) were averaged to produce a single baseline pre-training score for trained verbs and a single baseline pre-training score for untrained verbs. The same procedure was followed for the two final probe scores for each participant. For each participant, the chi-square test was used to compare pre- to post-training performance, and Cramer’s phi effect size was calculated. A paired-samples Wilcoxon test was used to compare pre- to post-training group mean scores and a corresponding effect size  r  was computed as  Z /√N, where  Z  is the test statistic obtained in the Wilcoxon text, and  N  is the number of observations. 
 
 
 2.1.8. Reliability 
 Thirty percent of recorded naming and sentence production probe responses were scored for inter-rater reliability by the second or last author. Across all samples, agreement between the raters was 96% for verb naming, 95% for verb production in sentences and 97% for verb argument structure production in sentences. All disagreements were discussed to achieve 100% agreement. 
 
 
 
 2.2. Examining the neural mechanisms of treatment-induced recovery 
 
 2.2.1. Participants 
 The four aphasic participants in the treatment group also participated in the fMRI portion of the study, undergoing pre- and post-treatment structural and functional MR scans to evaluate activation patterns associated with action verb naming. Post-treatment fMRI scanning occurred one week after post-treatment behavioral testing. In addition, 13 healthy individuals, recruited from Northwestern University and the surrounding community, were included in the study to ascertain normal activation patterns (5 females; age 51–69 years,  M  = 60.4 years). There was no significant difference in age between the treatment and control groups (Mann–Whitney,  Z  = −1.25,  p  = .211). All control participants were right-handed, monolingual English speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and normal hearing. None reported any history of psychiatric, developmental speech-language, language or neurological disorders. All participants provided informed consent, and the study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Northwestern University. 
 
 
 2.2.2. fMRI scanning procedures 
 An action (verb) video naming task was utilized in the scanner. The task included 18 two- and 18 one-argument verbs (see  Appendix C ). The two verb sets were controlled for frequency, number of syllables and body–part association. Each verb was depicted by a 2-sec action video, controlled for visual complexity (i.e., number of objects and people in the scene), and animacy of arguments across verb types (see  Den Ouden et al., 2009 , for details). Verbs from the different conditions appeared in a randomized order in an event-related design. Stimuli were repeated over two runs, for a total of 36 trials per condition. Each trial lasted 10 sec, beginning with a jittered Inter-stimulus interval between 0 and 2000 msec, which preceded the video presentation onset. The 2000 msec video was then presented, followed by a centered fixation cross presented for the remainder of the 10-sec trial. Participants were thus allowed between 6 and 10 sec for action naming in each trial. The total time of each run was 6:22 min. Participants were instructed to overtly produce the verb depicted in each video clip. Stimuli were presented using Superlab software (Cedrus Corporation, version 2.0, Phoenix, AZ). Verbal responses produced in the scanner were recorded using custom-built software (running under Matlab) for scanner noise reduction. The denoised files then were converted into Praat for analysis of response accuracy and RT. 
 Scanning was carried out on a Siemens 3T TIM Trio scanner. A T1-weighted anatomical scan was obtained at the start of each protocol with the following parameters: TR = 2300 msec; TE = 3.36 msec; flip angle = 9°; image matrix = 224 × 256; FOV = 256; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm. During experimental runs, functional volumes with BOLD contrast were obtained using gradient echo-planar imaging sequences (TR = 2000 msec; TE = 30 msec; flip angle = 80°; matrix size = 64 × 64; FOV = 220 mm; voxel size = 3.44 × 3.44 × 3 mm; 32 slices). To allow for image saturation, the first 10 volumes of each run were discarded. 
 
 
 2.2.3. Data analysis 
 Data preprocessing and statistical analysis were performed using SPM5 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). Functional scans were corrected for slice-acquisition timing and realigned to a mean functional volume. The anatomical volume was coregistered to the mean image and normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) 152-subject template brain (ICBM, NIH P-20 project). Functional volumes were then normalized using the same transformation, resliced at a resolution of 3 × 3 × 3 mm, and spatially smoothed using a 6 mm (full-width, half-maximum) isotropic Gaussian kernel. Effects of global signal were removed from the functional time-series using the method described by  Macey et al. (2004) . In the first-level analysis, a high-pass filter of 256 sec was used to eliminate scanner drift. For each run, six movement parameters obtained during pre-processing were entered as regressors. 
 Response accuracy and RTs were calculated using Praat files for each participant. Accuracy was scored according to the same criteria used for verb naming in the behavioral task (see Section 2.1.4). RT was measured from the onset of the stimulus video to the onset of production of target phonological material (e.g., for the response ‘uh bite, fishing’ following a video of fishing, RT was calculated to the onset of ‘fishing’). Incorrect (e.g., ‘fall’ for kick, ‘water’ for drink) and abandoned responses were not scored for RT. For reliability purposes an independent coder scored all responses for accuracy and 50% of responses for each participant for RT. Point-to-point inter-rater agreement for accuracy was 84.7 and for RT was 94.2. Disagreements were resolved by the first author. 
 For healthy control participants, activation maps for the main effects of two-argument and one-argument verb naming were entered into a second-level factorial model. Second-level statistics were evaluated at a voxelwise significance threshold of  p  < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons per false discovery rate (FDR;  Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ;  Genovese et al., 2002 ), with a minimum cluster size of 15 contiguous voxels (405 mm 3 ). 
 The aphasic individuals’ fMRI data were analyzed on a single-subject basis. In order to model the variance in response times to items between as well as within participants, the response times of each participant for each individual event were used as event durations. Naming accuracy was modeled as a parametric value with each individual trial. 5  At the first level, each participant’s pre- and post-treatment data were combined into a single model. The main effects of pre- versus post-treatment as well as the interaction between two- and one-argument conditions and pre- versus post-treatment activation were then evaluated at an uncorrected voxelwise significance threshold of  p  < .001, with a cluster threshold of 15 contiguous voxels (405 mm 3 ). 
 In addition, we performed ROI analyses on the aphasic participant’s pre- versus post-treatment main effect changes, in six LH regions and their contralateral homologs: the IFG (BAs 44 and 45), the superior and middle temporal gyri (BA 22, 21), the angular and supramarginal gyri (BA 39, 40), and the superior parietal cortex (BA 7). As in the lesion volume analysis described in Section 2.1.1, ROIs were based on the WFU-Pickatlas toolbox, version 2.0 ( Maldjian et al., 2003 ). For these analyses, we used the participant’s locally specific hemodynamic response functions (HRFs), as obtained through a long-trial version of the naming task, following the same methodology as in  Thompson et al. (2010b)  (also see  Bonakdarpour et al., 2007 ). In a 10-min run, participants performed the video action naming task, with a fixed stimulus onset asynchrony of 30 sec and volume acquisition (TR = 2 sec) locked to the events, allowing us to measure the BOLD response up to 30 sec post-stimulus, at a frequency of .5 Hz (1 data point every 2 sec). The long-trial data were analyzed using Brain Voyager (QX 1.4, Maastricht, The Netherlands). HRF latency maps were formed using linear correlation lag analysis of the stimulation onsets and the time series on a voxel by voxel basis. Within a suprathresholded ROI, a stimulus-locked average formed the HRF curve for that particular cluster. For each participant, we made alternative pre- versus post-treatment data models in SPM, using Finite Impulse Response (FIR) functions, instead of modeling the responses as canonical HRFs. In order to keep these models relatively simple, we did not model RTs or accuracy. For each ROI, the obtained hemodynamic response patterns from 0 to 20 sec post-stimulus were fed as weights into relevant FIR-modeled post-event time bins (10 time bins of 2 sec each) in the statistical model in SPM. Specific contrasts were compared across conditions. These  t -tests were evaluated at an alpha level of  p  < .05, FDR corrected for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Response to treatment: behavioral performance 
 All participants who received treatment reached criterion within 20 sessions (range 17–20), with all showing improved naming of trained three-argument verbs, production of these verbs in sentences and production of their arguments in sentences from pre- and post-treatment. The untreated controls, however, showed stable performance across test points in all conditions for three-argument verbs (see  Fig. 2 ; individual pre- and post-training scores on all tasks are provided in  Appendix D ). For the treated participants pre-treatment verb naming ranged from 20% to 40% correct ( M  = 27% correct, SD = 9%), with post-treatment scores rangingfrom 60% to 78% correct ( M  = 72% correct, SD = 8.1). In contrast, verb naming performance for the controls at baseline ranged from 25% to 70% correct ( M  = 46% correct, SD = 21.7), with little change noted in follow-up testing (range = 13%–75%,  M  = 48% correct, SD = 26.6). 
 Similar improvement in sentence production as well as verb argument structure was noted for the treated, but not for the control participants. Verb production in sentences for the treated participants pre-treatment ranged from 8% to 38% correct ( M  = 24% correct, SD = 14) and post-treatment ranged from 53% to 78% correct ( M  = 65% correct, SD = 11). For the controls verb production in sentences at baseline ranged from 15% to 70% correct ( M  = 56% correct, SD = 28), with similar scores at follow-up (range = 10%–80% correct,  M  = 43% correct, SD = 35). Finally, for verb argument structure production the treated participants showed pre-treatment performance ranging from 0% to 33% correct ( M  = 12% correct, SD = 15) and post-treatment scores ranging from 38% to 68% correct ( M  = 54% correct, SD = 12%), whereas baseline performance for the control participants ranged from 3% to 65% correct ( M  = 45% correct, SD = 29%), with follow-up scores ranging from 5% to 55% correct ( M  = 23% correct, SD = 24). 
 Statistical analysis examining pre- to post-treatment change in production of three-argument verbs for the treatment group approached significance for all conditions (verb naming, verb production in sentences, and argument structure production in sentences) ( Z  = −1.826,  p  = .068 for all), with a medium to large effect size ( r  = .646 for all), whereas control participants showed no significant difference between baseline and follow-up probes (verb naming:  Z  = −.730,  p  = .465; verb production in sentences:  Z  = −.816,  p  = .414; verb argument structure production:  Z  = −1.461,  p  = .144) and small or negative effect sizes were found across conditions (verb naming:  r  = −.258; verb production in sentences:  r  = −.288; verb argument structure production:  r  = .516). 6 
 This same pattern was found for untrained two- and one-argument verbs. In verb naming, treated participants showed an increase from a mean of 40% correct (range: 36%–49%, SD = 6.2%) to a mean of 59% correct (range: 45%–70%, SD = 10.6%), whereas untreated participants were at 49% (range: 28%–61%, SD = 15.7%) pre-treatment, and 54% (range: 38%–75%, SD = 16.9%) post-treatment. For verb production in sentences, trained participants showed a similar increase from 40% correct pre-treatment (range: 36%–48%, SD = 6%) to 58% correct post-treatment (range: 48%–61%, SD = 8%), while control participants showed a slight decrease, from 57% correct pre-treatment (range: 23%–73%, SD = 23%) to 55% correct post-treatment (range: 26%–83%, SD = 26%). For argument structure production, treated participants exhibited an increase from 31% (range: 15%–39%, SD = 11%) to 53% correct (range: 46%–61%, SD = 8%) following training, whereas control participants’ performance did not change from pre- (mean: 54% correct, range: 15%–71%, SD = 26%) to post-treatment (mean: 54% correct, range: 25%–83%, SD = 26%). 
 Statistical analyses showed that treated participants demonstrated a trend toward significant pre- to post-treatment improvement ( Z  = −1.826,  p  = .068,  r  = .646 for all conditions). Control participants, in contrast, showed no significant difference in performance across probes ( Z  = −.730,  p  = .465,  r  = .258 in verb naming and verb production in sentences conditions;  Z  = −.365,  p  = .715,  r  = .12 for argument structure production). 
 
 
 3.2. fMRI results 
 
 3.2.1. Behavioral performance 
 Data from the 13 healthy participants indicated high verb naming accuracy (mean correct responses for one-argument verbs: 90%, for two-argument verbs: 99%), with two-argument verbs produced more accurately than one-argument verbs [ t  (463.338) = −5.175,  p  < .001,  df  corrected for unequal variances]. RT means for naming one-argument and two-argument verbs were 2022 and 1915 msec, respectively, with no significant RT difference between the two verb types [ t  (710) = 1.445,  p  = .149]. 
 For the treated participants improved accuracy from pre- to post-treatment was noted for all participants, for both one- two-argument verbs {one-argument: pre-treatment range = 29.7%–54.2% correct [ M  = 41.3% correct], post-treatment range = 39.5%–63.9% correct [ M  = 50.05% correct],  t  (3) = −8.064,  p  = .004; two-argument verbs: pre-treatment range = 32.2%–55.6% correct [ M  = 38.75% correct], post-treatment range = 39.8%–58.3% correct [ M  = 46.47% correct],  t  (3) = −3.672,  p  = .035}. The RT data, however, showed an increase from pre- to post-training for all participants, albeit not significant for either verb type [one-argument: pre-treatment range 1182.8–4381.5 msec,  M  = 2328.6 msec, post-treatment, range 1191–4235.3 msec,  M  = 2922.4 msec,  t  (3) = −1.238,  p  = .304; two-argument: pre-treatment, range 1111–3953.1 msec,  M  = 2277.6 msec, post-treatment, range 1215.6–4937.3 msec,  M  = 3130.2 msec,  t  (3) = −2.133,  p  = .123]. 7 
 
 
 3.2.2. Neural activation patterns 
 
 3.2.2.1. Control Participants 
 Results for the contrast of two-argument versus one-argument action naming for the healthy volunteers are presented in  Table 4 . At the threshold of  p  < .05 (FDR corrected), large clusters of increased activation associated with two-argument verbs, relative to one-argument verbs, were found in the LH postcentral gyrus and inferior parietal lobule and in the RH inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9). Smaller clusters were found in the LH insula and in RH Heschl’s gyrus and thalamus. The opposite contrast, of one-argument versus two-argument verb naming, showed no significant regions of activation. 
 
 
 3.2.2.2. Agrammatic Participants 
 Pre- versus post-treatment main effects and transitivity effects (i.e., two-argument verbs contrasted with one-argument verbs) for each agrammatic aphasic participant, as modeled with a canonical HRF over the whole brain are shown in  Tables 5  and  6 , respectively, and in  Fig. 3 . In addition,  Table 7  presents the results of the ROI analysis of differential main effects, modeled with regionally specific true HRFs for each participant. 
 
 3.2.2.2.1. Participant 1 
 Main effects analyses for Participant 1 using a canonical HRF [with time-to-peak (TTP) of approximately 6 sec] showed no significant regions of cortical activation for the pre- versus post-treatment contrast. However, significant post- versus pre-treatment upregulation was found in the LH angular gyrus. For the two-argument versus one-argument verb contrast no regions of activation were found at pre-treatment or at post-treatment. When we examined activation patterns using Participant 1’s true HRF in the ROI analysis, greater pre- versus post-treatment activation was found in the LH Broca’s area and the middle temporal gyrus. Greater post- versus pre-treatment activation also was found in the LH Broca’s area. Notably, the HRF TTP was delayed (10–12 sec) in Broca’s area, but not in posterior brain regions. 
 
 
 3.2.2.2.2. Participant 2 
 For Participant 2 the main effects analysis showed pre- over post-treatment activation only in the primary visual cortex (BA 18) and no differential activation in any brain regions for two- compared to one-argument verbs. However, greater post- compared to pre-treatment main effects were found with significant activation in motor and sensory cortices bilaterally, and, notably, in the RH superior temporal gyrus (BA 22), as well as the fusiform gyrus (BA 37). For the contrast between verb types, i.e., two-argument > one-argument verb naming, greater post-compared to pre-treatment activation was found in the LH insula. The HRF analysis showed TTP within the normal range (ranging from 4 to 8 sec across regions) for Participant 2. Using these TTP, the ROI analyses reveal greater pre-compared to post-treatment activation in the LH angular gyrus and in the supramarginal gyrus, bilaterally, but no significant post- versus pre-treatment activation. 
 
 
 3.2.2.2.3. Participant 3 
 For Participant 3, main effects analysis in the pre-treatment > post-treatment contrast showed bilateral activation in the inferior frontal gyrus and superior parietal regions, as well as in superior frontal gyrus and motor cortex in the LH, and middle frontal gyrus, fusiform gyrus and visual cortex in the RH. Post-treatment contrasted with pre-treatment showed upregulation in the middle and superior temporal gyri as well as the angular gyri and superior parietal cortex bilaterally, with additional activations in LH supramarginal gyrus and RH sensory and motor cortices. The interaction between time (i.e., pre-  vs  post-treatment) and two-argument over one-argument verb naming showed activation in the LH insula and in RH premotor cortex (BA 6). Post-compared to pre-treatment, the two- over one-argument contrast showed activation in RH superior temporal gyrus. The ROI analyses further revealed activation post- compared to pre-treatment in the LH supramarginal gyrus, using the participant’s specific, normal-like TTP of 6–8 sec. 
 
 
 3.2.2.2.4. Participant 4 
 Finally, Participant 4 showed no regions of significant activation prior to treatment (i.e., in the pre-treatment  vs  post-treatment contrast), however, the opposite contrast (post-treatment  vs  pre-treatment) revealed greater activation in the LH supramarginal gyrus and superior parietal cortex. In addition, for the two- versus one-argument verb naming contrast, greater post- compared to pre-treatment activation was found in the LH sensory cortex and cuneus, and RH motor cortex, as well as superior temporal and Heschl’s gyri. ROI analyses revealed upregulation for main effects in the LH supramarginal gyrus and superior parietal cortex, with TTP between 10 and 12 sec. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Results of the present study suggest that verb deficits can be improved using treatment that explicitly exploits the argument structure of verbs. All treated participants improved in their ability to produce trained, three-argument verbs both in the verb naming task and in sentence contexts following treatment, whereas untreated participants showed no improvements in either task. Moreover, training of verbs with more complex argument structure resulted in generalized production of untrained verbs with less complex argument structures, both as singletons and in sentences. This finding is in line with CATE, indicating that generalization occurs from more complex to less complex, linguistically related structures. Importantly, the generalized verb naming improvement noted during treatment also was noted during performance of the fMRI task in that all participants showed increased naming accuracy on post-treatment scans for both one- and two-argument verbs. Notably, accuracy in the scanner was poorer than that seen on behavioral (out-of-scanner) probes. This is likely due to scanner noise (even though we used custom software to reduce noise) and other variables that area not at play in clinical testing. Interestingly, RT was slower on post-treatment compared to pre-treatment scans, increasing from a mean of 2329 msec to a mean of 2966 for one-argument verbs and from a mean of 2527 to a mean of 3134 for two-argument verbs from pre- to post-treatment scans. Although not significant, these findings suggest a trade-off between accuracy and response time, with accurate responding requiring greater processing time. Additionally, the increase in post-training RT may have resulted from the treatment itself, which emphasized production of the verb as well as its arguments. This perhaps enhanced verb argument structure encoding during naming in the scanner task, hence, increasing RT. 8 
 As noted in the introduction, treatments attempting to improve verb production by providing phonological or semantic cues have not resulted in generalization from trained to untrained verbs. Phonological cuing strategies may not promote generalization because the source of verb naming deficits in agrammatic aphasia is likely not related to a phonological access deficit (see  Bastiaanse and van Zonnefeld, 2004 ;  Luzzatti et al., 2002 ;  Thompson, 2003  and others). Semantic cuing strategies, on the other hand, may not result in generalization because of fundamental differences in the organization of the lexicon in the verbal domain compared to the nominal domain. Whereas for nouns, items form semantic categories with hierarchical structure and shared features (e.g.,  terrier, golden retriever  →  dog  →  animal ); for verbs, such strong featural overlap between lexical entries does not exist (see  Huttenlocher and Lui, 1979 ;  Kable et al., 2002 ;  Kemmerer and Gonzalez Castillo, 2010 ;  Levin, 1993 ;  Van Valin, 2005  and many others). Instead, verb categories are formed based on their event structure and argument structure. Hence, exploiting the argument structure information associated with verbs during treatment leads to significant generalization. 
 One caution with regard to the interpretation of the present data pertains to the fact that although the control participants were tested on two occasions separated by the treatment time provided to the experimental participants, they received no intervention between test points, whereas participants in the treatment group received direct one-on-one training. It is possible, therefore, that the improvement exhibited by the treated participants resulted from social interaction rather than from the treatment provided, per se. We point out, however, that previous verb treatment studies (i.e., those employing phonological and/or semantic treatment), also providing several hours of training for aphasic speakers, have not shown improvements in verb and sentence production and generalization, as in the current study. Thus, it is unlikely that the treatment effects found in the present experiment resulted solely from social interaction. Nevertheless, future studies should provide control participants with placebo treatment to rule out this possibility. 
 There also were some age and gender differences between the experimental and control participants. On average the controls were older (although group differences for age were not significant) and there were fewer females in the control group. However, the relationship between age and response to treatment in aphasia is unclear, with most studies suggesting that age has no significant effect on recovery ( Kertesz and McCabe, 1977 ;  Lazar et al., 2008 ;  Pedersen et al., 1995 ), some showing an effect ( Laska et al., 2001 ), and others presenting mixed findings ( Lenderm et al., 1988 ). It is also important to note that participants in both groups were well into the chronic stage of aphasia. According to  Robey’s (1998)  meta-analysis of clinical outcomes in aphasia treatment, spontaneous language improvement during the chronic stage is likely to be very small (average effect size = .05). We also point out that several studies have found no gender differences in aphasia recovery ( Lazar and Antoniello, 2008 ;  Lazar et al., 2008 ;  Pedersen et al., 1995 ) and in studies showing a difference, greater improvement for males has been noted ( Holland et al., 1989 ). 
 Turning next to discuss the imaging data, the healthy speakers showed several activation clusters in response to naming two-argument versus one-argument verbs. A large cluster was found in the left hemisphere postcentral and supramarginal gyri, similar to the one found in  Den Ouden et al. (2009)  for the same contrast. Supramarginal gyrus activation in response to complex argument structures was found also in  Thompson et al. (2007 ,  2010a ) and in  Ben-Shachar et al. (2003) . These results are in line with the many findings showing involvement of the inferior parietal lobule, particularly in the left hemisphere, in tasks implicating semantic computation ( Binder et al., 2009 ). We also found bilateral IFG activations (with a peak in BA 9 in the right hemisphere, and in the insula in the left hemisphere), which also parallel the activation found for video naming of two-argument over one-argument verbs in  Den Ouden et al. (2009) , where a small cluster of activation was found in the left IFG, and a bigger one in the right homolog of this region. The healthy participants also showed a cluster of activation in the right thalamus. The precise role of the thalamus in language processing is not clear (e.g.,  Crosson and Haaland, 2003 ). However, a number of studies suggest that it is involved in semantic processing ( Raymer et al., 1997 ;  Kraut et al., 2002 ). Further, the thalamus may be involved in word generation ( Crosson et al., 2003 ), in line with our findings. 
 With regard to the effects of treatment on brain activation in the participants with aphasia, we first point out the variability in lesion volume and location found across patients in the study. Importantly, our inclusionary criteria were based solely on the participants’ linguistic profile, i.e., all presented with a diagnosis of aphasia with agrammatism, rather than on their lesion properties. Lesion analyses showed that all evinced damage in BA 44/45 and the posterior perisylvian region. T4’s lesion also extended subcortically, a feature that has been found in other patients with Broca’s aphasia, including those studied by Broca (see  Dronkers et al., 2007 ;  Signoret et al., 1984 ). This heterogeneity is not surprising given the growing body of evidence showing that agrammatism is not necessarily correlated with lesions in Broca’s area (see e.g.,  Caplan et al., 1996 ;  Dronkers et al., 1992 ;  Kaan and Swaab, 2002 ; also see  Thompson et al., 2010b ;  Kielar et al., 2012 , for sets of patients with agrammatic aphasia and associated lesions). 
 The aphasic participants also showed considerable variability in neural activation patterns, as has been found in previous studies of treatment-induced language recovery. This variability undoubtedly stems, at least in part, from differences in lesion parameters as discussed above as well as related factors, including regions of hypoperfused tissue (see  Thompson et al., 2010b ). A limitation of the present study is that the aphasic control participants did not participate in the imaging portion of the experiment. It is thus not possible to be certain that the observed changes in activation from pre- to post-treatment were associated with treatment-induced improvement. Rather it is possible that these changes reflect variability associated with repeat scans. We note, however, that previous studies examining activation across repeat scans in healthy speakers have found relatively stable patterns ( Fridriksson et al., 2006 ;  Meltzer et al., 2009 ).  Meltzer et al. (2009) , for example, reported fMRI signal stability across multiple sessions in terms of regions of activation, but with reduced activation across scans, possibly related to repetition effects. Based on these findings,  Meltzer et al. (2009)  suggested that although reduced activation across scans in patients may be difficult to interpret, “activation increases occurring over a time course in aphasia recovery are quite likely to reflect genuine reorganization and neural recruitment” (p. 753). Hence, it is likely that increases in signal from pre- to post-treatment in our participants reflected changes in their language ability. 
 We also observed several interesting shifts in activation from pre- to post-treatment, which were consistent across participants, and in line with the activations found for this task in our healthy control participants and in  Den Ouden et al. (2009) . All participants who received treatment in the present study showed greater activation on post-treatment compared to pre-treatment scans, both for verb naming in general and for the two- versus one-argument verb contrast. For all treated participants, main effects analysis revealed upregulation in the angular, supramarginal and/or superior posterior temporal gyri. For three participants (T1, T3, T4) activation was perilesional. The analysis also showed post-treatment recruitment of the superior parietal cortex for T3 and T4 and sensory-motor cortices for T2 and T3. As mentioned above, posterior perisylvian regions have been implicated in the processing of complex argument structures in several studies ( Thompson et al., 2007 ,  2010a ;  Meltzer-Asscher et al., 2012 ), and we also found activation in this region in the healthy controls in the present study. SPL activation was also found in  Den Ouden et al. (2009)  and in  Thompson et al. (2010b) , in a study examining the effects of syntactic treatment highlighting verb properties. The superior parietal cortex also has been found to play a role in working memory in general ( Koenigs et al., 2009 ) and verbal memory in particular ( Tsukiura et al., 2001 ), suggesting, as noted by  Thompson et al. (2010b) , that participants relied more heavily on verbal working memory post- relative to pre-treatment. Notably, the left parietal lobe activation, associated with verb processing in our study as well as others (see  Silveri et al., 2003 ;  Tettamanti et al., 2005 ), also may be associated with action recognition ( Shmuelof and Zohary, 2005 ;  Buccino et al., 2001 ). With regard to post-treatment activation in sensorymotor areas in two of our participants,  Den Ouden et al. (2009)  also found motor activation in their verb naming task, suggesting possible recruitment of the mirror neuron system ( Rizzolatti et al., 1996 ;  Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004 ). 
 Interestingly, for the interaction between treatment and argument structure, treatment led to greater activation post-compared to pre-treatment in three of four participants (T2, T3, T4). Whereas for T2, upregulation was noted only in the insula, participants T3 and T4, once again, showed upregulation in the right superior temporal gyrus, implicated in previous studies with healthy controls for processing argument structure ( Ben-Shachar et al., 2003 ;  Den Ouden et al., 2009 ;  Thompson et al., 2007 ,  2010a ). This analysis thus indicates that T2, T3 and T4 recruited brain regions engaged in complex argument structure processing in healthy individuals. 
 We also performed an ROI analysis, preceded by modeling each participant’s regionally specific true HRF. Individual variation was observed in HRF curves, with two participants (T2 and T3) showing normal-like hemodynamic responses, and the other two showing delayed responses, peaking at around 10–12 sec post-stimulus in both pre- and post-treatment scans. These patterns are similar to those noted in the aphasic participants studied by  Bonakdarpour et al. (2007)  and  Thompson et al. (2010b) . The ROI analysis showed upregulation following treatment for three of the four participants, constrained to the left hemisphere. T3 and T4 showed upregulation in the left supramarginal gyrus and T4 showed additional upregulation in left superior parietal cortex, regions involved in complex argument structure processing in healthy individuals. T1 evinced a different pattern, showing upregulation in Broca’s area. It is possible that T1’s large posterior lesion precluded activation in posterior ROIs, resulting in recruitment of anterior brain structures. Although T1’s activation peak was more frontal then the peak observed in the insula in our healthy controls, the finding of upregulation in the left IFG is in line with healthy participants’ general activation patterns for the same contrast. 
 The post-treatment upregulation of activation, rather than downregulation (i.e., post-treatment decrease in activation) on some grounds may seem unusual. That is, because some studies suggest that upregulation of neural activity is associated with decreases in efficiency of language processing ( Sonty et al., 2003 ), it follows that a shift from greater, more widespread activation, to more focal activation may be expected when language improves following stroke. This latter view is consistent with the learning literature showing that skill acquisition correlates with spatially more restricted areas of activation and also with decreased BOLD response ( Chein and Schneider, 2005 ;  Haier et al., 1992 ;  Raichle et al., 1992 ;  Wong et al., 2007 ). Notably, however, although some studies have found this recovery pattern in neuroimaging studies of aphasia treatment (e.g.,  Cherney and Small, 2006 ;  Richter et al., 2008 ), several studies have shown the opposite pattern: increases in activation following treatment (e.g.,  Crosson et al., 2005 ;  Fridriksson et al., 2006 ;  Thompson et al., 2001 ; see  Thompson and den Ouden, 2008  for review). Indeed, the neurobiology of recovery is a complex issue and further research is needed to understand the relation between both cognitive and brain impairments and recovery of function. However, the present findings indicate that brain regions that are inactive prior to treatment and within the language network associated with language processing in healthy people have the potential to become actively engaged in linguistic processing following treatment. The treated participants in this study showed increased activation in temporoparietal regions, consistent with imaging data on argument structure processing in healthy speakers. These findings suggest that regions of the brain activated in healthy individuals performing a language function, and contralateral homologs of these regions, are areas capable of supporting that function in an automatized fashion, perhaps because of their redundant or “latent” capacity ( Toga et al., 2006 ;  Zilles and Amunts, 2009 ). 
 
 
 5. Conclusion 
 The findings reported here suggest that treatment aimed to improve verb (and sentence) production deficits that exploit the argument structure properties of verbs is efficacious for individuals with agrammatic aphasia. Treatment not only improved production of trained verbs, but it also resulted in generalization to untrained verbs, a finding that has not been forthcoming in studies examining the effects of semantic and phonological cuing approaches to verb deficits. In addition, treatment resulted in increased recruitment of posterior perisylvian, as well as superior parietal and sensory-motor cortices bilaterally. These regions are associated with verb processing and, in particular, complex argument structure processing in healthy individuals, suggesting that recovery was accompanied by restoration of normal-like brain activation patterns. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 This research was supported by NIH grants R01-DC001948-19 and R01-DC007213-05 (Dr. Cynthia K. Thompson). 
 
 
 
 1 
 We recognize that many patients who present with behavioral deficits consistent with agrammatic or anomic aphasia do not show these clear-cut lesion patterns. For example, agrammatism may result from large lesions that include frontal as well as temporal and parietal regions (see  Caplan et al., 1996 ;  Vanier and Caplan, 1990 ; also see  Wilson and Saygin, 2004 ). 
 
 
 2 
 C1 was unable to participate in MR scanning for medical reasons; scanning was attempted with C2, however, she was unable to tolerate the procedure. 
 
 
 3 
 Motor speech screening was based on methods espoused by  Dabul (1979)  and  Wertz et al. (1984) . 
 
 
 4 
 Reading ability was tested using a task requiring participants to orally read a list of single words and simple phrases used in the treatment protocol. Comprehension was assessed using a written/spoken phrase matching task, using phrases included in the treatment protocol. 
 
 
 5 
 For the healthy control participants, this was deemed irrelevant, as their naming accuracy was high and response time was consistent and fast. 
 
 
 6 
 The negative effect sizes were mainly driven by C2, who showed decreases in performance from baseline to follow-up, due to a deterioration in general health. However, even after taking C2’s scores out, percent correct verb production in sentences by control participants did not show any increase (mean correct pre-treatment = 53.3%, mean correct post-treatment = 53. 3%), and percent correct argument structure production dropped (mean correct pre-treatment = 37.6%, mean correct post-treatment = 28.3%). 
 
 
 7 
 A reviewer of this paper suggested that the fact that some of the stimuli in the fMRI task were also included in the behavioral probes affected participants’ performance on these items. Out of the transitive verbs in the fMRI task, 10 appeared in the probes and 8 did not. We compared these two verb sets on two measures: i) change in accuracy pre- to post-treatment; ii) change in RT pre- to post-treatment. In both cases, the difference between sets was not statistically significant (  p  = .152 and  p  = .294, respectively). These comparisons suggest that exposure to someactions in the probes did not significantly alter participants’ ability to name them. This is expected since during the probes, participants were only exposed to pictures depicting these verbs, and received no feedback on their naming. 
 
 
 8 
 We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this possibility. 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix A 
 Verbs used in the behavioral portion of the study. 
 
 
 Appendix B 
 
 
 
 Example of picture stimuli used in training. 
 
 
 Appendix C 
 Verbs used in the fMRI task. 
 
 
 Appendix D 
 Percent correct responses on verb naming probes, statistical significance and effect sizes for treated (T1–T4) and untreated control (C1–C4) participants. 
 Percent correct responses on verb production in sentence context, statistical significance and effect sizes for treated (T1–T4) and untreated control (C1–C4) participants. 
 Percent correct responses on argument structure in sentence context, statistical significance and effect sizes for treated (T1–T4) and untreated control (C1–C4) participants. 
 
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Hurkmans 
 J 
 
 
 Links 
 P 
 
 
 The training of verb production in Broca’s aphasia: A multiple-baseline across-behaviours study 
 Aphasiology 
 2006 
 20 
 2 
 298 
 311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Jonkers 
 R 
 
 
 Verb retrieval in action naming and spontaneous speech in agrammatic and anomic aphasia 
 Aphasiology 
 1998 
 12 
 951 
 969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 van Zonnefeld 
 R 
 
 
 Broca’s aphasia, verbs and the mental lexicon 
 Brain and Language 
 2004 
 90 
 198 
 202 
 15172537 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belin 
 P 
 
 
 Van Eackhout 
 P 
 
 
 Zilbovicius 
 M 
 
 
 Remy 
 P 
 
 
 Francois 
 C 
 
 
 Guillaume 
 S 
 
 
 
 Recovery from nonfluent aphasia after melodic intonation therapy: A PET study 
 Neurology 
 1996 
 47 
 1504 
 1511 
 8960735 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Ben-Bashat 
 D 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 The neural reality of syntactic transformations 
 Psychological Science 
 2003 
 14 
 433 
 440 
 12930473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benjamini 
 Y 
 
 
 Hochberg 
 Y 
 
 
 Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing 
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological) 
 1995 
 57 
 289 
 300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2767 
 2796 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boersma 
 P 
 
 
 Weenink 
 D 
 
 
 Praat: Doing Phonetics by Computer [Computer Program] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonakdarpour 
 B 
 
 
 Parrish 
 T 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Hemodynamic response changes in patients with stroke-induced aphasia: Implications for fMRI data analysis 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 322 
 331 
 17467297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Breier 
 JI 
 
 
 Maher 
 LM 
 
 
 Schmadeke 
 S 
 
 
 Hasan 
 KM 
 
 
 Papanicolaou 
 AC 
 
 
 Changes in language-specific brain activation after therapy for aphasia using magnetoencephalography: A case study 
 Neurocase 
 2007 
 13 
 169 
 177 
 17786776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 Fogassi 
 L 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 
 Action observation activated premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: An fMRI study 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2001 
 13 
 400 
 404 
 11168545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cao 
 Y 
 
 
 Vikingstad 
 EM 
 
 
 George 
 KP 
 
 
 Johnson 
 AF 
 
 
 Welch 
 KMA 
 
 
 Cortical language activation in stroke patients recovering from aphasia with functional fMRI 
 Stroke 
 1999 
 30 
 2331 
 2340 
 10548667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Hildebrandt 
 N 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Location of lesions in stroke patients with deficits in syntactic processing in sentence comprehension 
 Brain 
 1996 
 119 
 933 
 949 
 8673503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chein 
 JM 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 Neuroimaging studies of practice-related change: fMRI and meta-analytic evidence of a domain-general control network for learning 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2005 
 25 
 607 
 623 
 16242923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cherney 
 LR 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 Task-dependent changes in brain activation following therapy for nonfluent aphasia: Discussion of two individual cases 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 2006 
 12 
 828 
 842 
 17064446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conroy 
 P 
 
 
 Sage 
 K 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 A comparison of word versus sentence cues as therapy for verb naming in aphasia 
 Aphasiology 
 2009 
 23 
 462 
 482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crepaldi 
 D 
 
 
 Berlingeri 
 M 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Luzzatti 
 C 
 
 
 A place for nouns and a place for verbs? A critical review of neurocognitive data on grammatical-class effects 
 Brain and Language 
 2011 
 116 
 33 
 49 
 21036389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crinion 
 J 
 
 
 Holland 
 AL 
 
 
 Copland 
 DA 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Hillis 
 AE 
 
 
 Neuroimaging in aphasia treatment research: Quantifying brain lesions after stroke 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crinion 
 JT 
 
 
 Leff 
 AP 
 
 
 Recovery and treatment of aphasia after stroke: Functional imaging studies 
 Current Opinion in Neurology 
 2007 
 20 
 667 
 673 
 17992087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crosson 
 B 
 
 
 Bacon Moore 
 A 
 
 
 Gopinath 
 K 
 
 
 White 
 KD 
 
 
 Wierenga 
 CE 
 
 
 Gaiefsky 
 ME 
 
 
 
 Role of the right and left hemispheres in recovery of function during treatment of intention in aphasia 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2005 
 17 
 392 
 406 
 15814000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crosson 
 B 
 
 
 Benefield 
 H 
 
 
 Cato 
 MA 
 
 
 Sadek 
 JR 
 
 
 Moore 
 AB 
 
 
 Wierenga 
 CE 
 
 
 
 Left and right basal ganglia and frontal activity during language generation: Contributions to lexical, semantic, and phonological processes 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 2003 
 9 
 1061 
 1077 
 14738287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crosson 
 B 
 
 
 Haaland 
 KY 
 
 
 Subcortical functions in cognition: Toward a consensus 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 2003 
 9 
 1027 
 1030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dabul 
 BL 
 
 
 Apraxia Battery for Adults 
 1979 
 Pro-Ed 
 Austin, TX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Nouns and verbs are retrieved with differently distributed neural systems 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science in the USA 
 1993 
 90 
 4957 
 4960 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 CH 
 
 
 Harrington 
 G 
 
 
 Intensive semantic intervention in fluent aphasia: A pilot study with fMRI 
 Aphasiology 
 2006 
 20 
 59 
 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Bleser 
 R 
 
 
 Kauschke 
 C 
 
 
 Acquisition and loss of nouns and verbs: Parallel or divergent patterns? 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2003 
 16 
 213 
 229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Den Ouden 
 DB 
 
 
 Fix 
 S 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Argument structure effects in action verb naming in static and dynamic conditions 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2009 
 22 
 196 
 215 
 20160850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dragoy 
 O 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Verb production and word order in Russian agrammatic speakers 
 Aphasiology 
 2010 
 24 
 28 
 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Plaisant 
 O 
 
 
 Iba-Zizen 
 MT 
 
 
 Cabanis 
 EA 
 
 
 Paul Broca’s historic cases: High resolution MR imaging of the brains of Leborgne and Lelong 
 Brain 
 2007 
 130 
 1432 
 1441 
 17405763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 JK 
 
 
 Redfern 
 B 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 The role of Broca’s area in Broca’s aphasia 
 Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 
 1992 
 14 
 52 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fridriksson 
 J 
 
 
 Morrow-Odom 
 L 
 
 
 Moser 
 D 
 
 
 Fridriksson 
 A 
 
 
 Baylis 
 G 
 
 
 Neural recruitment associated with anomia treatment in aphasia 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 32 
 1403 
 1412 
 16766207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CE 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haier 
 RJ 
 
 
 Siegel 
 BV 
 
 
 MacLauchlan 
 A 
 
 
 Soderling 
 E 
 
 
 Lottenberg 
 S 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 MS 
 
 
 Regional glucose metabolic changes after learning a complex visuospatial/motor task: A positron emission tomographic study 
 Brain Research 
 1992 
 570 
 134 
 143 
 1617405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holland 
 AL 
 
 
 Greenhouse 
 JB 
 
 
 Fromm 
 D 
 
 
 Swindell 
 CS 
 
 
 Predictors of language restitution following stroke: A multivariate analysis 
 Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 
 1989 
 32 
 232 
 238 
 2739374 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huttenlocher 
 J 
 
 
 Lui 
 F 
 
 
 The semantic organization of some simple nouns and verbs 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1979 
 18 
 141 
 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaan 
 E 
 
 
 Swaab 
 TY 
 
 
 The brain circuitry of syntactic comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2002 
 6 
 350 
 356 
 12140086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 Lease-Spellmeyer 
 J 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 Neural substrates of action event knowledge 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 795 
 805 
 12167263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kemmerer 
 D 
 
 
 Gonzalez Castillo 
 J 
 
 
 The two-level theory of verb meaning: An approach to integrating the semantics of action with the mirror neuron system 
 Brain and Language 
 2010 
 112 
 54 
 76 
 18996582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kemmerer 
 D 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Verb retrieval in brain-damaged subjects 
 Brain and Language 
 2000 
 73 
 347 
 420 
 10860561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kertesz 
 A 
 
 
 Western Aphasia Battery-revised 
 2007 
 PsychCorp 
 San Antonio, TX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kertesz 
 A 
 
 
 McCabe 
 P 
 
 
 Recovery patterns and prognosis in aphasia 
 Brain 
 1977 
 100 
 1 
 18 
 861709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kielar 
 A 
 
 
 Meltzer-Asscher 
 A 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Electrophysiological responses to argument structure violations in healthy adults and individuals with agrammatic aphasia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 3320 
 3337 
 23022079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 M 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Patterns of comprehension and production of nouns and verbs in agrammatism: Implications for lexical organization 
 Brain and Language 
 2000 
 74 
 1 
 25 
 10924214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 M 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Verb deficits in Alzheimer’s disease and agrammatism: Implications for lexical organization 
 Brain and Language 
 2004 
 88 
 1 
 20 
 14698726 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiran 
 S 
 
 
 Ansaldo 
 A 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Cherney 
 LR 
 
 
 Howard 
 D 
 
 
 Faroqi-Shah 
 Y 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging in aphasia treatment research: Standards for establishing the effects of treatment 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiran 
 S 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 The role of semantic complexity in treatment of naming deficits: Training semantic categories in fluent aphasia by controlling exemplar typicality 
 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 
 2003 
 46 
 773 
 787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiss 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Effect of verb complexity on agrammatic aphasics’ sentence production 
 Grammatical Disorders in Aphasia: A Neurolinguistic Perspective 
 2000 
 123 
 151 
 Whurr 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koenigs 
 M 
 
 
 Barbey 
 AK 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Superior parietal cortex is critical for the manipulation of information in working memory 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 14980 
 14986 
 19940193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kraut 
 MA 
 
 
 Kremen 
 S 
 
 
 Segal 
 JB 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 V 
 
 
 Moo 
 LR 
 
 
 Hart 
 J 
 
 
 Object activation from features in the semantic system 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 24 
 36 
 11798384 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laska 
 AC 
 
 
 Hellblom 
 A 
 
 
 Murray 
 V 
 
 
 Kahan 
 T 
 
 
 Von Arbin 
 M 
 
 
 Aphasia in acute stroke and relation to outcome 
 Journal of Internal Medicine 
 2001 
 249 
 413 
 422 
 11350565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lazar 
 RM 
 
 
 Antoniello 
 D 
 
 
 Variability in recovery from aphasia 
 Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 
 2008 
 8 
 497 
 502 
 18957187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lazar 
 RM 
 
 
 Speizer 
 AE 
 
 
 Festa 
 JR 
 
 
 Krakauer 
 JW 
 
 
 Marshall 
 RS 
 
 
 Variability in language recovery after first-time stroke 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 2008 
 79 
 530 
 534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leger 
 A 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Ruff 
 S 
 
 
 Aithamon 
 B 
 
 
 Touyeras 
 B 
 
 
 Puel 
 M 
 
 
 
 Neural substrates of spoken language rehabilitation in an aphasia patient: An fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 17 
 174 
 183 
 12482075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenderm 
 W 
 
 
 McGuirk 
 E 
 
 
 Lincoln 
 NB 
 
 
 Factors affecting language recovery in aphasic stroke patients receiving speech therapy 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 1988 
 51 
 1103 
 1104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levin 
 B 
 
 
 English Verb Classes and Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation 
 1993 
 University of Chicago Press 
 Chicago, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luzzatti 
 C 
 
 
 Raggi 
 R 
 
 
 Zonca 
 G 
 
 
 Pistarini 
 C 
 
 
 Contardi 
 A 
 
 
 Pinna 
 GD 
 
 
 Verb-noun double dissociation in aphasic lexical impairments: The role of word frequency and imageability 
 Brain and Language 
 2002 
 81 
 432 
 444 
 12081411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maas 
 E 
 
 
 Barlow 
 J 
 
 
 Robin 
 D 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 L 
 
 
 Treatment of sound errors in aphasia and apraxia of speech: Effects of phonological complexity 
 Aphasiology 
 2002 
 16 
 4–6 
 609 
 622 
 22787286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macey 
 PM 
 
 
 Macey 
 KE 
 
 
 Kumar 
 R 
 
 
 Harper 
 RM 
 
 
 A method for removal of global effects from fMRI time series 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 22 
 360 
 366 
 15110027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 1233 
 1239 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marshall 
 J 
 
 
 Pring 
 T 
 
 
 Chiat 
 S 
 
 
 Verb retrieval and sentence production in aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1998 
 63 
 159 
 183 
 9654430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meinzer 
 M 
 
 
 Beeson 
 PM 
 
 
 Cappa 
 S 
 
 
 Crinion 
 J 
 
 
 Kiran 
 S 
 
 
 Saur 
 D 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging in aphasia treatment research: Consensus and practical guidelines for data analysis 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meinzer 
 M 
 
 
 Flaisch 
 T 
 
 
 Breitenstein 
 C 
 
 
 Wienbruch 
 C 
 
 
 Elbert 
 T 
 
 
 Rockstroh 
 B 
 
 
 Functional re-recruitment of dysfunctional brain areas predicts language recovery in chronic aphasia 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 39 
 2038 
 2046 
 18096407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meltzer 
 JA 
 
 
 Postman-Caucheteau 
 WA 
 
 
 McArdle 
 JJ 
 
 
 Braun 
 AR 
 
 
 Strategies for longitudinal neuroimaging studies of overt language production 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 47 
 745 
 755 
 19427907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meltzer-Asscher 
 A 
 
 
 Schuchard 
 J 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 DB 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 The neural substrates of complex argument structure representations: Processing ‘alternating transitivity’ verbs 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 2012 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01690965.2012.672754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miceli 
 G 
 
 
 Mazzucchi 
 A 
 
 
 Menn 
 L 
 
 
 Goodglass 
 H 
 
 
 Contrasting cases of Italian agrammatic aphasia without comprehension disorder 
 Brain and Language 
 1983 
 19 
 65 
 97 
 6860936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pedersen 
 PM 
 
 
 Jorgensen 
 HS 
 
 
 Nakayama 
 H 
 
 
 Raaschou 
 HO 
 
 
 Olsen 
 TS 
 
 
 Aphasia in acute stroke: Incidence, determinants, and recovery 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1995 
 38 
 659 
 666 
 7574464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Tettamanti 
 M 
 
 
 Rosa 
 M 
 
 
 Scifo 
 P 
 
 
 Miozzo 
 A 
 
 
 
 A fMRI study of word retrieval in aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 2003 
 85 
 357 
 368 
 12744947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raboyeau 
 G 
 
 
 de Boissezon 
 X 
 
 
 Marie 
 N 
 
 
 Balduyck 
 S 
 
 
 Puel 
 M 
 
 
 Bézy 
 D 
 
 
 
 Right hemisphere activation in recovery from aphasia: Lesion effect or function recruitment? 
 Neurology 
 2008 
 70 
 290 
 298 
 18209203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Videen 
 TO 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AMK 
 
 
 Pardo 
 JV 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 
 Practice-related changes in human brain functional anatomy during nonmotor learning 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1992 
 4 
 8 
 26 
 8180494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rapp 
 B 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Edwards 
 S 
 
 
 Visch-Brink 
 E 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Neuroimaging in aphasia treatment research: Issues of experimental design for relating cognitive and neural changes 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raymer 
 AM 
 
 
 Ellsworth 
 TA 
 
 
 Response to contrasting verb retrieval treatments: A case study 
 Aphasiology 
 2002 
 16 
 1031 
 1045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raymer 
 AM 
 
 
 Moberg 
 PJ 
 
 
 Crosson 
 B 
 
 
 Nadeau 
 SE 
 
 
 Gonzalez-Rothi 
 LJ 
 
 
 Lexical-semantic deficits in two cases of thalamic lesion 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1997 
 35 
 211 
 219 
 9025124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richter 
 M 
 
 
 Miltner 
 WHR 
 
 
 Straube 
 T 
 
 
 Association between therapy outcome and right-hemispheric activation in chronic aphasia 
 Brain 
 2008 
 131 
 1391 
 1401 
 18349055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riley 
 EA 
 
 
 Effects of phonological complexity on error production and pseudoword training in acquired phonological dyslexia 
 2011 
 Northwestern University 
 Dissertation. Evanston, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Craighero 
 L 
 
 
 The mirror-neuron system 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2004 
 27 
 169 
 192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 Matelli 
 M 
 
 
 Bettinardi 
 V 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 
 Localization of grasp representation in humans by PET: 1. Observation versus execution 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 1996 
 111 
 246 
 252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robey 
 RR 
 
 
 A meta-analysis of clinical outcomes in the treatment of aphasia 
 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 
 1998 
 41 
 172 
 187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosen 
 HJ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Linenweber 
 MR 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 White 
 DA 
 
 
 Chapman 
 L 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of recovery from aphasia after damage to left inferior frontal cortex 
 Neurology 
 2005 
 55 
 1883 
 1894 
 11134389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saur 
 D 
 
 
 Lange 
 R 
 
 
 Baumgaertner 
 A 
 
 
 Schraknepper 
 V 
 
 
 Willmes 
 K 
 
 
 Rijntjes 
 M 
 
 
 
 Dynamics of language reorganization after stroke 
 Brain 
 2006 
 129 
 1371 
 1384 
 16638796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schneider 
 SL 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Verb production in agrammatic aphasia: The influence of semantic class and argument structure properties on generalization 
 Aphasiology 
 2003 
 17 
 213 
 241 
 21311720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 L 
 
 
 Gordon 
 B 
 
 
 Hack 
 N 
 
 
 Killackey 
 J 
 
 
 Verb argument processing in complex sentences in Broca and Wernicke’s aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 423 
 447 
 8269333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 L 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 Verb processing during sentence comprehension in aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1990 
 38 
 21 
 47 
 2302544 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 K 
 
 
 Mottaghy 
 FM 
 
 
 Schiller 
 NO 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 TD 
 
 
 Fluss 
 MO 
 
 
 Muller 
 HW 
 
 
 
 Dissociating neural correlates for nouns and verbs 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 24 
 1058 
 1067 
 15670683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shmuelof 
 L 
 
 
 Zohary 
 E 
 
 
 Dissociation between ventral and dorsal fMRI activation during object and action recognition 
 Neuron 
 2005 
 47 
 457 
 470 
 16055068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silveri 
 MC 
 
 
 Perri 
 R 
 
 
 Cappa 
 A 
 
 
 Grammatical class effects in brain-damages patients: Functional locus of noun and verb deficit 
 Brain and Language 
 2003 
 85 
 49 
 66 
 12681348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Signoret 
 J 
 
 
 Castaigne 
 P 
 
 
 Lehrmitte 
 F 
 
 
 Abelanet 
 R 
 
 
 Lavorel 
 P 
 
 
 Rediscovery of Leborgne’s brain: Anatomical description with CT scan 
 Brain and Language 
 1984 
 22 
 303 
 319 
 6378319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sonty 
 SP 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Johnson 
 NA 
 
 
 Weintraub 
 S 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 
 Primary progressive aphasia: PPA and the language network 
 Annals of Neurology 
 2003 
 53 
 35 
 49 
 12509846 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tettamanti 
 M 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Saccuman 
 MC 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 Danna 
 M 
 
 
 Scifo 
 P 
 
 
 
 Listening to action-related sentences activates fronto-parietal motor circuits 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2005 
 17 
 273 
 281 
 15811239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Northwestern Assessment of Verbs in Sentences 
 2011 
 Northwestern University 
 Evanston, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Unaccusative verb production in agrammatic aphasia: The argument structure complexity hypothesis 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2003 
 16 
 151 
 167 
 21274410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Lange 
 KL 
 
 
 Schneider 
 SL 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 LP 
 
 
 Agrammatic and non-brain-damaged subjects’ verb and verb argument production in constrained elicitation conditions 
 Aphasiology 
 1997 
 11 
 473 
 490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Bonakdarpour 
 B 
 
 
 Fix 
 SF 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of verb argument structure processing in agrammatic aphasic and healthy age-matched listeners 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2010a 
 22 
 1993 
 2011 
 19702460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Bonakdarpour 
 B 
 
 
 Fix 
 SF 
 
 
 Blumenfeld 
 HD 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of verb argument structure processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 1753 
 1767 
 17958479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Cho 
 S 
 
 
 Ju-Hsu 
 C 
 
 
 Wieneke 
 C 
 
 
 Rademaker 
 A 
 
 
 Weitner 
 BB 
 
 
 
 Dissociations between fluency and agrammatism in primary progressive aphasia 
 Aphasiology 
 2012 
 26 
 20 
 43 
 22199417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 DB 
 
 
 Neuroimaging and recovery of language in aphasia 
 Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 
 2008 
 8 
 475 
 483 
 18957184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 DB 
 
 
 Bonakdarpour 
 B 
 
 
 Garibaldi 
 K 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Neural plasticity and treatment-induced recovery of sentence processing in agrammatism 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2010b 
 48 
 3211 
 3227 
 20603138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Fix 
 S 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 The neurobiology of recovered sentence comprehension in aphasia: Treatment-induced fMRI activation patterns 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2001 
 S164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 LP 
 
 
 Kiran 
 S 
 
 
 Sobecks 
 J 
 
 
 The role of syntactic complexity in treatment of sentence deficits in agrammatic aphasia: The complexity account of treatment efficacy (CATE) 
 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 
 2003 
 46 
 591 
 607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 LP 
 
 
 Tait 
 ME 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 B 
 
 
 Schneider 
 S 
 
 
 Ballard 
 K 
 
 
 A system for the linguistic analysis of agrammatic language production 
 Brain and Language 
 1995 
 51 
 124 
 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Mori 
 S 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Towards multimodal atlases of the human brain 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2006 
 7 
 952 
 966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsukiura 
 T 
 
 
 Fujii 
 T 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 T 
 
 
 Xiao 
 R 
 
 
 Inase 
 M 
 
 
 Iijima 
 T 
 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical discrimination between manipulating and maintaining processes involved in verbal working memory: A functional MRI study 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2001 
 11 
 13 
 21 
 11240107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Bright 
 P 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Stamatakis 
 EA 
 
 
 Neural processing of nouns and verbs: The role of inflectional morphology 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2004 
 42 
 512 
 523 
 14728923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vanier 
 M 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 
 
 Menn 
 L 
 
 
 Obler 
 LK 
 
 
 CT-scan correlates of agrammatism 
 Agrammatic Aphasia 
 1990 
 97 
 114 
 Benjamins 
 Amsterdam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Valin 
 RD 
 
 
 Exploring the SyntaxeSemantics Interface 
 2005 
 Cambridge University Press 
 Cambridge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wambaugh 
 J 
 
 
 Cameron 
 R 
 
 
 Kalinyak-Fliszar 
 M 
 
 
 Retrieval of action names in aphasia: Effects of two cueing treatments 
 Aphasiology 
 2004 
 18 
 979 
 1004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wertz 
 RT 
 
 
 LaPointe 
 LL 
 
 
 Rosenbek 
 JC 
 
 
 Apraxia of Speech in Adults: The Disorder and Its Management 
 1984 
 Grune and Stratton 
 Orlando 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Grammatical judgment in aphasia: Deficits are not specific to specific syntactic structures, aphasic syndromes, or lesion sites 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2004 
 16 
 238 
 252 
 15068594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 PCM 
 
 
 Perrachione 
 TK 
 
 
 Parrish 
 T 
 
 
 Neural characteristics of successful and less successful speech and word learning in adults 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2007 
 28 
 995 
 1006 
 17133399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Receptor mapping: Architecture of the human cerebral cortex 
 Current Opinion in Neurology 
 2009 
 22 
 331 
 339 
 19512925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 1 
 
 T1 scans of the four participants in the treatment group and two of the participants in the control group. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 2 
 
 Mean percent correct production pre- and post-treatment (tx) for treated and control participant groups on (a) verb naming (b) verb production in sentences, and (c) argument structure production. Error bars represent ±1SE. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 3 
 
 Pre- versus post-training fMRI results for the agrammatic participants (  p  < .001, uncorrected,  k  ≥ 15). Shown on the left are main effects of verb processing; shown on the right are effects of the two-argument > one-argument contrast. Note: Participant 1 had no pre > post or post > pre activations for the two-argument > one-argument comparison. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Number of lesioned voxels and percent lesioned tissue of treated participants in selected ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 IFG (BA 44 & 45) 
 MTG (BA 21) 
 STG (BA 22) 
 AG (BA 39) 
 SMG (BA 40) 
 SPL (BA 7) 
 
 
 
 
 # Voxels (MNI brain) 
 38,900 
 40,340 
 42,852 
 3230 
 6823 
 6741 
 
 
 T1 
 18,056 (46.4%) 
 22,420 (55.6%) 
 38,789 (90.5%) 
 468 (14.5%) 
 6091 (89.3%) 
 58 (.8%) 
 
 
 T2 
 824 (2.1%) 
 587 (1.4%) 
 14,506 (33.9%) 
 78 (2.4%) 
 4573 (67.0%) 
 2362 (35.0%) 
 
 
 T3 
 23,684 (60.9%) 
 14,575 (36.1%) 
 31,407 (73.3%) 
 0 (.0%) 
 581 (8.5%) 
 0 (.0%) 
 
 
 T4 
 9121 (23.4%) 
 11,024 (27.3%) 
 22,273 (52.0%) 
 0 (.0%) 
 0 (.0%) 
 0 (.0%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; MTG = middle temporal gyrus; STG = superior temporal gyrus; AG = angular gyrus; SMG = supramarginal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Baseline performance (percent correct) on language tests for treated (T1–T4) and untreated control participants (C1–C4): NAVS verb naming and verb argument structure production scores by verb type. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Verb naming 
 Argument structure production 
 
 
 
 1-Arg 
 2-Arg 
 3-Arg 
 Total 
 1-Arg 
 2-Arg 
 3-Arg 
 Total 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 60% 
 70% 
 14% 
 50% 
 100% 
 87% 
 33% 
 69% 
 
 
 T2 
 88% 
 56% 
 40% 
 59% 
 0% 
 0% 
 0% 
 5% 
 
 
 T3 
 63% 
 31% 
 0% 
 29% 
 100% 
 100% 
 67% 
 88% 
 
 
 T4 
 60% 
 80% 
 57% 
 68% 
 100% 
 100% 
 100% 
 100% 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 67.75% (13.6%) 
 59.25% (21.3%) 
 27.75% (25.6%) 
 51.5% (16.7%) 
 75% (50.0%) 
 71.75% (48.2%) 
 50% (43.1%) 
 64.25% (44.7%) 
 
 
 C1 
 0% 
 40% 
 58% 
 33% 
 100% 
 87% 
 67% 
 85% 
 
 
 C2 
 60% 
 50% 
 29% 
 46% 
 100% 
 93% 
 100% 
 98% 
 
 
 C3 
 100% 
 100% 
 100% 
 100% 
 100% 
 80% 
 75% 
 85% 
 
 
 C4 
 100% 
 70% 
 86% 
 85% 
 100% 
 100% 
 83% 
 94% 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 65% (47.3%) 
 65% (26.5%) 
 68.25% (31.5%) 
 66% (31.7%) 
 100% (.0%) 
 90% (8.5%) 
 81.25% (14.1%) 
 90.5% (6.6%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Spontaneous speech features of control and treated aphasic participants pre-treatment, and of a sample of healthy speakers ( n  = 8): proportion (percent) verb-less utterances out of the total number of utterances; proportion of 1, 2 and 3-argument verbs out of all verbs produced. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 % Verb-less utterance 
 % 1-Arg verbs 
 % 2-Arg verbs 
 % 3-Arg verbs 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 51.2% 
 50% 
 50% 
 0% 
 
 
 T2 
 36% 
 25% 
 75% 
 0% 
 
 
 T3 
 81.1% 
 33.3% 
 66.7% 
 0% 
 
 
 T4 
 3% 
 25.6% 
 69.2% 
 5.1% 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 42.8% (32.5%) 
 33.5% (11.6%) 
 65.2% (10.7%) 
 1.3% (2.5%) 
 
 
 C1 
 33.3% 
 50% 
 50% 
 0% 
 
 
 C2 
 6.2% 
 19.7% 
 78.9% 
 1.3% 
 
 
 C3 
 22.6% 
 77.8% 
 22.2% 
 0% 
 
 
 C4 
 33.3% 
 0% 
 100% 
 0% 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 23.9% (12.8%) 
 36.9% (34.2%) 
 62.8% (33.9%) 
 .3% (.6%) 
 
 
 Mean (all patients) (SD) 
 33.3% (25.0%) 
 35.2% (23.7%) 
 64.0% (23.3%) 
 .8% (1.8%) 
 
 
 Healthy controls mean (SD) 
 .5% (1.3%) 
 31.6% (8.0%) 
 60.7% (7.8%) 
 7.7% (3.0%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Suprathreshold activation for the naming of 2-argument over 1-argument verbs, in the healthy control group [FDR corrected,  p  < .05, cluster size ( k ) > 25]. 
 
 
 
 
 Hem. 
 Cluster extent 
 BAs 
 
 k 
 
 Peak MNI coordinates 
 t -Max 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Insula 
 13 
 49 
 −42 
 −3 
 9 
 4.83 
 
 
 L 
 Postcentral gyrus, inferior parietal lobule 
 2, 40 
 178 
 −57 
 −21 
 30 
 6.88 
 
 
 R 
 Inferior frontal gyrus 
 9 
 173 
 48 
 0 
 24 
 6.18 
 
 
 R 
 Transverse temporal gyrus 
 41 
 44 
 33 
 −30 
 6 
 5.34 
 
 
 R 
 Thalamus 
 
 52 
 21 
 −18 
 6 
 5.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Significant regions of pre- versus post-treatment activation (main effects) for agrammatic participants as measured using a canonical HRF,  p  < .001, uncorrected. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Contrast 
 L/R 
 Region 
 BA 
 
 k 
 
 Peak MNI coordinates 
 t -Max 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 N/A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Angular Gyrus 
 39 
 20 
 −42 
 −69 
 15 
 3.77 
 
 
 T2 
 Pre > post 
 R 
 Cuneus 
 18 
 34 
 42 
 −87 
 −9 
 4.77 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Precentral gyrus 
 6 
 92 
 −39 
 −6 
 54 
 5.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 3 
 
 −39 
 −21 
 54 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Precentral gyrus 
 4 
 432 
 18 
 −27 
 60 
 6.99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 36 
 −9 
 57 
 4.58 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 3 
 
 42 
 −27 
 60 
 5.36 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 STG 
 22 
 24 
 60 
 −45 
 18 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Fusiform gyrus 
 37 
 42 
 36 
 −63 
 −6 
 4.72 
 
 
 T3 
 Pre > post 
 L 
 IFG 
 44 
 
 −51 
 15 
 18 
 5.59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 
 −42 
 39 
 12 
 5.22 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 SFG 
 10 
 652 
 −24 
 48 
 21 
 5.7 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Precentral gyrus 
 4 
 41 
 −51 
 −12 
 39 
 4.94 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 IFG 
 45 
 27 
 42 
 21 
 15 
 4.87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 
 51 
 30 
 21 
 3.20 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Anterior cing. 
 24 
 408 
 12 
 30 
 15 
 5.36 
 
 
 
 
 
 MFG 
 10 
 
 9 
 54 
 12 
 5.03 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Fusiform gyrus 
 37 
 59 
 45 
 −63 
 3 
 4.28 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Cuneus 
 18 
 102 
 33 
 −54 
 6 
 4.23 
 
 
 
 
 BL 
 SPL 
 7 
 696 
 18 
 −57 
 60 
 5.21 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 MTG 
 21 
 24 
 −63 
 −54 
 −3 
 3.98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 
 −57 
 −45 
 −15 
 3.71 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 STG 
 22 
 79 
 −63 
 −42 
 6 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMG 
 40 
 
 −63 
 −36 
 24 
 4.24 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 AG 
 39 
 129 
 −42 
 −60 
 27 
 4.87 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 19 
 
 −30 
 −84 
 36 
 5.36 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 SFG 
 8 
 26 
 21 
 24 
 51 
 5.17 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Precentral gyrus 
 6 
 21 
 42 
 −9 
 54 
 4.45 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 AG 
 39 
 64 
 45 
 −75 
 33 
 5.71 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 43 
 646 
 66 
 −18 
 15 
 6.66 
 
 
 
 
 
 MTG 
 21 
 
 54 
 −12 
 −15 
 6.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 STG 
 22 
 
 60 
 6 
 3 
 5.96 
 
 
 
 
 BL 
 SPL 
 7 
 165 
 −3 
 −81 
 42 
 4.95 
 
 
 T4 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 N/A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 SMG 
 40 
 68 
 −39 
 −57 
 54 
 3.96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41 
 −57 
 −36 
 36 
 3.86 
 
 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 7 
 
 −36 
 −72 
 45 
 4.55 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. L = left; R = right; BL = bilateral; MFG = middle frontal gyrus; STG = superior temporal gyrus; SFG = superior frontal gyrus; cing. = cingulate; IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; MTG = middle temporal gyrus; SMG = supramarginal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Differential activation patterns for interactions of argument structure complexity (two-argument > one-argument) with scan time, for each agrammatic participant, as measured using a canonical HRF, with TTP of approximately 6 sec. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Contrast 
 L/R 
 Region 
 BA 
 
 k 
 
 Peak MNI coordinates 
 t -Max 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 
 None 
 NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T2 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Insula 
 13 
 23 
 −42 
 15 
 18 
 4.22 
 
 
 T3 
 Pre > post 
 L 
 Insula 
 13 
 20 
 −48 
 −15 
 15 
 3.87 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 R 
 MFG 
 6 
 34 
 27 
 −6 
 48 
 3.72 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 STG 
 22 
 93 
 54 
 −30 
 3 
 5.02 
 
 
 T4 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 2 
 83 
 −36 
 −39 
 66 
 5.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 −24 
 −33 
 75 
 4.74 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Cuneus 
 19 
 22 
 −39 
 −81 
 9 
 3.85 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Precentral gyrus 
 6 
 44 
 30 
 −24 
 75 
 4.52 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 STG 
 22 
 21 
 51 
 12 
 −6 
 4.83 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Heschl’s gyrus 
 42 
 234 
 66 
 −18 
 12 
 6.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. L = left; R = right; MFG = middle frontal gyrus; STG = superior temporal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 7 
 
 Results of ROI analysis, conducted by modeling each participant’s regionally specific true HRF, for pre- versus post training differential activation for verb naming (FDR corrected;  p  < .05). Also given is the regionally specific TTPof the hemodynamic response curve. 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Contrast 
 L/R 
 ROI 
 TTP 
 
 k 
 
 Peak MNI coordinates 
 t -Max 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 Pre > post 
 L 
 Broca’s area 
 10–12 sec a 
 6 
 −36 
 18 
 33 
 4.61 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Middle temporal gyrus 
 6–8 sec 
 3 
 −51 
 −30 
 −9 
 5.01 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Broca’s area 
 10–12 sec a 
 5 
 −39 
 36 
 3 
 3.79 
 
 
 T2 
 Pre > post 
 L 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 6–8 sec 
 7 
 −54 
 −51 
 33 
 5.03 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Angular gyrus 
 6–8 sec 
 2 
 −54 
 −51 
 33 
 4.80 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 4–6 sec 
 7 
 48 
 −39 
 27 
 4.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T3 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 6–8 sec 
 11 
 −45 
 −33 
 33 
 3.97 
 
 
 T4 
 Pre > post 
 
 None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Post > pre 
 L 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 10–12 sec 
 36 
 −51 
 −48 
 27 
 3.78 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Superior parietal cortex 
 10–12 sec 
 26 
 −33 
 −63 
 60 
 4.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −30 
 −66 
 45 
 3.45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 −12 
 −72 
 39 
 3.26 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 HRF with negative slope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1-Argument 
 2-Argument 
 3-Argument 
 
 
 
 
 Cry 
 Kiss 
 Give 
 
 
 Yawn 
 Lick 
 Deliver 
 
 
 Smile 
 Watch 
 Write 
 
 
 Laugh 
 Sniff 
 Send 
 
 
 Wink 
 Bite 
 Build 
 
 
 Cough 
 Stir 
 Sell 
 
 
 Scream 
 Grab 
 Show 
 
 
 Bowl 
 Wash 
 Pour 
 
 
 Clap 
 Lift 
 Read 
 
 
 Point 
 Hit 
 Throw 
 
 
 Fish 
 Pull 
 
 
 
 Box 
 Pinch 
 
 
 
 Fence 
 Tickle 
 
 
 
 Jump 
 Hug 
 
 
 
 Hop 
 Push 
 
 
 
 Tiptoe 
 Cut 
 
 
 
 Skate 
 Zip 
 
 
 
 Kneel 
 Kick 
 
 
 
 Run 
 Chase 
 
 
 
 Ski 
 Spill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1-Argument 
 2-Argument 
 
 
 
 
 Cry 
 Kiss 
 
 
 Yawn 
 Lick 
 
 
 Laugh 
 Watch 
 
 
 Wink 
 Sniff 
 
 
 Cough 
 Bite 
 
 
 Scream 
 Pull 
 
 
 Bowl 
 Pinch 
 
 
 Clap 
 Push 
 
 
 Point 
 Zip 
 
 
 Fish 
 Kick 
 
 
 Box 
 Follow 
 
 
 Fence 
 Whisper 
 
 
 Jump 
 Spit 
 
 
 Run 
 Eat 
 
 
 Smile 
 Squeeze 
 
 
 Sneeze 
 Drink 
 
 
 Frown 
 Type 
 
 
 Nod 
 Smoke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Trained verbs 
 Untrained verbs 
 
 
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
φ
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
φ
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 25% 
 78% 
 4.95 
 .026 
 .4 
 36% 
 58% 
 1.16 
 .281 
 .22 
 
 
 T2 
 23% 
 75% 
 9.03 
 .003 
 .53 
 49% 
 70% 
 1.09 
 .296 
 .22 
 
 
 T3 
 20% 
 60% 
 5.1 
 .024 
 .41 
 36% 
 45% 
 .06 
 .806 
 .09 
 
 
 T4 
 40% 
 75% 
 3.68 
 .055 
 .35 
 39% 
 63% 
 1.48 
 .224 
 .24 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 27% (9%) 
 72% (8.1%) 
 
 .068 a 
 
 40% (6.2%) 
 59% (10.6%) 
 
 .068 a 
 
 
 
 C1 
 30% 
 43% 
 .24 
 .62 
 .13 
 28% 
 43% 
 1.37 
 .242 
 .16 
 
 
 C2 
 25% 
 13% 
 
–
 b 
 
 1 
 −.16 
 46% 
 38% 
 .32 
 .572 
 −.09 
 
 
 C3 
 58% 
 60% 
 .03 
 .862 
 .03 
 61% 
 60% 
 .01 
 .920 
 −.01 
 
 
 C4 
 70% 
 75% 
 0 
 1 
 .06 
 61% 
 75% 
 1.17 
 .279 
 .15 
 
 
 Mean (SD.) 
 46% (21.7%) 
 48% (26.6%) 
 
 .465 a 
 
 49% (15.7%) 
 54% (16.9%) 
 
 .465 a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 Statistical significance based on a paired-sample Wilcoxon test. 
 
 
 b 
 The chi-square test could not be applied due to small cell frequencies; Fisher’s exact test was used instead. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Trained verbs 
 Untrained verbs 
 
 
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
ϕ
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
ϕ
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 18% 
 78% 
 12.13 
 <.001 
 .6 
 36% 
 58% 
 1.06 
 .303 
 .21 
 
 
 T2 
 33% 
 68% 
 2.51 
 .113 
 .3 
 48% 
 66% 
 .72 
 .396 
 .18 
 
 
 T3 
 8% 
 60% 
 10.09 
 .001 
 .56 
 39% 
 48% 
 .06 
 .806 
 .09 
 
 
 T4 
 38% 
 53% 
 .4 
 .527 
 .15 
 36% 
 61% 
 1.41 
 .235 
 .24 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 24% (14%) 
 65% (11%) 
 0 
 .068 a 
 0 
 40% (6%) 
 58% (8%) 
 0 
 068 a 
 0 
 
 
 C1 
 15% 
 15% 
 
–
 b 
 
 1 
 0 
 23% 
 26% 
 .02 
 .887 
 .04 
 
 
 C2 
 65% 
 10% 
 10.67 
 .001 
 −.57 
 65% 
 40% 
 4.06 
 .044 
 −.25 
 
 
 C3 
 75% 
 65% 
 .12 
 .729 
 −.11 
 65% 
 70% 
 .06 
 .806 
 .05 
 
 
 C4 
 70% 
 80% 
 .13 
 .718 
 .12 
 73% 
 83% 
 .65 
 .420 
 .12 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 56% (28%) 
 43% (35%) 
 
 .414 a 
 
 57% (23%) 
 55% (26%) 
 
 .465 a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 Statistical significance based on a paired-sample Wilcoxon test. 
 
 
 b 
 The chi-square test could not be applied due to small cell frequencies; Fisher’s exact test was used instead. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participant 
 Trained verbs 
 Untrained verbs 
 
 
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
ϕ
 
 Pre 
 Post 
 
χ
 2 
 
 
 p 
 
 
ϕ
 
 
 
 
 
 T1 
 0% 
 68% 
 17.47 
 <.001 
 .71 
 15% 
 46% 
 3.24 
 .072 
 .34 
 
 
 T2 
 8% 
 53% 
 7.62 
 .006 
 .49 
 35% 
 61% 
 1.6 
 .206 
 .25 
 
 
 T3 
 5% 
 55% 
 9.64 
 .002 
 .55 
 39% 
 46% 
 .03 
 .862 
 .08 
 
 
 T4 
 33% 
 38% 
 .01 
 .920 
 .04 
 35% 
 60% 
 1.6 
 .206 
 .25 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 12% (15%) 
 54% (12%) 
 
 .068 a 
 
 31% (11%) 
 53% (8%) 
 
 .068 a 
 
 
 
 C1 
 3% 
 5% 
 
–
 b 
 
 1 
 .07 
 15% 
 25% 
 .7 
 .403 
 .13 
 
 
 C2 
 65% 
 5% 
 13.3 
 <.001 
 −.63 
 65% 
 40% 
 4.06 
 .044 
 −.25 
 
 
 C3 
 45% 
 25% 
 .99 
 .320 
 −.21 
 63% 
 66% 
 .01 
 .920 
 .04 
 
 
 C4 
 65% 
 55% 
 .1 
 .752 
 −.1 
 71% 
 83% 
 .86 
 .354 
 .13 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 45% (29%) 
 23% (24%) 
 
 .144 a 
 
 54% (26%) 
 54% (26%) 
 
 .715 a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 Statistical significance based on a paired-sample Wilcoxon test. 
 
 
 b 
 The chi-square test could not be applied due to small cell frequencies; Fisher’s exact test was used instead. 
 
 
 
 
