
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8100437 
 6047 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 
 Neurobiology of aging 
 
 0197-4580 
 1558-1497 
 
 
 23523270 
 3651767 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.02.004 
 NIHMS447489 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Functional and structural aging of the speech sensorimotor neural system: fMRI evidence 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 Pascale 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 Anthony Steven 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Small 
 Steven L. 
 
 3 
 
 
 1 Centre de Recherche de l’Institut universitaire en santé mentale de Québec, Department of Rehabilitation, Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada 
 2 Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami FL, USA 
 3 Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine CA, USA 
 
 Corresponding author: Pascale Tremblay, PhD., Centre de Recherche de l’Institut universitaire en santé mentale de Québec, Department of Rehabilitation, Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada, G1J 2G3, 2601, de la Canardière, office # F-2445, Pascale.  Tremblay@fmed.ulaval.ca , Phone: +001 418 663 5000 ext. 4738, Fax: +001 418 656-5476 
 
 
 18 
 3 
 2013 
 
 
 21 
 3 
 2013 
 
 
 8 
 2013 
 
 
 01 
 8 
 2014 
 
 34 
 8 
 1935 
 1951 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The ability to perceive and produce speech undergoes important changes in late adulthood. The goal of the present study was to characterize functional and structural age-related differences in the cortical network supporting speech perception and production using magnetic resonance imaging, as well as the relationship between functional and structural age-related changes occurring in this network. We asked young and older adults to (1) observe videos of a speaker producing single words (perception), and (B) observe and repeat the words produced (production). Results show a widespread bilateral network of brain activation for Perception and Production that was uncorrelated with age. In addition, several regions did show age-related change (auditory cortex, planum temporale, superior temporal sulcus, premotor cortices, SMA-proper). Examination of the relationship between brain signal and regional and global gray matter volume and cortical thickness revealed a complex set of relationships between structure and function, with some regions showing a relationship between structure and function and not. The present results provide novel findings about the neurobiology of aging and verbal communication. 
 
 
 Normal aging 
 speech perception 
 speech production 
 brain reserve capacity 
 surface-based cortical thickness 
 gray matter volume 
 MRI 
 
 
 
 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders : NIDCD 
 R33 DC008638 || DC 
 
 
 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders : NIDCD 
 R01 DC003378 || DC 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 The ability to communicate verbally through language critically depends upon the ability to recognize and articulate speech sounds (i.e. phonemes and syllables). Like many other aspects of human behaviour, these abilities are vulnerable to senescence, which may lead to communication difficulties (e.g. more difficult sentence comprehension or word recognition) and, ultimately, to a social participation that is less diverse, is more restricted to home settings and involves fewer social relationships ( Law, 2002 ). As the proportion of the world’s population in the older ages continues to grow, the prevalence of disorders of speech, voice and language increases. Because these disorders pose a major challenge to patients, families, and health care systems, particularly in this time of significant global population aging, there is increasing need for reliable neurobiological data about expected (normal) age-related changes. In this paper we focus on the relation between functional and structural changes that accompany aging, and whether and how these changes affect behaviour. 
 At the behavioural level, numerous age-related changes have been documented in both speech perception and production. In terms of speech perception, which refers to the extraordinary ability of the human brain to recognize the phonemes (the smallest unit in a language, such as/p/) and syllables that form a speakers’ language and to parse the continuous speech stream, the most common change is an age-related loss of auditory sensitivity to high frequency sounds, known as  presbycusis , which affects approximately 20–40% of adults over 65 ( Gates & Mills, 2005 ;  Ries, 1994 ). Presbycusis reduces the ability to recognize speech sounds and, consequently, to comprehend words and sentences; it mainly affects consonants with energy in the high frequency range ( Nilsson et al., 1994 ;  Plomp & Mimpen, 1979 ). In addition to peripheral hearing loss, the ability to perceive speech in noisy environments also declines with age ( Cooper & Gates, 1991 ;  Frisina & Frisina, 1997 ;  Plath, 1991 ;  Working Group on Speech Understanding and Aging and Committee on Hearing, 1988 ). Because communication often occurs in the presence of background noise (e.g. at social gatherings, in public transportation, on the phone), this can have dramatic ecological consequences. Decreased hearing-in-noise capacity appears independent of peripheral hearing loss ( Frisina & Frisina, 1997 ). Other changes affecting speech perception include a reduced ability to discriminate between pairs of minimally different syllables (e.g./pa-ba/) ( Strouse et al., 1998 ) and to read lips ( Sommers et al., 2005 ). In addition to changes affecting speech perception, and by extension, language comprehension and communication, age-related changes in speech production have also been described, and include a reduction in speech rate ( Duchin & Mysak, 1987 ;  Fozo & Watson, 1998 ;  Hartman & Danahuer, 1976 ), an increase in the duration of individual speech sounds ( Morris & Brown, 1987 ;  Ryan & Burk, 1974 ), a decrease in voice amplitude ( Baker et al., 2001 ) and a change (either increase or decrease) in the fundamental frequency of voice ( Decoster & Debruyne, 1997 ;  Linville, 1996 ;  Mueller, 1997 ;  Ramig, 1983a ,  1983b ). These changes are likely to reduce communication efficiency by reducing intelligibility, that is, the ability for a person to be understood by another. 
 Speech perception and production abilities are vulnerable to aging as are many aspects of human behaviour such as processing speed, episodic memory, and attention. However, several important questions remain unanswered with regards to aging of the speech system, and we try to address a few of these in the present study. First, the extent to which behavioural changes affecting speech perception and production are associated with normal age-related structural changes at the level of the central nervous system (CNS), a phenomenon often referred to as “brain senescence” ( Dickstein et al., 2009 ;  Raz & Kennedy, 2009 ), is undetermined. Some of the behavioural changes may be related to peripheral age-related changes in the speech system, such as ossification of the laryngeal cartilages and reduced facial muscle strengths, rather than functional and structural changes in the brain. Second, it is unclear whether age-related difficulties in processing and producing speech sounds are related to general aging mechanisms that affect the brain globally, or to changes affecting specific regions involved in speech processing and production. Age-related changes at the level of the prefrontal cortex, for instance, have been abundantly documented in relation to cognitive decline. Are these prefrontal changes relevant to the behavioural decline in speech perception and production? Third, we don’t know whether age-related behavioural speech perception and production changes have overlapping origins in the brain. Closed-loop accounts of motor control suggest that movements, including speech ( Nasir & Ostry, 2008 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ), are under the constant control of sensory feedback. Because aging is associated with a decline in hearing acuity, this account predicts that the precision and stability of the speech movements will decrease with age as a consequence of decreased sensory acuity (so too will speech perception). 
 Consistent with this idea, it has been shown that sudden deafness leads to a rapid deterioration of several aspects of speech production ( Gould et al., 2001 ;  Matthies et al., 1994 ;  Perkell et al., 1992 ). Moreover, several studies have shown that online acoustical and somatosensory manipulation of a person’s auditory/tactile feedback triggers immediate compensatory changes in speech production ( Burnett et al., 1998 ;  Houde & Jordan, 1998 ;  Jones & Munhall, 2000 ;  Tremblay et al., 2003 ), supporting the notion that motor control relies on online feedback processing. Consistent with this behavioural evidence, neuroimaging and neurostimulation studies have shown overlap in the neural representation of speech perceptual and motor mechanisms, in particular at the level of the ventral premotor cortex (PMv) ( Callan, Callan, et al., 2006 ;  Callan et al., 2010 ;  Callan, Tsytsarev, et al., 2006 ;  D’Ausilio et al., 2009 ;  Pulvermüller et al., 2006 ;  Tremblay et al., 2012 ;  Wilson et al., 2004 ) and in auditory association areas in particular in the planum temporale (PT) ( Tremblay et al., 2011 ;  Tremblay & Small, 2011c ). Because the neural system underlying speech perception and speech production are overlapping, it is possible that age-related alterations to this system affects speech behaviour globally, independent of the specific speech task. 
 A few groups have begun to investigate the neurobiological changes that are related to decline in speech perception and found age differences, especially at the level of the supratemporal cortex, but also in the frontal lobe ( Frisina & Frisina, 1997 ;  Harkrider et al., 2005 ;  Peelle et al., 2011 ;  Sheppard et al., 2011 ;  Tremblay et al., 2002 ;  Wong et al., 2010 ). For example, using fMRI, Wong et al. ( Wong et al., 2009 ) showed that speech perception in aging is associated with lower activation magnitude in the left auditory cortex in older compared to younger adults, most likely reflecting neuronal under-recruitment ( Gazzaley & D’Esposito, 2005 ). Results also showed higher activation magnitude in the left middle temporal gyrus and right precuneus, two areas associated with higher order cognitive processing, which may indicate compensatory neural mechanisms. In a follow-up study, Wong et al. ( Wong et al., 2010 ) further demonstrated a link between cognition and speech in aging using structural MRI. In this study, the ability to perceive speech in noise was examined against structural changes occurring in the frontal lobe. A significant relationship was found between the volume of left pars triangularis inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and behavioural performance. Other studies however have found lower brain activation in older compared to younger adults, without concomitant increases in brain activation. For example, Peelle et al. ( Peelle et al., 2011 ), reported lower activation magnitude in the primary auditory cortices (A1) bilaterally during a speech perception task in older compared to younger adults, which was accompanied by smaller grey matter volume in this area. This result is consistent with high-resolution MRI morphometric studies showing structural vulnerability to age in A1 ( Allen et al., 2005 ). Sheppard et al. ( Sheppard et al., 2011 ) recently showed an age-related regional decrease in network efficiency at the level of the supratemporal cortex, including A1, during speech perception in quiet and in noise. There was no evidence of compensatory network changes. 
 One fMRI study has examined age-related neural changes in overt speech production ( Soros et al., 2011 ) and found increased activation in several areas in elderly compared to young adults, including A1, the ventral premotor cortex (PMv), the supplementary motor area (SMA-proper) and the prefrontal cortex. There was also decreased activation in posterior supratemporal areas including STG. Increased activation was interpreted as evidence of neural compensation, that is, neural reorganization used to counteract age-related neural decline and resulting in maintained high performance ( Cabeza et al., 2002 ). Taken together, results of these previous brain-imaging studies on speech in aging reveal age-related functional and structural alterations in the CNS that appear to affect the ability to process, and perhaps also produce, speech. 
 The general objective of the present study is to further current understanding of the neurobiology of speech in aging. First, we examine the direction of magnitude changes (higher vs. lower), context relevance (task-dependent vs. task-independent) and scope (regional vs. global) of age-related differences in the Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent (BOLD) during speech perception and production using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Second, we examine the relationship between age-related functional and structural alterations, with focus on grey matter volume and surface-based cortical thickness, two measures widely used to quantify structural change of the cortex ( Fischl & Dale, 2000 ;  Han et al., 2006 ;  Walhovd et al., 2005 ). We hypothesize that areas involved in processing and producing speech, in particular the planum temporale (PT) and the ventral premotor cortex (PMv), would show lower activation in older adults compared to younger adults reflecting less efficient neural processes. Further, we expect that these age-related functional differences will be dependent upon regional structural brain changes in PT and PMv, with thinner cortical thickness and smaller gray matter volume predicting regional changes in BOLD signal. We used a multiple mediation approach to better characterize whether and how structural changes mediate the relation between age and changes in the BOLD response. Our results provide important new insights into normative age-related brain changes. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 The young adult group was comprised of twenty healthy right-handed ( Oldfield, 1971 ) native speakers of American English (mean age 23.7 ± 5.5; range: 18–38 years; 11 females), with a mean of 15.1 ± 2 years of education (range: 12–18). The data from one additional participant could not be used because of a technical problem with the stimulus presentation. The older adult group was comprised of nineteen healthy right-handed ( Oldfield, 1971 ) native speakers of American English (mean age 62.05 ± 3.84; range: 57–70 years; 11 females), with a mean of 16.2 ± 2 years of education (range: 13–22). Participants in both groups had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no self-reported history of speech, voice, language or neurological disorder. Participants were screened for depression using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) ( Radloff, 1977 ) and cognitive functioning using the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ). There were no differences across groups on these tests. Participants’ characteristics are reported in  Table 1 . The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Biological Sciences Division of The University of Chicago. 
 
 
 Behavioural tests 
 Participants’ hearing sensitivity was assessed using a standard audiometric testing procedure (pure-tone air conduction thresholds for the following frequencies: 250, 500, 1000 , 2000, 3000, 4000, 6000, and 8000Hz). A standard speech discrimination test (Northwestern University auditory test number six, form A) was also used to evaluate participants’ ability to identify speech sounds. Speech discrimination procedures measure a person’s ability not only to hear words but also to identify them. For each participant, a standard pure tone average (PTA – average of threshold at 1, 2 and 4KHz) was computed for the left and right ear, as well as a better ear PTA. 
 
 
 Stimuli and Procedures 
 The experiment consisted of two tasks: (1) observation of a set of short video clips showing a female actor producing words (Perception), and (2) observation of a set of similar videos followed by repetition of the word produced by the speaker (Production). A resting condition (crosshair fixation) was also included as a baseline condition and interleaved with rest trials; the order of the conditions and the number of rest trials were jittered and optimized using Optseq2  http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/optseq/ ). Participants always completed the Perception task first. Moreover, they did not know that they would be required to produce words until the beginning of the Production task. This was done to avoid covert rehearsal during Perception. The stimuli were 120 short video clips of a native English-speaking female actor articulating bisyllabic words (nouns). These words were either simple or complex, as measured in terms of the presence or absence of a consonant cluster. The complexity manipulation is reported elsewhere ( Tremblay & Small, 2011c ). In the present study, stimuli were collapsed across complexity levels. All videos were presented using Presentation Software (Neurobehavioral System, CA, USA). Visual stimuli were delivered to a custom rear projection screen placed inside the bore of the magnet approximately 24″ from the participant, who viewed the stimuli via a mirror attached to the head coil. Auditory stimuli were delivered via a high quality full frequency range auditory amplifier (Avotec Inc., FL, USA). 
 
 
 Image acquisition 
 The data were acquired on a whole-body Siemens 3.0 Tesla Tim Trio MRI scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) at Northwestern University (Chicago, IL, USA). Thirty-two axial slices (3×1.7×1.7 mm, no gap) were acquired in interleaved order using a multislice EPI sequence (TR = 2sec, TE = 20ms; FOV = 200×207×127mm; 128×128 matrix; Flip angle: 75). This covered the entire cortex, but, for most participants, the cerebellum was only partially covered. For this reason we do not report group results for the cerebellum. Two experimental runs (6.3 minutes each) resulted in the acquisition of 380 T2*-weighted BOLD images (120 experimental trials and 60 baseline trials). High-resolution T1-weighted volumes were acquired for anatomical localization (176 sagittal slices, 1×1×1 mm resolution, TR = 23ms, TE = 2.91, FOV = 256×256×176 mm). Throughout the procedure, each participant’s head was immobilized by means of a set of cushions and pads. 
 
 
 Image analysis 
 
 Pre-processing 
 All time series were spatially registered, motion-corrected, time-shifted, de-spiked and mean-normalized using AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ). All time points occurring during excessive motion, defined as >1 mm, were excluded from the analyses as part of the regression ( Johnstone et al., 2006 ). Separate regressors for Perception and Production were created for each participant; additional regressors were the mean, linear, and quadratic trend components, and the 6 motion parameters (x, y, z and roll, pitch and yaw). To remove additional sources of spurious variance unlikely to represent signal of interest, we also included in the regression signal from the lateral ventricles ( Dick et al., 2010 ;  Fox et al., 2005 ), which was identified using the automated subcortical segmentation from Freesurfer to mask the ventricles. A linear least squares model was used to establish a fit to each time point of the hemodynamic response function for each condition. Event-related signals were deconvolved by linear interpolation, beginning at two seconds post stimulus onset and continuing at 2-sec intervals for 10 sec, using AFNI’s tent function (i.e. a piecewise linear spline model). This resulted in regression weights (beta values) indexing percent signal change at each 2-sec interval. All analyses focused on the beta values averaged across the 4–8 sec post-stimulus onset time lag. The FreeSurfer software package ( Dale et al., 1999 ;  Fischl et al., 1999 ;  Fischl et al., 2004 ) was used to create surface representations of each participant’s anatomy by inflating each hemisphere of the anatomical volumes to a surface representation and aligning it to a template of average curvature. SUMA was then used to import the surface representations into the AFNI 3D space and to project the functional data from the 3-dimensional volumes onto the 2-dimensional surfaces. Data were smoothed on the surface to achieve a target smoothing value of 6mm using a Gaussian full width half maximum (FWHM) filter. Smoothing on the surface as opposed to smoothing on the volume ensures that white matter values are not included, and that functional data situated in anatomically distant locations on the cortical surface are not averaged across sulci ( Argall et al., 2006 ;  Desai et al., 2005 ). 
 
 
 Whole-brain analyses 
 Whole-brain, group analyses were performed using SUMA on the participants’ smoothed beta values resulting from the first-level analysis. For each analysis, we controlled for sex, education and PTA. A series of vertex-wise directional t-tests was computed for the contrasts of  (1)  Conjunction of Perception against rest for the young and Perception against rest for the older adults, yielding a map of age-independent  Perception-related activation , and  (2)  Conjunction of Production against rest for the young and Production against rest for the older adults, yielding a map of age-independent  Production-related activation . Next, we examined (3) Age-dependent activation  within Perception ; (4) Age-dependent activation  within Production ; and (5)  Task x Age interactions . Conjunction analyses were conducted using the procedure outlined in  Nichols et al., 2005  ( Nichols et al., 2005 ), which is essentially an intersection of vertices that are significantly active relative to resting baseline. A Monte Carlo simulation conducted in the surface space, based on Forman et al., 1995 ( Nyberg et al., 2010 ), was used to identify significant clusters of activated vertices, with an individual vertex threshold of  p  < .005, corrected for multiple comparisons to achieve a family-wise error (FWE) rate of  p  < 0.05 (clusters ≥ 163 vertices). 
 
 
 ROI 
 An analysis of regions of interests (ROI) was conducted on all the age-sensitive cortical areas (bilateral PMv, right SMA-proper, left pSFG, left auditory cortex, right PT, right middle superior temporal sulcus (STS), right anterior occipito-temporal sulcus (aOTS) and right occipital pole (Opole)) identified through the whole-brain analysis (contrasts #3, 4 and 5) to determine the direction of the age effects. The group images were used as masks to extract the percentage of change in these regions for each condition (Perception, Production) and each participant. Using Freesurfer, for each ROI, we computed two morphometric measures: surface-based cortical thickness, and gray matter volume. This process involves normalizing intensity from a high resolution T1-weighted anatomical MRI, removing non-brain voxels using a skull-stripping procedure (the result of which was visually inspected and manually adjusted when necessary), segmentation of the gray and white matter and CSF as well as surface deformation and topological corrections ( Dale et al., 1999 ). Cortical thickness measures were obtained by calculating the distance between white matter and pial surfaces at each vertex across the cortical mantle ( Fischl & Dale, 2000 ). The cortical volumes were computed using the statistical module of FreeSurfer, which integrates the area of each surface triangle and multiplies it by the mean thickness over the entire ROI. Two summary measures were also computed for the whole hemispheres: mean cortical thickness (in mm) and overall gray matter volume (calculated as the sum of the volumes for all cortical and subcortical gray and white matter ROIs, in cubic cm). To examine whether age-related changes in BOLD signal are mediated by regional volume and thickness, a series of multiple mediations were conducted. These analyses were conducted using the INDIRECT macro for SPSS ( http://www.afhayes.com/ ) ( Preacher & Hayes, 2004 ;  Preacher & Hayes, 2008b ). 
 Mediation analyses provide a very powerful analytical framework for testing predictions about  mechanisms  to explain age effects. Indeed, mediation models allow researchers to explain the mechanisms by which one variable affect another ( Baron & Kenny, 1986 ;  MacKinnon et al., 2007 ;  Preacher & Hayes, 2004 ,  2008a ;  Shrout & Bolger, 2002 ). Multiple mediation analyses estimate the path coefficients in a multiple mediator model and generate bootstrap confidence intervals for total and specific indirect effects of X on Y through multiple mediator variables (M). The model that was used is illustrated in  Supplementary Material S1 . In this multiple (parallel) mediation model, the dependent (y) variables were the signal magnitude in Perception and in Production (each tested separately) for each of our age-sensitive ROIs, while the independent (x) variable was the categorical variable Age (young, older). Four mediators (bilateral volume, bilateral thickness) and three covariates (PTA, sex and education) were used. For each ROI, a linear regression was used to test for a direct effect of Age on brain structure --the  a  path in the model. A linear regression was also conducted to test for an effect of brain structure on BOLD signal (the  b  path). Next, a series of multiple regressions was conducted, each including one of the mediators to examine (1) whether there was a direct effect of Age on BOLD independent of brain structure (the c′ path), and (2) whether there was an indirect effect of Age on BOLD signal through regional brain structure (the  ab  path). An indirect effect indicates that a change in brain structure affects BOLD signal while Age is kept constant. A bootstrapping approach was used to test for the significance of the indirect effects ( Shrout & Bolger, 2002 ) ( P  < 0.05, using bootstrapping with 20,000 samples). Bootstrapping involves the repeated extraction of samples, with replacement, from a dataset and the estimation of the indirect effect in each resampled data set. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Hearing assessment 
 Examination of hearing sensitivity across groups, as measured by better ear PTA, revealed significant between-group differences (t (37df)  = −5.843 , 
 p  = .000001). Hearing results are presented in Table 1 and illustrated in  Figure 1 . As can be seen in the figure, some of our older participants had mild hearing loss; thus in all analyses, PTA was used as a covariate to remove potential effects of hearing sensitivity on BOLD signal. 
 
 
 Behavioural data 
 Participants’ performance in the repetition task approached ceiling. The young participants committed a total of 15 errors in over 960 trials. The older participants committed a total of 14 errors in over 960 trials. 
 
 
 Imaging data 
 
 Whole-brain analysis 
 We first examined the magnitude of age-independent activation at the whole-brain level (see  Table 2 ). For Perception ( Figure 2A , red), age-independent activation included a large bilateral cluster covering the supratemporal planes, part of the occipital pole and fusiform gyrus. For Production, ( Figure 2B , red) age-independent activation included additional bilateral clusters in ventral primary motor cortex (M1v), PMv, and SMA-proper. For the contrast of age-independent Production against age-independent Perception,  Figure 3  (red) shows activation in bilateral M1v, PMv and along the supratemporal cortices, including the transverse temporal gyrus (TTG), transverse temporal sulcus (TTS) and planum temporale (PT). No region showed stronger response for Perception than Production. 
 We next examined age-dependent task-related activation ( Table 3 ). As shown in  Figure 2A  (blue), For Perception, we found cortical regions sensitive to Age in the left TTS, right PT, in the right STS, approximately in the middle of the sulcus (along the anterior/posterior dimension) (mSTS), left superior frontal gyrus (pSFG), right occipital pole (OPole) and right anterior occipito-temporal sulcus (aOTS;  Figure 2A , blue). In all these regions except pSFG, the activation magnitude during Perception was significantly weaker for older compared to younger adults ( Figure 4 ). For Production, we found cortical regions sensitive to Age in the right PMv, right mSTS and right SMA-proper ( Figure 2B , blue). In all these ROIs, the amplitude of the BOLD signal was lower for older compared to younger adults ( Figure 5 ). 
 Finally, we examined regions exhibiting an Age by Task interaction. As shown in  Figure 3  (blue), an interaction was found in the bilateral PMv, left pSFG, and right SMA-proper. In both PMv regions and in the right SMA-proper, the interaction was driven by lower BOLD signal for Production in older compared to younger adults without an effect of Age on Perception ( Figure 6A, B, and C ). In the left pSFG, there was no significant effect of Age on Production, but the amplitude of the BOLD signal was stronger for older compared to younger participants during Perception ( Figure 6D ). 
 
 
 
 Age-related structural changes 
 
 Global brain senescence 
 The left hemisphere gray matter volume was 266 cc (±21.2 cc) for the young and 226.3 cc (±21.39 cc) for the older adults; this difference was significant ( t (34)  = 4.60,  p  < .0001). The right hemisphere gray matter volume was 267.4 cc (±2.1 cc) for the young and 227.9 cc (±22.54 cc) for the older adults; this difference was significant ( t (34)  = 4.49,  p  < .0001). The left hemisphere thickness was 2.46 mm (±.077 mm) for the young and 2.34 mm (±.059 mm) for the older adults ( t 
 (34)  = 4.32,  p  < .001). The right hemisphere thickness was 2.47 mm (±.069 mm) for the young and 2.35 mm (±.063 mm) for the older adults ( t 
 (34)  = 4.037,  p  < .001). 
 
 
 Regional brain senescence 
 First, we conducted a set of FDR-corrected independent  t -tests (q = .05,  i  = 8 tests per hemisphere) to examine the volume of gray matter in young and older adults in age-sensitive ROIs identified through whole-brain analyses (PMv, SMA-proper, pSFG, TTS, PT, mSTS, aOTS and Opole). Since all available evidence points towards a lower volume and thickness in older ages (see for example  Drachman, 2006 ;  Raz & Kennedy, 2009 ), directional tests were conducted. The PMv, SMA-proper, pSFG and the aOTS had smaller gray matter volume (bilaterally) for older compared to younger adults. The left mSTS and right Opole had smaller gray matter volume, and PT and TTS showed no age difference. These results are presented in  Table 4 . Next, we examined regional differences in cortical thickness. The results revealed a difference in cortical thickness (thinner cortical mantle for older compared to younger adults) in SMA-proper, pSFG, TTS and mSTS bilaterally, left PMv, and left PT, and no difference in thickness in the occipital ROIs. These results are presented in  Table 5 . 
 
 
 
 Mediation analyses 
 A main focus of this study was to examine the relationship between group differences in regional structural measures and regional task-related BOLD signal magnitude. To this aim, we conducted a series of multiple mediation analyses on the age-sensitive ROIs identified in the whole-brain analysis (PMv, SMA-proper, pSFG, TTS, PT, mSTS, aOTS and Opole). In the occipital lobe ROIs ( right Opole  and  right aOTS ) there was no direct or indirect relationship between structure and BOLD signal ( Supplementary material S2 ; statistics are presented in  Supplementary material S3 ). 
 In the temporal ROIs, BOLD signal changes were predicted by age in both Perception and Production, and all ROIs showed a direct relationship between structure and BOLD (see  Fig. 7A ). In the  left TTS , there was a direct effect of contralateral TTS volume on BOLD signal during Production. In the  right PT , there was a direct effect of bilateral PT thickness on BOLD signal during Perception. In the  right mSTS , there was a direct effect of contralateral mSTS thickness on BOLD signal magnitude during Perception. A partial indirect effect of Age on Perception through contralateral thickness was also found ( ab  path). Partial mediation indicates that the mediation effect is smaller than total effect ( c  path), meaning that the direct effect ( c ′ path) and the indirect effect ( ab  path) are both significantly different from zero. The frontal ROIs (bilateral PMv, right SMA-proper, left pSFG) showed various response patterns. As show in  figure 8A  (top row) the  left PMv  BOLD signal was modulated by age in both Perception and Production. There was a direct effect of contralateral volume on BOLD signal magnitude during Perception and a partial indirect effect of Age on Perception through contralateral volume. As show in  figure 8A  (bottom row) the  right PMv  BOLD signal was modulated by age only in Production. There was no direct or indirect effect of structure on BOLD. In the  right SMA-proper  (see  Fig. 9A , top row), BOLD signal was modulated by age only in Production. There was a direct effect of contralateral thickness on BOLD signal magnitude during Perception and an indirect effect (complete mediation) of Age on Perception through contralateral SMA thickness. As show in  figure 9A  (bottom row) the  left pSFG  BOLD signal was modulated by age only in Perception, consistent with whole-brain results. In contrast to all other ROIs, pSFG showed stronger activation in older compared to younger adults; this effect was not influenced, directly or indirectly, by regional structural differences. There was, however, a direct effect of bilateral thickness on BOLD signal magnitude during Production. 
 An additional set of mediation analyses was conducted to determine whether examining the effect of regional structural changes onto BOLD signal provides information different from using global structural measures. The result are presented in  Figures 7B ,  8B  and  9B . As can be seen in the figures, the results of this analysis are quite different from those obtained using regional measures. Most of the relations (direct and indirect) between brain structure and BOLD signal were mediated exclusively through either regional or global structural measurements. Only in the left TTS we found that the relation of right hemisphere volume to BOLD was significant using both right TTS volume and total right hemisphere volume. In terms of the ability of each method to detect relationships, we found significant direct structure/BOLD relationships ( b  paths) in 6 ROIs using regional values and in 4 using global measures. For indirect (mediated) structure/BOLD relationships ( ab  paths), they were found in 3 ROIs using regional values and in 4 using global measures. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The unprecedented aging of the population worldwide has triggered a renewed interest in understanding how the brain ages, both functionally and structurally. Modern brain imaging techniques such as functional MRI and PET offer powerful and non-invasive tools to study,  in vivo , the structure and function of the human brain throughout the lifespan. At the functional level, imaging studies have consistently documented age-related alterations, though the pattern of observed change has varied from one study to the other, with some studies showing a decline in functional activation with aging, and others demonstrating co-occurring increases and decreases in functional activation with aging. One difficulty in interpreting these apparently divergent findings derives from the fact that most studies have either focused on changes in the BOLD signal, or changes in brain structure, but not both concurrently. Only a small number of studies have examined the relationship between structural and functional changes in aging (see for example  Nyberg et al., 2002 ;  Sheppard et al., 2011 ). Here we explore this issue in the context of speech perception and production. The four most important findings of this study are (1) age-related, gender-independent changes are regional, largely task-dependent, and essentially consisting of lower activation in older compared to younger adults; (2) neural compensation, defined as increased brain activation serving to counteract age-related neural decline, was generally not evident, with the exception of the left pSFG; (3) global decreases in cortical thickness and gray matter volume were present with important regional differences; (4) the relation between brain structure and function is heterogeneous and complex. In some regions there is a significant relationship between structure and function, while in others functional changes are independent of regional ipsi- and contralateral structural changes. These findings are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
 
 
 Aging and the BOLD signal 
 We tackle first the general aging effects on the BOLD signal. The comparison of BOLD responses in individuals of different ages relies on the assumption of comparable cerebrovascular coupling and cerebral blood flow (CBF) since the BOLD signal depends on the integrity of neurovascular coupling and is believed to depend on CBF. Changes in the cerebrovascular system frequently occur in older ages (e.g. reduced vascular reactivity, arteriosclerosis), which are likely to affect (reduce) the BOLD signal ( D’Esposito et al., 2003 ). One way to circumvent this problem is to focus on age by condition interactions in the BOLD signal rather than absolute age differences in BOLD signal across age groups. In the same way that a receding tide lowers all boats, reduced BOLD signal will occur across conditions within age. Focusing on the interaction—the difference of the condition differences across age—is a strategy that helps alleviate main effects of aging such as vascular changes ( D’Esposito et al., 2009 ). In the present study, we focused on Age by Task (Perception, Production) interactions; that is, we identified brain regions in which the BOLD signal varied as a function of both Task and Age group. 
 
 
 Functional changes in the speech network: nature, context-relevance and scope 
 In the present study, we examined age-independent and age-dependent activation in the cortical system involved during simple audiovisual speech perception and production tasks in healthy adults. Our results demonstrate a large bilateral network of cortical areas not affected by age, which included primary motor and premotor areas of the frontal lobe, most of the supratemporal cortex, the fusiform gyrus and parts of the occipital lobe. In addition, our results demonstrate lower activation magnitude in frontal, temporal and occipital cortices during audiovisual perception and production of single bisyllabic words for older compared to younger adults. The only exception to this pattern was found in the left pSFG, which showed stronger activation for older compared to younger adults during Perception. Most regions showing age-related effects in BOLD signal magnitude in the present study - which included the TTS, PT, mSTS, PMv, SMA-proper and pSFG - are known to be part of the cortical speech network, which suggests that age-related changes in speech skills have a cortical correlate. For example, the right PT exhibited a decrease in functional activation in both perception and production, suggesting a role in both processes. Consistent with this observation, several studies have shown that PT is involved in both speech perception and overt speech production ( Tremblay et al., 2011 ;  Tremblay & Small, 2011c ). It is also active during silent speech production, which does not involve self-generated auditory feedback, suggesting that its role in speech production goes beyond the processing of self-generated feedback (e.g.  Hickok et al., 2003 ;  Huang et al., 2002 ;  Okada et al., 2003 ;  Pa & Hickok, 2008 ;  Wise et al., 2001 ). Our results demonstrate that the biological function of this core speech area is vulnerable to normal aging. The bilateral PMv, which is known to be involved in both perceptual and motor aspects of speech, was among the only areas showing a Task by Age interaction, revealing stronger functional decline in speech production than perception, consistent with prior evidence for a role in both perception and production, with greater involvement in production ( Tremblay & Small, 2011a ,  2011c ). A similar pattern was found in the SMA-proper, consistent with its the role in motor preparation for speech production ( Alario et al., 2006 ;  Bohland & Guenther, 2006 ;  Tremblay & Gracco, 2006 ,  2009 ,  2010 ;  Tremblay & Small, 2011b ). In both left PMv and right SMA-proper, the age to BOLD relationship was not directly or indirectly mediated by regional structural changes. Interestingly, in the left PMv, age-related BOLD signal change in Production was mediated, not by regional but by global brain shrinkage. It has recently been suggested that BOLD signal in PMv during speech perception is dependent upon working memory skills—i.e., the ability to maintain and manipulate information, skills that are necessary to perceive speech and understand language ( Szenkovits et al., 2012 ). Given the well-documented decline in working memory skills with age (for a review, see for example  Bopp & Verhaeghen, 2005 ), it is possible that our finding of lower activation in PMv in older adults compared to younger adults is subsequent to decrease in functional efficiency in working memory network. However, since we did not collect a measure of working memory, future studies looking at the relation between cognitive and speech decline will be necessary to uncover the nature of the senescence mechanisms occurring in the cortical network supporting speech processes. Understanding the aetiology of changes in this system (cognitive, motor, sensory, etc) may provide avenues of behavioural treatments for age-related speech difficulties. 
 Another area vulnerable to aging was a region of mSTS, a region that has been described as a core phonological processing area ( Hickok, 2009 ;  Hickok & Poeppel, 2007 ) for speech perception and production. In the present study, the mSTS bilaterally was jointly active for speech perception and production; its activation magnitude was lower for older compared to younger adults in both tasks in the right hemisphere but not in the left. Though we did not specifically evaluate phonological skills, core phonological processing skills were necessary to succeed in the production task, which requires transformation of an auditory or audiovisual code into a code that the motor system can understand. This suggests that despite neural decline in this area, participants were still capable of sustaining basic speech repetition mechanisms. 
 The left posterior SFG, corresponding to the rostral sector of the dorsal PM (area F2 in monkey) showed a unique response pattern. In contrast to all other age-sensitive ROIs who exhibited lower BOLD signal in older compared to younger adults, the pSFG showed higher activation for older compared to younger adults during speech perception but not speech production. This region is often found during speech and non-speech orofacial movement execution ( Grabski et al., 2012 ;  Tatsumi et al., 1999 ;  Tremblay & Small, 2011b ) as well as execution of hand and arm movements ( Colebatch et al., 1991 ). In monkeys, parietal-premotor loops involving area F2 appear to be involved in planning and controlling movements on the basis of sensory information ( Rizzolatti et al., 1998 ); F2 is a source of corticospinal projections and is connected with the primary motor area. Parietal afferents are very rich ( Luppino & Rizzolatti, 2000 ). It is possible that this region is involved in the planning and execution of speech movements, which too rely on sensory information, including somatosensory and auditory feedback. The fact that it is more strongly active in older compared to younger adults during perception but not production suggests that it may be providing additional sensorimotor information that could be used to constrain speech sound identification. The Motor Theory of Speech Perception ( Liberman et al., 1967 ;  Liberman & Mattingly, 1985 ) contends that speech perception and production are intimately linked, and that each speech sound is associated with a specific combination of motor commands, such as “tongue retraction” and “jaw opening”. According to this view, the ability to categorize the speech sounds forming the incoming speech stream is accomplished by tracking the intended articulatory patterns, and thus, the intended articulatory patterns represent the ultimate objects of speech perception. Given the well-known decline in speech perception skills that occurs with age, the finding of increased premotor activation during speech perception is consistent with the Perception-for-Action-Control Theory (PACT) ( Schwartz et al., 2010 ), which posits that speech production mechanisms have two functions in speech perception: (1) co-structure auditory categories with learned motor routines, which leads to the integration of articulatory information into perceptual categories, and, (2) mediate speech perception through a predictive mechanism, which comes into play when there is perceptual ambiguity, to recover the missing information. Loss of sensitivity to speech acoustical features, as it occurs in older ages, may represent one such situation. 
 
 
 Lower efficiency of the speech system in aging or age-related expertise? 
 Lower BOLD signal in aging, given appropriate experimental design and analysis (‘see section on aging and the BOLD signal’), can be interpreted in at east two ways. One hypothesis is that lower BOLD reflects a reduced level of neural functioning, especially if it is accompanied with poorer behavioural performance. Such a pattern may or may not be associated with age-related reduction in brain tissue. An alternative possibility is that lower BOLD signal magnitude, especially if accompanied with similar or better behavioural performance, reflects expertise (increased neural efficiency), rather than reduced neural functioning. Prior work has shown that expertise is associated with regional decrease in brain activation in young adults during object recognition ( Wiesmann & Ishai, 2011 ) and auditory perception ( Berkowitz & Ansari, 2010 ;  Petrini et al., 2011 ), though there is also evidence of increased activation associated with action observation in expert dancers ( Berkowitz & Ansari, 2010 ). Expertise, however, has never been associated with brain tissue reduction. In contrast, it has been associated with increased thickness in STS in athletes ( Wei et al., 2011 ), and with increased gray matter volume in the prefrontal cortex in car experts ( Gilaie-Dotan et al., 2012 ). While some forms of expertise do not correlate with increase in cortical volume and/or thickness, such as medical expertise ( Woollett et al., 2008 ), we have not found evidence for an association between lower volume or thickness and expertise. 
 In the present study, lower BOLD signal magnitude in regions involved in perceiving or producing speech was found in several cortical areas (PMv, SMA-proper, TTS, PT, mSTS, aOTS and OPole), reflecting both lower functioning (PMv, SMA-proper, TTS, PT, mSTS) and expertise (OPole, aOTS). For the PMv, SMA-proper, TTS, PT, mSTS, the patterns of results suggest lower functioning level because the age difference in BOLD signal was mediated by regional changes in cortical thickness or volume, with lower thickness and/or volume associated with lower BOLD signal. This pattern is more consistent with the hypothesis of decreased neural functioning, despite the absence of a difference in behavioural performance between groups; it is possible that, while decreased, neural functioning level was still sufficient to maintain performance especially during such a low difficulty speech repetition task. 
 In the occipital ROIs (OPole and aOTS), we suggest that expertise rather than lower functional efficiency accounts for the lower BOLD signal. Indeed, the occipital ROIs exhibited lower BOLD signal magnitude in older adults during speech perception (which involved hearing and seeing a person producing words) uncorrelated with regional morphometric differences. Recall that our right aOTS ROI encompassed both the occipito-temporal sulcus and the fusiform gyrus. This areas has been shown to be involved in human movement perception as well as face perception ( Grill-Spector et al., 2004 ;  Kanwisher et al., 1997 ;  Rossion et al., 2012 ;  Yovel & Kanwisher, 2004 ) and facial motion ( Puce et al., 2003 ). The finding of lower BOLD signal in older adults in areas involved in vision and face perception is interesting because empirical evidence shows that visual speech information enhances speech perception ( Binnie et al., 1974 ;  MacLeod & Summerfield, 1987 ;  Summerfield, 1979 ) particularly for older adults ( Winneke & Phillips, 2011 ). Rehabilitation strategies designed to compensate for an impoverished auditory signal often encourage lip-reading ( Alpiner, 1986 ). If older adults rely more heavily on visual information, one might expect to see increased BOLD signal in visual areas, but we found no visual area showing such pattern. Unlike the other ROIs, the BOLD signal in the occipital ROIs showed no relationship to regional structural measures, which may indicate that despite increased reliance on visual information, expertise rather than lower functional efficiency accounts for the lower BOLD signal found in these areas. Lower thickness or lower volume associated with lower BOLD signal, as discussed above, suggests decreased functional efficiency rather than expertise, because expertise has been associated with increased morphometric indices rather than decreases. In sum, our data reveal patterns of BOLD/structure relationship suggesting of both lower functioning (temporal and frontal ROIs with the exception of the pSFG) and expertise (occipital areas) in healthy older adults. 
 
 
 Regional structural senescence in the speech network vs. global brain senescence 
 In addition to expected global trends, our data indicate regional differences in the relationship between age and structure, consistent with the hypothesis that age-related structural changes are not uniform across the whole brain, with some regions showing heightened vulnerability ( Cabeza, 2001 ). Global age-related brain senescence is a well-established phenomenon. Multiple autopsy studies have revealed global age-related decreases in brain volume and weight ( Dekaban, 1978 ;  Ho et al., 1980 ;  Skullerud, 1985 ). Consistent with these findings, more recent MRI and CT experiments have shown age-related linear decline in several morphometric measures such as global gray matter volume ( Allen et al., 2005 ;  Carmichael et al., 2007 ;  Giorgio et al., 2010 ;  Raz et al., 1998 ;  Takeda & Matsuzawa, 1984 ;  Takeda et al., 1984 ;  Yamaura et al., 1980 ). Based on the literature, we thus expected to find global senescence in both cortical thickness and gray matter volume, which we found, while controlling for gender. 
 Compared to the frontal ROIs, the temporal and occipital ROIs showed little sensitivity to aging. In a recent longitudinal MRI study of 38 healthy elderly participants (average of 66 years) many regions, including the right inferior frontal gyrus and bilateral postcentral gyrus showed a structural decline, while other regions, including the precentral gyrus and the auditory cortex, showed no structural decline, consistent with our findings ( Nyberg et al., 2010 ). In another longitudinal study in a large group (N = 142) of healthy adults with mean age of 75.6 years ( Fjell et al., 2009 ), regional differences in the rate of atrophy were examined at one and two-years intervals. While most regions showed structural decline, some regions were well preserved such as the precentral and postcentral regions. Hence, our results, in keeping with previous findings, demonstrate different patterns of cortical vulnerability, with some regions, such as the supratemporal cortex, beginning to decay only later in life. 
 Another important finding of the present study is that different morphometric measures reveal distinct patterns of structural vulnerability to aging. Our results show that only 6 unilateral ROIs (representing fewer than 40% of all ROIs examined) showed significant reduction in both gray matter volume and cortical thickness. All other ROIs were vulnerable to aging as measured in only one of these measures. These results emphasize the importance of looking at multiple measures of brain morphology in aging as they have various sensitivity profiles, each of which potentially providing complementary information on the course of brain structural decline, and perhaps, aging, more generally. 
 
 
 Structural to functional decline 
 A central objective of this study was to examine the relationship between age, BOLD signal, and anatomy in other to further current understanding of brain senescence mechanisms. Despite the repeated observation that the degree of brain atrophy is generally a poor predictor of behaviour, whether normal or impaired ( Katzman et al., 1988 ), only a handful of studies ( Nyberg et al., 2002 ;  Tremblay et al., Submitted ) have examined aging of both brain structure and brain function, which may be a more sensitive and more representative measure of brain senescence, and perhaps also a better predictor of speech performance, than any measure (functional, anatomical) taken individually. As was discussed in the previous sections, we found significant functional and structural regional differences in multiple sensory and motor areas involved in producing and perceiving speech in healthy older adults. In addition to these changes, our results also revealed direct or indirect relationship between structure and BOLD in all but one age-sensitive functionally-defined ROI (aOTS). As described in the methods section, these regions were identified based on the group results. When we examined their homologues in the other hemisphere, we noted that all homologues expect for the Opole showed a significant age difference in either thickness or volume; yet none exhibited age-related BOLD signal magnitude difference, indicating that, at this age, structural and functional changes are not necessarily connected, but that functional changes, when present, appear to co-occur with regional structural changes. 
 
 
 Brain/behaviour relationship and the brain reserve hypothesis 
 In the present study, speech performance (repetition of audiovisual words in noise) was similar across groups, which suggests that the neural system supporting speech production is capable of coping with a certain amount of functional and structural brain changes. The only other study that examined speech production in aging using fMRI found both decreased and increased functional activations (in PMv, SMA-proper and prefrontal cortex) in older adults ( Soros et al., 2011 ). Though these increased activations were interpreted as neural compensation, since no behavioural measure of speech production was reported, it is difficult to determine whether these hyperactivations really reflected compensatory mechanisms associated with better functional outcome, or instead neural dedifferentiation ( Heuninckx et al., 2008 ), that is, failure to recruit specialized neural mechanism, a phenomenon that isn’t associated with better functional outcome. Resistance to cortical loss may indeed be the product of neural compensation/reorganization strategies ( D’Esposito et al., 2009 ;  Grady, 2009 ;  Steffener & Stern, 2012 ), which involve the use of additional brain mechanisms or alternative brain networks to counteract age-related structural decline and maintain successful performance ( Heuninckx et al., 2008 ;  Stern, 2003 ). One possible explanation for these apparently divergent results is that, because participants were on average 10 years older in the study by Soros et al. compared to the present one, it is possible that they had already begun using compensatory strategies to counteract protracted structural decline that could no longer be sustained by the CNS. In contrast, our participants were, on average, 62 years old; hence they were only just entering older adulthood and their CNS may still have been capable of coping with early effect of brain senescence. While further studies are necessary to explore factors that may trigger behavioural decline (e.g. age, global health factors, expertise), our results are generally consistent with the hypothesis of a ‘brain reserve capacity’ ( Satz, 1993 ;  Steffener & Stern, 2012 ;  Stern, 2002 ,  2003 ). This hypothesis stems from the repeated observation that degree of brain atrophy is generally a poor predictor of behaviour, whether normal or impaired ( Katzman et al., 1988 ). Indeed, functional brain systems appear to be able to sustain different levels of normal age-related brain atrophy. In the present study, we found only limited evidence of compensatory processes, and no behavioural disadvantage for older compared to younger adults, consistent with the notion of brain reserve. 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 The present results provide novel and exciting findings about normative neurobiological aging processes occurring in the cortical network involved in verbal communication. Our results show regional variations in brain structure, task-specific decrease and increase in the magnitude of functional activation in the cortical network that supports speech functions, and a complex relationship between structural and functional mechanisms. Further studies are needed to identify the factors, such as global health, life style, environment and genetics, age-related cognitive and motor decline that contribute to the aetiology of age-related cortical and behavioural changes affecting the speech system; this knowledge is critical to understand normative brain aging mechanisms and inter-individual differences in the course and course and quality of aging. Knowledge about the functional and neurobiological factors contributing to the aetiology of speech difficulties in older ages is necessary to lay the foundation for the development of new interventions to prevent, slow down or reverse age-related speech difficulties. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 Supplementary Figure S1 
 Panel A.  Illustration of the process of measuring cortical thickness. Panel B. The conceptual model that was used for the multiple mediation analyses. In this model, the dependent (y) variables were the signal magnitude in Perception and in Production (each tested separately) for each ROIs, while the independent (x) variable was the categorical variable Age (young, older). Four mediator and three covariates (PTA, sex and education) were also included in the model. The mediators were the ROI left and right average gray matter volume and surface based cortical thickness. 
 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 
 
 03 
 
 S3 
 Result of the multiple mediation analysis for the occipital ROIs. A. Mediations analyses with regional morphometric measurements as mediator variables. B. Mediations analyses with global (whole hemisphere) morphometric measurements as mediator variables. Significant paths are coloured (see legend on the figure). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We thank Blythe Buchholz, Margaret Flynn, and Michael Andric for their help collecting the data, and Matthew Schiel for his help in pre-processing the fMRI data. Thanks also to all participants. This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health under NIDCD grants R33 DC008638 and R01 DC003378 to S.L. Small, and by a postdoctoral fellowship from the CIHR to P. Tremblay. Their support is gratefully acknowledged. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alario 
 FX 
 
 
 Chainay 
 H 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 2006 
 The role of the supplementary motor area (SMA) in word production 
 Brain Res 
 1076 
 1 
 129 
 143 
 16480694 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 JS 
 
 
 Bruss 
 J 
 
 
 Brown 
 CK 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 Normal neuroanatomical variation due to age: the major lobes and a parcellation of the temporal region 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 26 
 9 
 1245 
 1260 
 discussion 1279–1282 
 16046030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alpiner 
 JG 
 
 
 1986 
 Rehabilitation concepts with the cochlear implant 
 Otolaryngol Clin North Am 
 19 
 2 
 259 
 265 
 3754949 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Argall 
 BD 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 2006 
 Simplified intersubject averaging on the cortical surface using SUMA 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 27 
 1 
 14 
 27 
 16035046 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baker 
 KK 
 
 
 Ramig 
 LO 
 
 
 Sapir 
 S 
 
 
 Luschei 
 ES 
 
 
 Smith 
 ME 
 
 
 2001 
 Control of vocal loudness in young and old adults 
 J Speech Lang Hear Res 
 44 
 2 
 297 
 305 
 11324652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baron 
 RM 
 
 
 Kenny 
 DA 
 
 
 1986 
 The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 51 
 6 
 1173 
 1182 
 3806354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berkowitz 
 AL 
 
 
 Ansari 
 D 
 
 
 2010 
 Expertise-related deactivation of the right temporoparietal junction during musical improvisation 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 1 
 712 
 719 
 19715764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binnie 
 CA 
 
 
 Montgomery 
 AA 
 
 
 Jackson 
 PL 
 
 
 1974 
 Auditory and visual contributions to the perception of consonants 
 Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 
 17 
 619 
 630 
 4444283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bohland 
 JW 
 
 
 Guenther 
 FH 
 
 
 2006 
 An fMRI investigation of syllable sequence production 
 Neuroimage 
 32 
 2 
 821 
 841 
 16730195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bopp 
 KL 
 
 
 Verhaeghen 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Aging and verbal memory span: a meta-analysis 
 J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 
 60 
 5 
 P223 
 233 
 16131616 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burnett 
 TA 
 
 
 Freedland 
 MB 
 
 
 Larson 
 CR 
 
 
 Hain 
 TC 
 
 
 1998 
 Voice F0 responses to manipulations in pitch feedback 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 103 
 6 
 3153 
 3161 
 9637026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2001 
 Cognitive neuroscience of aging: contributions of functional neuroimaging 
 Scand J Psychol 
 42 
 3 
 277 
 286 
 11501741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Anderson 
 ND 
 
 
 Locantore 
 JK 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 2002 
 Aging gracefully: compensatory brain activity in high-performing older adults 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 3 
 1394 
 1402 
 12414279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Callan 
 AM 
 
 
 Callan 
 DE 
 
 
 Tajima 
 K 
 
 
 Akahane-Yamada 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural processes involved with perception of non-native durational contrasts 
 Neuroreport 
 17 
 12 
 1353 
 1357 
 16951584 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Callan 
 D 
 
 
 Callan 
 A 
 
 
 Gamez 
 M 
 
 
 Sato 
 MA 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Premotor cortex mediates perceptual performance 
 Neuroimage 
 51 
 2 
 844 
 858 
 20184959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Callan 
 DE 
 
 
 Tsytsarev 
 V 
 
 
 Hanakawa 
 T 
 
 
 Callan 
 AM 
 
 
 Katsuhara 
 M 
 
 
 Fukuyama 
 H 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Song and speech: brain regions involved with perception and covert production 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 3 
 1327 
 1342 
 16546406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carmichael 
 OT 
 
 
 Kuller 
 LH 
 
 
 Lopez 
 OL 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Dutton 
 RA 
 
 
 Lu 
 A 
 
 
 Becker 
 JT 
 
 
 2007 
 Ventricular volume and dementia progression in the Cardiovascular Health Study 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 28 
 3 
 389 
 397 
 16504345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colebatch 
 JG 
 
 
 Deiber 
 MP 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 1991 
 Regional cerebral blood flow during voluntary arm and hand movements in human subjects 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 65 
 6 
 1392 
 1401 
 1875248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 Jr 
 
 
 Gates 
 GA 
 
 
 1991 
 Hearing in the elderly--the Framingham cohort, 1983–1985: Part II. Prevalence of central auditory processing disorders 
 Ear Hear 
 12 
 5 
 304 
 311 
 1783233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for Analysis and Visualization of Functional Magnetic Resonance Neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 3 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Ausilio 
 A 
 
 
 Pulvermüller 
 F 
 
 
 Salmas 
 P 
 
 
 Bufalari 
 I 
 
 
 Begliomini 
 C 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 The motor somatotopy of speech perception 
 Current Biology 
 19 
 381 
 385 
 19217297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Deouell 
 LY 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 Alterations in the BOLD fMRI signal with ageing and disease: a challenge for neuroimaging 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 4 
 11 
 863 
 872 
 14595398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 2009 
 Methodological and Conceptual Issues in the Study of the Aging Brain 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Imaging the aging brain 
 11 
 25 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical surface-based Analysis: I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 2 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Decoster 
 W 
 
 
 Debruyne 
 F 
 
 
 1997 
 The ageing voice: changes in fundamental frequency, waveform stability and spectrum 
 Acta Otorhinolaryngol Belg 
 51 
 2 
 105 
 112 
 9241377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dekaban 
 AS 
 
 
 1978 
 Changes in brain weights during the span of human life: relation of brain weights to body heights and body weights 
 Ann Neurol 
 4 
 4 
 345 
 356 
 727739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 Waldron 
 E 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 2005 
 Volumetric vs. surface-based alignment for localization of auditory cortex activation 
 NeuroImage 
 26 
 4 
 1019 
 1029 
 15893476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Solodkin 
 A 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural development of networks for audiovisual speech comprehension 
 Brain Lang 
 114 
 2 
 101 
 114 
 19781755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickstein 
 DL 
 
 
 Miorrison 
 JH 
 
 
 Hof 
 PR 
 
 
 2009 
 The neuropathology of aging 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Imaging the aging brain 
 27 
 40 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drachman 
 DA 
 
 
 2006 
 Aging of the brain, entropy, and Alzheimer disease 
 Neurology 
 67 
 8 
 1340 
 1352 
 17060558 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duchin 
 SW 
 
 
 Mysak 
 ED 
 
 
 1987 
 Disfluency and rate characteristics of young adult, middle-aged, and older males 
 J Commun Disord 
 20 
 3 
 245 
 257 
 3597824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2000 
 Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance images 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 97 
 20 
 11050 
 11055 
 10984517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical surface-based analysis: II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 2 
 195 
 207 
 9931269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 Segonne 
 F 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2004 
 Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 14 
 1 
 11 
 22 
 14654453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fjell 
 AM 
 
 
 Walhovd 
 KB 
 
 
 Fennema-Notestine 
 C 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 LK 
 
 
 Hagler 
 DJ 
 
 
 Holland 
 D 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2009 
 One-year brain atrophy evident in healthy aging 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 48 
 15223 
 15231 
 19955375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 MF 
 
 
 Folstein 
 SE 
 
 
 McHugh 
 PR 
 
 
 1975 
 “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician 
 J Psychiatr Res 
 12 
 3 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2005 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 102 
 27 
 9673 
 9678 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fozo 
 MS 
 
 
 Watson 
 BC 
 
 
 1998 
 Task complexity effect on vocal reaction time in aged speakers 
 J Voice 
 12 
 4 
 404 
 414 
 9988027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisina 
 DR 
 
 
 Frisina 
 RD 
 
 
 1997 
 Speech recognition in noise and presbycusis: relations to possible neural mechanisms 
 Hear Res 
 106 
 1–2 
 95 
 104 
 9112109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates 
 GA 
 
 
 Mills 
 JH 
 
 
 2005 
 Presbycusis 
 Lancet 
 366 
 9491 
 1111 
 1120 
 16182900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 AH 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 BOLD Functional MRI and Cognitive Aging 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Park 
 D 
 
 
 Cognitive Neuroscience of Aging: Linking Cognitive and Cerebral Aging 
 107 
 131 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilaie-Dotan 
 S 
 
 
 Harel 
 A 
 
 
 Bentin 
 S 
 
 
 Kanai 
 R 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 2012 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of visual car expertise 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 1 
 147 
 153 
 22587898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giorgio 
 A 
 
 
 Santelli 
 L 
 
 
 Tomassini 
 V 
 
 
 Bosnell 
 R 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 2010 
 Age-related changes in grey and white matter structure throughout adulthood 
 Neuroimage 
 51 
 3 
 943 
 951 
 20211265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gould 
 J 
 
 
 Lane 
 H 
 
 
 Vick 
 J 
 
 
 Perkell 
 JS 
 
 
 Matthies 
 ML 
 
 
 Zandipour 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Changes in speech intelligibility of postlingually deaf adults after cochlear implantation 
 Ear Hear 
 22 
 6 
 453 
 460 
 11770668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grabski 
 K 
 
 
 Lamalle 
 L 
 
 
 Vilain 
 C 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 JL 
 
 
 Vallee 
 N 
 
 
 Tropres 
 I 
 
 
 Sato 
 M 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional MRI assessment of orofacial articulators: neural correlates of lip, jaw, larynx, and tongue movements 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 33 
 10 
 2306 
 2321 
 21826760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2009 
 Compensatory Reorganization of Brain Networks in Older Adults 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Imaging the aging brain 
 105 
 113 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Knouf 
 N 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 The fusiform face area subserves face perception, not generic within-category identification 
 Nat Neurosci 
 7 
 5 
 555 
 562 
 15077112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Han 
 X 
 
 
 Jovicich 
 J 
 
 
 Salat 
 D 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Quinn 
 B 
 
 
 Czanner 
 S 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Reliability of MRI-derived measurements of human cerebral cortical thickness: the effects of field strength, scanner upgrade and manufacturer 
 Neuroimage 
 32 
 1 
 180 
 194 
 16651008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harkrider 
 AW 
 
 
 Plyler 
 PN 
 
 
 Hedrick 
 MS 
 
 
 2005 
 Effects of age and spectral shaping on perception and neural representation of stop consonant stimuli 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 116 
 9 
 2153 
 2164 
 16043402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hartman 
 DE 
 
 
 Danahuer 
 JL 
 
 
 1976 
 Perceptual features of speech for males in four perceived age decades 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 59 
 3 
 713 
 715 
 1254800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heuninckx 
 S 
 
 
 Wenderoth 
 N 
 
 
 Swinnen 
 SP 
 
 
 2008 
 Systems neuroplasticity in the aging brain: recruiting additional neural resources for successful motor performance in elderly persons 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 1 
 91 
 99 
 18171926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 2009 
 The functional neuroanatomy of language 
 Phys Life Rev 
 6 
 3 
 121 
 143 
 20161054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 B 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Muftuler 
 T 
 
 
 2003 
 Auditory-motor interaction revealed by fMRI: speech, music, and working memory in area Spt 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 15 
 5 
 673 
 682 
 12965041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 The cortical organization of speech processing 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 5 
 393 
 402 
 17431404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ho 
 KC 
 
 
 Roessmann 
 U 
 
 
 Straumfjord 
 JV 
 
 
 Monroe 
 G 
 
 
 1980 
 Analysis of brain weight. I. Adult brain weight in relation to sex, race, and age 
 Arch Pathol Lab Med 
 104 
 12 
 635 
 639 
 6893659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Houde 
 JF 
 
 
 Jordan 
 MI 
 
 
 1998 
 Sensorimotor adaptation in speech production 
 Science 
 279 
 5354 
 1213 
 1216 
 9469813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huang 
 J 
 
 
 Carr 
 TH 
 
 
 Cao 
 Y 
 
 
 2002 
 Comparing cortical activations for silent and overt speech using event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 15 
 1 
 39 
 53 
 11747099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnstone 
 T 
 
 
 Ores Walsh 
 KS 
 
 
 Greischar 
 LL 
 
 
 Alexander 
 AL 
 
 
 Fox 
 AS 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Oakes 
 TR 
 
 
 2006 
 Motion correction and the use of motion covariates in multiple-subject fMRI analysis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 27 
 779 
 788 
 16456818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 JA 
 
 
 Munhall 
 KG 
 
 
 2000 
 Perceptual calibration of F0 production: evidence from feedback perturbation 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 108 
 3 Pt 1 
 1246 
 1251 
 11008824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 McDermott 
 J 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 1997 
 The fusiform face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception 
 J Neurosci 
 17 
 11 
 4302 
 4311 
 9151747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katzman 
 R 
 
 
 Terry 
 R 
 
 
 DeTeresa 
 R 
 
 
 Brown 
 T 
 
 
 Davies 
 P 
 
 
 Fuld 
 P 
 
 
 Peck 
 A 
 
 
 1988 
 Clinical, pathological, and neurochemical changes in dementia: a subgroup with preserved mental status and numerous neocortical plaques 
 Ann Neurol 
 23 
 2 
 138 
 144 
 2897823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Law 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Participation in the occupations of everyday life 
 Am J Occup Ther 
 56 
 6 
 640 
 649 
 12458856 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liberman 
 AM 
 
 
 Cooper 
 FS 
 
 
 Shankweiler 
 DP 
 
 
 Studdert-Kennedy 
 M 
 
 
 1967 
 Perception of the speech code 
 Psychol Rev 
 74 
 6 
 431 
 461 
 4170865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liberman 
 AM 
 
 
 Mattingly 
 IG 
 
 
 1985 
 The motor theory of speech perception revised 
 Cognition 
 21 
 1 
 1 
 36 
 4075760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linville 
 SE 
 
 
 1996 
 The sound of senescence 
 J Voice 
 10 
 2 
 190 
 200 
 8734394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luppino 
 G 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 2000 
 The Organization of the Frontal Motor Cortex 
 News and Views 
 15 
 219 
 224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacKinnon 
 DP 
 
 
 Fairchild 
 AJ 
 
 
 Fritz 
 MS 
 
 
 2007 
 Mediation analysis 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 58 
 593 
 614 
 16968208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 A 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 Q 
 
 
 1987 
 Quantifying the contribution of vision to speech perception in noise 
 British Journal of Audiology 
 21 
 131 
 141 
 3594015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matthies 
 ML 
 
 
 Svirsky 
 MA 
 
 
 Lane 
 HL 
 
 
 Perkell 
 JS 
 
 
 1994 
 A preliminary study of the effects of cochlear implants on the production of sibilants 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 96 
 3 
 1367 
 1373 
 7963001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 R 
 
 
 Brown 
 WS 
 
 
 1987 
 Age-related voice measures among adult women 
 Journal of voice 
 1 
 1 
 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mueller 
 PB 
 
 
 1997 
 The aging voice 
 Semin Speech Lang 
 18 
 2 
 159 
 168 
 quiz 168–159 
 9195688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nasir 
 SM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Speech motor learning in profoundly deaf adults 
 Nat Neurosci 
 11 
 10 
 1217 
 1222 
 18794839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 2005 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 3 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 M 
 
 
 Soli 
 SD 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 JA 
 
 
 1994 
 Development of the Hearing in Noise Test for the measurement of speech reception thresholds in quiet and in noise 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 95 
 2 
 1085 
 1099 
 8132902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Forkstam 
 C 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain imaging of human memory systems: between-systems similarities and within-system differences 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 13 
 2 
 281 
 292 
 11958972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Salami 
 A 
 
 
 Andersson 
 M 
 
 
 Eriksson 
 J 
 
 
 Kalpouzos 
 G 
 
 
 Kauppi 
 K 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 2010 
 Longitudinal evidence for diminished frontal cortex function in aging 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 107 
 52 
 22682 
 22686 
 21156826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Okada 
 K 
 
 
 Smith 
 KR 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 2003 
 Word length modulates neural activity in auditory cortex during covert object naming 
 Neuroreport 
 14 
 18 
 2323 
 2326 
 14663184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 1971 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 9 
 1 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pa 
 J 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 A parietal-temporal sensory-motor integration area for the human vocal tract: evidence from an fMRI study of skilled musicians 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 1 
 362 
 368 
 17709121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Troiani 
 V 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Wingfield 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Hearing loss in older adults affects neural systems supporting speech comprehension 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 35 
 12638 
 12643 
 21880924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perkell 
 J 
 
 
 Lane 
 H 
 
 
 Svirsky 
 M 
 
 
 Webster 
 J 
 
 
 1992 
 Speech of cochlear implant patients: a longitudinal study of vowel production 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 91 
 5 
 2961 
 2978 
 1629489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrini 
 K 
 
 
 Pollick 
 FE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 S 
 
 
 McAleer 
 P 
 
 
 McKay 
 LS 
 
 
 Rocchesso 
 D 
 
 
 Puce 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Action expertise reduces brain activity for audiovisual matching actions: an fMRI study with expert drummers 
 Neuroimage 
 56 
 3 
 1480 
 1492 
 21397699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plath 
 P 
 
 
 1991 
 Speech recognition in the elderly 
 Acta Otolaryngology 
 476 
 Suppl 
 127 
 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plomp 
 R 
 
 
 Mimpen 
 AM 
 
 
 1979 
 Speech-reception threshold for sentences as a function of age and noise level 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 66 
 5 
 1333 
 1342 
 500971 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preacher 
 KJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 AF 
 
 
 2004 
 SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple mediation models 
 Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 
 36 
 4 
 717 
 731 
 15641418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preacher 
 KJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 AF 
 
 
 2008a 
 Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models 
 Behav Res Methods 
 40 
 3 
 879 
 891 
 18697684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preacher 
 KJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 AF 
 
 
 2008b 
 Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 40 
 879 
 891 
 18697684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Puce 
 A 
 
 
 Syngeniotis 
 A 
 
 
 Thompson 
 JC 
 
 
 Abbott 
 DF 
 
 
 Wheaton 
 KJ 
 
 
 Castiello 
 U 
 
 
 2003 
 The human temporal lobe integrates facial form and motion: evidence from fMRI and ERP studies 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 3 
 861 
 869 
 12880814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pulvermüller 
 F 
 
 
 Huss 
 M 
 
 
 Kherif 
 F 
 
 
 Moscoso del Prado Martin 
 F 
 
 
 Hauk 
 O 
 
 
 Shtyrov 
 Y 
 
 
 2006 
 Motor cortex maps articulatory features of speech sounds 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 103 
 20 
 7865 
 7870 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Radloff 
 LS 
 
 
 1977 
 The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the General Population 
 Applied Psychological Measurement 
 1 
 385 
 385 
 401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramig 
 LA 
 
 
 1983a 
 Effects of physiological aging on speaking and reading rates 
 J Commun Disord 
 16 
 3 
 217 
 226 
 6875037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramig 
 LA 
 
 
 1983b 
 Effects of physiological aging on vowel spectral noise 
 J Gerontol 
 38 
 2 
 223 
 225 
 6827040 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 N 
 
 
 Gunning-Dixon 
 FM 
 
 
 Head 
 D 
 
 
 Dupuis 
 JH 
 
 
 Acker 
 JD 
 
 
 1998 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of cognitive aging: evidence from structural magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuropsychology 
 12 
 1 
 95 
 114 
 9460738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 N 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 2009 
 A systems approach to the aging brain: neuroanatomic changes, thir modifiers, and cognitive correlates 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Imaging the aging brain 
 43 
 70 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ries 
 PW 
 
 
 1994 
 Prevalence and characteristics of persons with hearing trouble: United States, 1990–91 
 Vital Health Stat 
 10 
 188 
 1 
 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Luppino 
 G 
 
 
 Matelli 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 The organization of the cortical motor system: new concepts 
 Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 
 106 
 283 
 296 
 9741757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossion 
 B 
 
 
 Hanseeuw 
 B 
 
 
 Dricot 
 L 
 
 
 2012 
 Defining face perception areas in the human brain: a large-scale factorial fMRI face localizer analysis 
 Brain Cogn 
 79 
 2 
 138 
 157 
 22330606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ryan 
 WJ 
 
 
 Burk 
 KW 
 
 
 1974 
 Perceptual and acoustic correlates of aging in the speech of males 
 J Commun Disord 
 7 
 2 
 181 
 192 
 4841332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satz 
 P 
 
 
 1993 
 Brain reserve capacity on symptom onset after brain injury: A formulation and review of evidence for threshold theory 
 Neuropsychology 
 7 
 3 
 273 
 295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 J 
 
 
 Basirat 
 ALM 
 
 
 Sato 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 The Perception-for-Action-Control Theory (PACT): A perceptuo-motor theory of speech perception 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheppard 
 JP 
 
 
 Wang 
 JP 
 
 
 Wong 
 PC 
 
 
 2011 
 Large-scale cortical functional organization and speech perception across the lifespan 
 PLoS ONE 
 6 
 1 
 e16510 
 21304991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shrout 
 PE 
 
 
 Bolger 
 N 
 
 
 2002 
 Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: new procedures and recommendations 
 Psychol Methods 
 7 
 4 
 422 
 445 
 12530702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skullerud 
 K 
 
 
 1985 
 Variations in the size of the human brain. Influence of age, sex, body length, body mass index, alcoholism, Alzheimer changes, and cerebral atherosclerosis 
 Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 
 102 
 1 
 94 
 3887832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sommers 
 MS 
 
 
 Tye-Murray 
 N 
 
 
 Spehar 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Auditory-visual speech perception and auditory-visual enhancement in normal-hearing younger and older adults 
 Ear Hear 
 26 
 3 
 263 
 275 
 15937408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soros 
 P 
 
 
 Bose 
 A 
 
 
 Sokoloff 
 LG 
 
 
 Graham 
 SJ 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 2011 
 Age-related changes in the functional neuroanatomy of overt speech production 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 32 
 8 
 1505 
 1513 
 19782435 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steffener 
 J 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 2012 
 Exploring the neural basis of cognitive reserve in aging 
 Biochim Biophys Acta 
 1822 
 3 
 467 
 473 
 21982946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 2002 
 What is cognitive reserve? Theory and research application of the reserve concept 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 8 
 3 
 448 
 460 
 11939702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 2003 
 The concept of cognitive reserve: a catalyst for research 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 25 
 5 
 589 
 593 
 12815497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strouse 
 A 
 
 
 Ashmead 
 DH 
 
 
 Ohde 
 RN 
 
 
 Grantham 
 DW 
 
 
 1998 
 Temporal processing in the aging auditory system 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 104 
 4 
 2385 
 2399 
 10491702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 Q 
 
 
 1979 
 Use of visual information for phonetic perception 
 Phonetica 
 36 
 4–5 
 314 
 331 
 523520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szenkovits 
 G 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Norris 
 D 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 2012 
 Individual differences in premotor and motor recruitment during speech perception 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 7 
 1380 
 1392 
 22521874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takeda 
 S 
 
 
 Matsuzawa 
 T 
 
 
 1984 
 Brain atrophy during aging: a quantitative study using computed tomography 
 J Am Geriatr Soc 
 32 
 7 
 520 
 524 
 6736517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takeda 
 S 
 
 
 Matsuzawa 
 T 
 
 
 Ito 
 H 
 
 
 1984 
 Atrophy of gray and white matters in the brain during aging: a quantitative study with computed tomography 
 Sci Rep Res Inst Tohoku Univ Med 
 31 
 1–4 
 38 
 41 
 6528282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tatsumi 
 IF 
 
 
 Fushimi 
 T 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Yokoyama 
 E 
 
 
 Kanno 
 I 
 
 
 Senda 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 Verb generation in Japanese--A multicenter PET activation study 
 Neuroimage 
 9 
 1 
 154 
 164 
 9918737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 KL 
 
 
 Piskosz 
 M 
 
 
 Souza 
 P 
 
 
 2002 
 Aging alters the neural representation of speech cues 
 Neuroreport 
 13 
 15 
 1865 
 1870 
 12395081 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Baroni 
 M 
 
 
 Hasson 
 U 
 
 
 2012 
 Processing of speech and non-speech sounds in the supratemporal plane: Auditory input preference does not predict sensitivity to statistical structure 
 Neuroimage 
 66C 
 318 
 332 
 23116815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Deschamps 
 I 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 2011 
 Regional heterogeneity in the processing and the production of speech in the human planum temporale 
 Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 Submitted 
 Functional and structural aging of the speech sensorimotor neural system: fMRI evidence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 2006 
 Contribution of the frontal lobe to externally and internally specified verbal responses: fMRI evidence 
 Neuroimage 
 33 
 3 
 947 
 957 
 16990015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 2009 
 Contribution of the pre-SMA to the production of words and non-speech oral motor gestures, as revealed by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) 
 Brain Res 
 1268 
 112 
 124 
 19285972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Gracco 
 VL 
 
 
 2010 
 On the selection of words and oral motor responses: evidence of a response-independent fronto-parietal network 
 Cortex 
 46 
 1 
 15 
 28 
 19362298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2011a 
 From language comprehension to action understanding and back again 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 21 
 5 
 1166 
 1177 
 20940222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2011b 
 Motor response selection in overt sentence production: a functional MRI study 
 Frontiers in psychology 
 2 
 253 
 21994500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 P 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2011c 
 On the context-dependent nature of the contribution of the ventral premotor cortex to speech perception 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 4 
 1561 
 1571 
 21664275 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tremblay 
 S 
 
 
 Shiller 
 DM 
 
 
 Ostry 
 DJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Somatosensory basis of speech production 
 Nature 
 423 
 6942 
 866 
 869 
 12815431 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Walhovd 
 KB 
 
 
 Fjell 
 AM 
 
 
 Reinvang 
 I 
 
 
 Lundervold 
 A 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Eilertsen 
 DE 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Effects of age on volumes of cortex, white matter and subcortical structures 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 26 
 9 
 1261 
 1270 
 discussion 1275–1268 
 16005549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wei 
 G 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 Luo 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 Increased cortical thickness in sports experts: a comparison of diving players with the controls 
 PLoS ONE 
 6 
 2 
 e17112 
 21359177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiesmann 
 M 
 
 
 Ishai 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Expertise reduces neural cost but does not modulate repetition suppression 
 Cogn Neurosci 
 2 
 1 
 57 
 65 
 21479254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Listening to speech activates motor areas involved in speech production 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 7 
 7 
 701 
 702 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winneke 
 AH 
 
 
 Phillips 
 NA 
 
 
 2011 
 Does audiovisual speech offer a fountain of youth for old ears? An event-related brain potential study of age differences in audiovisual speech perception 
 Psychol Aging 
 26 
 2 
 427 
 438 
 21443357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJ 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 Blank 
 SC 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Warburton 
 EA 
 
 
 2001 
 Separate neural subsystems within ‘Wernicke’s area’ 
 Brain 
 124 
 Pt 1 
 83 
 95 
 11133789 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 PC 
 
 
 Ettlinger 
 M 
 
 
 Sheppard 
 JP 
 
 
 Gunasekera 
 GM 
 
 
 Dhar 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Neuroanatomical characteristics and speech perception in noise in older adults 
 Ear Hear 
 31 
 4 
 471 
 479 
 20588117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 PC 
 
 
 Jin 
 JX 
 
 
 Gunasekera 
 GM 
 
 
 Abel 
 R 
 
 
 Lee 
 ER 
 
 
 Dhar 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Aging and cortical mechanisms of speech perception in noise 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 3 
 693 
 703 
 19124032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woollett 
 K 
 
 
 Glensman 
 J 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2008 
 Non-spatial expertise and hippocampal gray matter volume in humans 
 Hippocampus 
 18 
 10 
 981 
 984 
 18566963 
 
 
 
 
 Working Group on Speech Understanding and Aging and Committee on Hearing B Biomechanics 
 1988 
 Speech understanding and aging 
 J Acoust Soc Am 
 83 
 3 
 859 
 895 
 3281988 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yamaura 
 H 
 
 
 Ito 
 M 
 
 
 Kubota 
 K 
 
 
 Matsuzawa 
 T 
 
 
 1980 
 Brain atrophy during aging: a quantitative study with computed tomography 
 J Gerontol 
 35 
 4 
 492 
 498 
 7400542 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yovel 
 G 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 Face perception: domain specific, not process specific 
 Neuron 
 44 
 5 
 889 
 898 
 15572118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Pure tone thresholds (in dB) for the young (orange line) and older adults (blue line) for different frequencies, provided separately for the right ear (A) and the left ear (B). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Regions significantly active, at the group-level, corrected for multiple comparisons, A. for the conjunction of Perception Young and Perception Older (top row – in red), and B. for the conjunction of Production young and Production Older (bottom row – in red), shown on lateral, medial and ventral views of the cerebral hemispheres. Red-coloured activation represents the age-independent task-related activation, while blue-coloured activation represent age-dependent activation in speech perception and speech production. Activations are shown on the group average smoothed white matter inflated surface. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Regions significantly modulated by task (Production > Perception), at the group-level, corrected for multiple comparisons, for the conjunction of Task Young and Task Older (in red). Red-coloured activation represents the age-independent task-related activation, while blue-coloured activation represent age-dependent activation in speech perception and speech production. Activation is shown on the group average smoothed white matter inflated surface. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Bar graphs illustrating the pattern of activation in regions exhibiting a significant Age effect during Perception (left TTS, right PT, right STS, right aOTS and, right Opole and left pSFG). The error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Bar graphs illustrating the pattern of activation in regions exhibiting a significant Age effect during Production (left right PMv, Right SMA-proper, and right mSTS). The error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Bar graphs illustrating the pattern of activation in regions exhibiting a significant Task by Age interaction (bilateral PMv, left pSFG and right SMA-proper). The error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Result of the multiple mediation analysis for the temporal ROIs. A. Mediations analyses with regional morphometric measurements as mediator variables. B. Mediations analyses with global (whole hemisphere) morphometric measurements as mediator variables. Significant paths are coloured (see legend on the figure). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Result of the multiple mediation analysis for the left and right PMv. A. Mediations analyses with regional morphometric measurements as mediator variables. B. Mediations analyses with global (whole hemisphere) morphometric measurements as mediator variables. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 Result of the multiple mediation analysis for the other frontal ROIs. A. Mediations analyses with regional morphometric measurements as mediator variables. B. Mediations analyses with global (whole hemisphere) morphometric measurements as mediator variables. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Group description 
 
 
 
 
 Variable 
 Young (N = 20) 
 Older (N = 19) 
 
 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 Mean 
 SD 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 23.7 
 5.5 
 18–38 
 62.1 
 3.8 
 13–22 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 15.1 
 2.0 
 12–18 
 16.4 
 2.5 
 57–70 
 
 
 MMSE 
 29.3 
 .7 
 28–30 
 28.8 
 1.3 
 26–30 
 
 
 Depression 
 10.5 
 7.1 
 0–31 
 6.9 
 7.2 
 0–20 
 
 
 Left ear PTA 
 8.3 
 4.3 
 2–18 
 17.8 
 7.5 
 5–32 
 
 
 Right Ear PTA 
 8.1 
 6.8 
 −2–28 
 19.3 
 8.6 
 3–43 
 
 
 Better Ear PTA 
 4.7 
 4.1 
 −2–17 
 15.8 
 7.4 
 3–32 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 FWE-corrected group-level whole brain conjunctions across groups for A. Perception, and B. Production. Coordinates are in Talairach space. Regions significantly active represent age-independent task-related activation. Cluster size is calculated in number of surface vertices, and area is in mm2. 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast 
 Region 
 Hemi 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Number of nodes 
 Surface area 
 
 
 
 
 Perception Young ∩ Perception Older 
 Supratemporal plane, including the transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus, the planum temporale and the anterior half of the STG. 
 Left 
 −50 
 −22 
 2 
 4197 
 1318.85 
 
 
 Activation also extend onto the middle STS. Occipito-temporal cortex, including the fusiform gyrus, OTS, inferior and middle occipital gyri and occipital pole. 
 Left 
 −39 
 −74 
 −13 
 2505 
 833.29 
 
 
 Occipital pole 
 Left 
 −10 
 −102 
 4 
 237 
 81.46 
 
 
 Lingual gyrus 
 Left 
 −8 
 −95 
 −12 
 201 
 46.25 
 
 
 Supratemporal plane, including the transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus, the planum temporale and the entire STG. Activation also runs along most of the STS. 
 Right 
 48 
 −26 
 9 
 8652 
 2484.92 
 
 
 Occipito-temporal cortex, including the fusiform gyrus, OTS, inferior and middle occipital gyri and occipital pole. 
 Right 
 28 
 −80 
 −11 
 3804 
 1176.91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Production Young ∩ Production Older 
 Supratemporal plane, including the transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus, the planum temporale and the entire STG. Activation also extend onto the middle STS. 
 Left 
 −50 
 −27 
 5 
 6584 
 2041.05 
 
 
 Ventral primary motor area in the central sulcus, extending into the ventral precentral gyrus (PMv). 
 Left 
 −46 
 −8 
 34 
 3965 
 1302.74 
 
 
 Ventral precentral sulcus, extending into the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus. 
 Left 
 −43 
 9 
 19 
 1156 
 420.49 
 
 
 Fusiform gyrus, extending into the OTS. 
 Left 
 −35 
 −58 
 −18 
 627 
 235.76 
 
 
 SMA-proper. 
 Left 
 −6 
 0 
 61 
 418 
 122.62 
 
 
 Anterior occipital sulcus. 
 Left 
 −39 
 −67 
 5 
 163 
 52.73 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate gyrus. 
 Left 
 −11 
 −16 
 38 
 187 
 47.23 
 
 
 Supratemporal plane, including the transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus, the planum temporale and the entire STG. Activation also extend onto the posterior half of the STS. 
 Right 
 48 
 −26 
 9 
 8748 
 2497.38 
 
 
 Ventral primary motor area in the central sulcus, extending into the ventral precentral gyrus (PMv). 
 Right 
 49 
 −12 
 30 
 4640 
 1367.79 
 
 
 Calcarine sulcus, cuneus and lingual gyrus. 
 Right 
 11 
 −68 
 12 
 473 
 251.41 
 
 
 Fusiform gyrus. 
 Right 
 35 
 −55 
 −17 
 440 
 200.57 
 
 
 Dorsal central sulcus (M1d) 
 Right 
 20 
 −32 
 57 
 495 
 145.58 
 
 
 Pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus, extending onto the ventral precentral sulcus. 
 Right 
 42 
 15 
 23 
 466 
 129.8 
 
 
 Pre-SMA/SMA-proper. 
 Right 
 7 
 5 
 61 
 311 
 104.91 
 
 
 Anterior occipital sulcus. 
 Right 
 41 
 −67 
 3 
 433 
 104.2 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate gyrus. 
 Right 
 8 
 13 
 34 
 253 
 84.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 FWE-corrected age-dependent whole brain effects in A. Perception, B. Production, and C. Production > Perception. Coordinates are in Talairach space. Cluster size is calculated in number of surface nodes, cluster area is calculated in mm 2 . 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast 
 
 Region 
 
 Hemi 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 t 
 
 p 
 
 Cluster size 
 Cluster area 
 
 
 
 
 
 A. Perception 
 
 
 TTS, extending into TTG 
 
 Left 
 −49 
 −19 
 4 
 −3.340218 
 0.002 
 312 
 97.61 
 
 
 
 Dorsal precentral sulcus/superior frontal gyrus. 
 
 Left 
 −13 
 −7 
 69 
 3.239507 
 0.002 
 184 
 68.69 
 
 
 
 PT extending into TTS. 
 
 Right 
 49 
 −32 
 11 
 −4.613151 
 0.00004 
 306 
 80.13 
 
 
 
 Occipital pole. 
 
 Right 
 16 
 −99 
 −7 
 −4.180524 
 0.0002 
 169 
 80.03 
 
 
 
 Lateral occipital-temporal sulcus extending into the fusiform gyrus. 
 
 Right 
 39 
 −19 
 −22 
 −3.818996 
 0.0005 
 203 
 54.02 
 
 
 
 Middle STG. 
 
 Right 
 58 
 −24 
 2 
 −3.885855 
 0.0004 
 205 
 75.14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B. Production 
 
 
 Ventral precentral gyrus (posterior PMv). 
 
 Right 
 41 
 −10 
 38 
 −4.383471 
 0.00009 
 281 
 123.7 
 
 
 
 Middle STG/STS. 
 
 Right 
 50 
 −31 
 3 
 −4.381458 
 0.00009 
 384 
 118.66 
 
 
 
 SMA-proper. 
 
 Right 
 8 
 −4 
 54 
 −3.99374 
 0.0003 
 171 
 38.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C. Production > Perception 
 
 
 Ventral central sulcus and precentral gyrus (PMv). 
 
 Left 
 −42 
 −11 
 36 
 −3.79114 
 0.0005 
 347 
 144.42 
 
 
 
 Dorsal precentral sulcus/posterior superior frontal gyrus (pSFG). 
 
 Left 
 −14 
 −9 
 68 
 −3.096119 
 0.004 
 163 
 63.98 
 
 
 
 Ventral precentral gyrus (PMv) 
 
 Right 
 49 
 −3 
 46 
 −3.946285 
 0.0003 
 347 
 160.42 
 
 
 
 SMA-proper. 
 
 Right 
 8 
 −3 
 54 
 −4.225055 
 0.0001 
 285 
 69.56 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Age-related decline in gray matter volume. 
 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 Hemi 
 GID 
 Gray matter volume (cc) 
 Percent change 
 p value (difference) 
 FDR 
 
 
 
 
 Ventral PM 
 Left 
 Younger 
 1.86 
 −22.47 
 0.00037 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 1.44 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 1.64 
 −19.69 
 0.00239 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 1.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMA- proper 
 Left 
 Younger 
 3.05 
 −20.18 
 0.00128 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.44 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 3.47 
 −21.96 
 0.00016 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior SFG 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.38 
 −24.85 
 0.00007 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 1.78 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.13 
 −21.22 
 0.00236 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 1.68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PT 
 Left 
 Younger 
 1.12 
 −7.01 
 0.19119 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 1.04 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 .80 
 −3.94 
 0.34774 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 .77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TTS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 .55 
 −7.12 
 0.13462 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 .51 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 .46 
 −11.07 
 0.05231 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 .41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle STS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.89 
 −18.82 
 0.00276 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.35 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 3.41 
 −7.64 
 0.11521 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 3.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aOTS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.05 
 −24.98 
 0.00802 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 1.54 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.05 
 −23.32 
 0.00229 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 1.57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OPole 
 Left 
 Younger 
 3.22 
 −0.08 
 0.49458 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 3.22 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 5.38 
 −10.87 
 0.02360 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 4.79 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Age-related decline in surface-based cortical thickness. 
 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 Hemi 
 GID 
 Cortical thickness (mm) 
 Percent change 
 p value (difference) 
 FDR 
 
 
 
 
 Ventral PM 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.91 
 −6.59 
 0.00042 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.72 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.82 
 −3.81 
 0.05921 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMA-proper 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.90 
 −6.05 
 0.00017 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.73 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.92 
 −7.60 
 0.00013 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior SFG 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.98 
 −7.31 
 0.00138 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.76 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.90 
 −5.93 
 0.00129 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PT 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.56 
 −4.42 
 0.03620 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.45 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.61 
 −3.29 
 0.09122 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TTS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.47 
 −6.95 
 0.03766 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.30 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.67 
 −9.80 
 0.00008 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle STS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.54 
 −6.04 
 0.00019 
 * 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.38 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.70 
 −6.92 
 0.00015 
 * 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aOTS 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.70 
 −1.23 
 0.35579 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.67 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.65 
 −1.20 
 0.27132 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OPole 
 Left 
 Younger 
 2.09 
 −1.24 
 0.28350 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Left 
 Older 
 2.07 
 
 
 Right 
 Younger 
 2.13 
 −2.38 
 0.11829 
 n.s. 
 
 
 Right 
 Older 
 2.08 
 
 
 
 
 
