
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8910747 
 20835 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 
 0898-929X 
 1530-8898 
 
 
 23701459 
 3767398 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00405 
 NIHMS502135 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 A Surface-based Analysis of Language Lateralization and Cortical Asymmetry 
 
 
 
 
 Greve 
 Douglas N. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 Lise 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 Qing 
 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 
 Stufflebeam 
 Steven 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 Mert R. 
 
 1 
 5 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 Bruce 
 
 1 
 5 
 
 
 
 Bysbaert 
 Marc 
 
 2 
 
 
 1 Harvard Medical School 
 2 Ghent University 
 3 East China Normal University 
 4 INSERM, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, France 
 5 MIT 
 
 Reprint requests should be sent to Douglas N. Greve, The Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Room 2301, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, or via  greve@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu 
 
 
 5 
 8 
 2013 
 
 
 22 
 4 
 2013 
 
 
 9 
 2013 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2014 
 
 25 
 9 
 1477 
 1492 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Among brain functions, language is one of the most lateralized. Cortical language areas are also some of the most asymmetrical in the brain. An open question is whether the asymmetry in function is linked to the asymmetry in anatomy. To address this question, we measured anatomical asymmetry in 34 participants shown with fMRI to have language dominance of the left hemisphere (LLD) and 21 participants shown to have atypical right hemisphere dominance (RLD). All participants were healthy and left-handed, and most (80%) were female. Gray matter (GM) volume asymmetry was measured using an automated surface-based technique in both ROIs and exploratory analyses. In the ROI analysis, a significant difference between LLD and RLD was found in the insula. No differences were found in planum temporale (PT), pars opercularis (POp), pars triangularis (PTr), or Heschl’s gyrus (HG). The PT, POp, insula, and HG were all significantly left lateralized in both LLD and RLD participants. Both the positive and negative ROI findings replicate a previous study using manually labeled ROIs in a different cohort [Keller, S. S., Roberts, N., Garcia-Finana, M., Mohammadi, S., Ringelstein, E. B., Knecht, S., et al. Can the language-dominant hemisphere be predicted by brain anatomy?  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23 , 2013–2029, 2011]. The exploratory analysis was accomplished using a new surface-based registration that aligns cortical folding patterns across both subject and hemisphere. A small but significant cluster was found in the superior temporal gyrus that overlapped with the PT. A cluster was also found in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex corresponding to the visual word recognition area. The surface-based analysis also makes it possible to disentangle the effects of GM volume, thickness, and surface area while removing the effects of curvature. For both the ROI and exploratory analyses, the difference between LLD and RLD volume laterality was most strongly driven by differences in surface area and not cortical thickness. Overall, there were surprisingly few differences in GM volume asymmetry between LLD and RLD indicating that gross morphometric asymmetry is only subtly related to functional language laterality. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering : NIBIB 
 K25 EB013649 || EB 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 It has long been known that speech production is lateralized in the brain, with the left side being dominant in most people. On the basis of a review of the existing clinical data,  Benson and Geschwind (1985)  estimated that 60% of right-handed patients with unilateral left hemisphere (LH) lesions developed aphasia, whereas only 2% of right-handed patients with right hemisphere (RH) damage did. For left-handed patients, the figures were respectively 32% and 24%. Other clinical evidence came from the Wada test ( Wada & Rasmussen, 1960 ). In this test, sodium amytal is injected unilaterally to anesthetize a hemisphere, and the effects on speech production are monitored. The test was administered to determine speech dominance in epileptic patients before surgery.  Loring et al. (1990)  described the outcome of one of the best controlled studies. A total of 103 patients (91 right-handed and 12 left- or mixed-handed) were tested. Of these, 79 had exclusively LH language representation (73 right-handers) involving both production (counting) and comprehension (following simple commands). Only two patients had exclusive RH language representation (1 right-hander). The remaining 22 participants (17 righthanders) had performance decrements after injection to each hemisphere. 
 In the 1990s, brain imaging started to replace the Wada test. Classifications with these techniques were shown to be nearly identical to those of the Wada test (e.g.,  Binder et al., 1996 ) and made possible research on healthy individuals. Using transcranial Doppler sonography, Knecht and colleagues reported that 95% of right-handers had a larger increase in blood flow in the LH when silently generating words starting with a particular letter. For the left-handers, the percentage of left dominance was 75–90%, depending on the degree of handedness ( Van der Haegen, Cai, Seurinck, & Brysbaert, 2011 ;  Knecht et al., 2000 ;  Loring et al., 1990 ). 
 Recently, researchers have started to investigate what consequences atypical right speech lateralization has for the lateralization of other brain functions. First, it was shown that right lateralization of Broca’s area is mostly, but not always, accompanied by atypical lateralization of the occipito-temporal regions involved in word reading (Van der Haegen, Cai, & Brysbaert, 2012;  Seghier & Price, 2011 ;  Cai, Paulignan, Brysbaert, Ibarrola, & Nazir, 2010 ;  Cai, Lavidor, Brysbaert, Paulignan, & Nazir, 2008 ). Second, it was observed that all participants with RH speech dominance were right dominant for tool use as well ( Vingerhoets et al., 2013 ), independent of handed-ness. Good performance on this task involved the SMA (BA 6), Broca’s area (BA 44/45), the dorsolateral pFC (BA 9/46), and the posterior parietal cortex (BA 40/7). Finally,  Cai, Van der Haegen, and Brysbaert (2013)  reported that all participants with right speech lateralization had atypical, LH lateralization of the frontoparietal network involved in visuospatial processing (the Landmark task). This network involved the inferior parietal sulcus and the superior parietal lobule (BA 39/40) together with the FEF (the intersection of BA 4/6/8) and the inferior frontal sulcus (BA 44/45) in the nondominant hemisphere. Thus, it appears that atypical speech lateralization has profound implications for functional lateralization throughout the brain. 1 
 In this study, we examine how atypical speech dominance is related to the structural asymmetries of the cerebral cortex. Given the large functional implications, one might expect that atypical speech lateralization is accompanied by substantial differences in gray matter (GM). A dominant hypothesis is that the usual LH language dominance may be the result of the LH being larger in brain areas related to language processing. Indeed, both the planum temporale (PT), involved in auditory language processing, and the opercular part of Broca’s area are known to show a leftward volume asymmetry, which is larger in right-handers than in left-handers ( Toga & Thompson, 2003 ). This discovery has lead to a number of studies in which functional laterality scores were correlated with anatomical laterality scores (e.g.,  Josse, Kherif, Flandin, Seghier, & Price, 2009 ;  Josse, Mazoyer, Crivello, & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003 ;  Tzourio, Nkanga-Ngila, & Mazoyer, 1998 ). A limitation of these studies, however, was that they usually involved small numbers of participants who were not selected for hemisphere dominance. Given the rareness of atypical right speech laterality, it is unlikely that enough participants with truly inversed speech dominance were included to draw valid conclusions (see  Cai et al., 2013 , for more information on the problem of drawing conclusions on the basis of samples mainly consisting of left language dominant participants). 
 Arguably the best study comparing left language dominant (LLD) participants with right language dominant (RLD) participants was  Keller et al. (2011) . The authors compared the anatomical MRI images of 15 LLD participants with those of 10 RLD participants (language dominance determined by transcranial Doppler sonography or fMRI during a silent word generation [WG]). To their surprise, Keller et al. observed no relationship between volume asymmetry of Broca’s area or the PT and language dominance (the trends were even in the opposite direction, with larger leftward asymmetries for RLD participants than for LLD participants). The only region for which they found a robust relationship between volume asymmetry and language dominance was the insula, with a tendency toward rightward asymmetry for the RLD participants, making the authors conclude that the insular morphology should be given more importance in studies on the anatomical correlates of human language laterali-zation. This study performs an analysis similar to  Keller et al. (2011)  to see whether the surprising findings can be replicated on new groups of LLD and RLD participants and to what extent the results depend on the methodology used. 
 An important issue in studying the relationship between structure and function is the delineation of morphological features. Typically, cortical structures known to be involved in language are manually segmented based on landmarks to obtain measures of volume, area, length, and/or angulation. However, the cortical surface is highly folded with variable thickness, and there is a large degree of anatomical variability across participants. This variability makes it difficult to consistently and accurately define and quantify structures of interest. Manual labeling is also a tedious procedure that is not feasible in the large data sets required for testing hypotheses in human studies. 
 Even in the case where morphological features are well defined and quantified, they may still be somewhat arbitrary relative to the underlying function. The anatomical manifestation of a functional asymmetry may not confine itself neatly within a morphological feature chosen by an anatomist. This can cause a loss of statistical power if the entire feature is considered. In this case, exploratory methods may be more powerful because they allow the data itself to determine what the underlying morphological feature should be. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM;  Ashburner & Friston, 2000 ) is often used in this type of application, including brain asymmetry ( Luders, Gaser, Jancke, & Schlaug, 2004 ;  Watkins et al., 2001 ). There has only been one study using VBM to assess structural asymmetry differences in LLD and RLD ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ). This VBM study was in an epilepsy pre-surgical cohort involving a small number of patients (11 of whom were RLD), which may not reflect the general population. In addition, VBM has two other shortcomings. First, it relies on volume-based registration to align brains across participants, which is often inaccurate when attempting to align particular cortical folds ( Fischl et al., 2008 ). Second, when differences are found with VBM, the results cannot be refined to determine whether the underlying cause of the difference was because of differences in folding pattern, GM volume, cortical surface, or cortical thickness. 
 This study addresses the limitations of  Keller et al. (2011)  in three important ways. First, it uses a relatively large sample of healthy participants who have been verified to be strongly RLD based on fMRI  (n = 2 1 instead of 10), thereby considerably increasing the power of the study. This increase was made practical through the use of a low-cost and noninvasive screening procedure developed previously ( Van der Haegen et al., 2011 ). Second, it uses computer-generated mesh models of the cortical surface to automatically find and accurately quantify standard morphological features, including those associated with language. Finally, it uses surface-based interparticipant and interhemispheric registration to align folding patterns so that the cortical volume, surface area, and thickness can be consistently evaluated across language dominance group, subject, and hemisphere. This registration allows for an exploratory analysis in which the data dictate the anatomical boundaries of areas that show consistent structural and functional asymmetries. 
 
 
 METHODS 
 
 Laterality Index 
 The laterality index (LI) is used to quantify the difference between left and right while removing the effects of brain size. We use the formula:  (1) LI = ( L − R ) ( L + R )  where  L  is the value from the left side and  R  is the value from the right side. LI has a range from −1 (completely right lateralized) to +1 (completely left lateralized). This formula can be applied to any metric including volume, area, thickness, volume of functional activation, or behavioral measure. 
 
 
 Participants and fMRI Analysis 
 Full details of subject recruitment, handedness assessment, screening procedures, fMRI analysis, and language LI calculation are provided in ( Van der Haegen et al. 2011 , 2012). For completeness, we summarize them here. All participants signed an informed consent form according to the guidelines of the Ethics Committee of the Ghent University Hospital. A total of 269 participants 2  were accepted to the initial screening based on the criteria that they wrote and drew with their left hand to increase the likelihood of atypical language dominance. Handedness was later assessed with the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory ( Oldfield, 1971 ) modified to have answers in the range of −3 to −1 (degree of left-handedness) or +1 to +3 (right-handedness). Most participants underwent two visual half field (VHF) tasks ( Hunter & Brysbaert, 2008 ) in which they were asked to name words and pictures presented to the left visual field (LVF) or to the right visual field (RVF). LIs were calculated by subtracting the mean RT to stimuli in RVF from the mean RT to stimuli in LVF. 
 Sixty-five participants were invited (and willing) to take part in the fMRI study. Twenty-five were expected to be LLD on the basis of their VHF scores; the remaining 40 had an LVF advantage on one of the VHF tasks and were hoped to be RLD ( Van der Haegen et al., 2011 ;  Hunter & Brysbaert, 2008 ). 3  The fMRI task consisted of silent WG ( Hunter & Brysbaert, 2008 ;  Knecht et al., 2000 ;  Pujol, Deus, Losilla, & Capdevila, 1999 ). Participants were asked to silently think of as many words as possible, beginning with a cued letter. The control/baseline condition was silent repetition of the nonword “baba.” SPMs were generated based on target letter versus nonword contrast. The functional LIs were computed in areas approximately corresponding to Broca’s area (i.e., BA 44 and BA 45; AAL template;  Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002 ). These regions were chosen because they are the most active areas in the silent WG task and are known to be involved in many linguistic functions ( Heim, Eickhoff, & Amunts, 2008 ;  Amunts et al., 2004 ). 
 For statistical analysis, the 65 participants were categorized into three groups based on the functional WG LI scores: LLD if LI > 0.6, RLD if LI < −0.6, and bilateral language dominant (BLD) otherwise. This categorization was used to make a clear separation between the RLD group and the LLD group (see the Discussion for the reasoning behind this model).  Figure 1  shows the distribution of the fMRI LIs of all participants. The demographics and mean LI for the three groups are shown in  Table 1 . The handedness scores for all groups were less than −2, indicating strong left handedness (−3 would be the most extreme for left handers). The groups did not significantly differ in handedness ( p  > .55) or age ( p  > .48). The sample was recruited from a wide range of courses at university or higher education schools. As female students seemed to be more willing to take part, they formed the majority of participants. 
 A second fMRI task (lexical decision task, LDT) was also collected on these participants (Van der Haegen et al., 2012). The LDT assesses the lateralization of word reading by looking at activity in the vOT. Stimuli consisted of high- and low-frequency words, consonant strings, and pixel-scrambled words. Participants were required to respond with button press as to whether the stimulus was a word or nonword. Cerebral dominance was determined on the basis of the WG task and not the LDT, in line with clinical practice ( Spreer et al., 2002 ;  Benson et al., 1999 ;  Springer et al., 1999 ), which uses speech production lateralization as an index of language laterality. The brain areas involved in speech production are the most lateralized, arguably because fluent speaking requires a single control center ( Kosslyn, 1987 ). 
 
 
 MRI Acquisition 
 Images were acquired on a 3-T Siemens Trio MRI scanner at Ghent University (Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany) with an eight-channel radiofrequency head coil. A high-resolution anatomical image was collected using a T1-weighted 3-D MPRAGE sequence. All images were 256 × 256 × 176 with voxel size = 0.9 × 0.9 × 0.9 mm 3 . The data were acquired with either one of two sets of pulse sequence parameters: repetition time = 1550 msec, echo time = 2.39 msec, flip angle = 9°, inversion time = 900 msec, pixel frequency = 180 Hz; or repetition time = 2530 msec, echo time = 2.58 msec, flip angle = 7°, inversion time = 1100 msec, pixel frequency = 190 Hz. Most ( n  = 54) were acquired with the first set. The proportion of each parameter set was the same (85% to 15%) in the LLD and RLD groups. 
 
 
 Anatomical Analysis 
 All participants were analyzed in FreeSurfer ( www.surfer . nmr.mgh.harvard.edu, version 5.1) to provide detailed anatomical information customized for each participant ( Dale, Fischl, & Sereno, 1999 ;  Fischl, Sereno, & Dale, 1999 ). The FreeSurfer analysis stream includes intensity bias field removal, skull stripping, and assigning a neuro-anatomical label (e.g., hippocampus, amygdala, etc.) to each voxel ( Segonne et al., 2004 ;  Fischl et al., 2002 ). In addition to the volume-based analysis, FreeSurfer constructs models of the cortical surface. A surface model consists of a mesh of triangles. The location of the mesh is controlled by adjusting the location of the vertices. A vertex is the place where the points of neighboring triangles meet (typically about 1 mm apart). The vertex positions are adjusted such that the surface follows the T1 intensity gradient between cortical white matter (WM) and cortical GM. Smoothness constraints allow the surface to cut through a voxel to model partial volume effects and provide subvoxel accuracy of the location of the surface. This highly folded surface can be “inflated” ( Figure 2 ) to see inside the sulci. A second surface is also fit to the outside of the brain (between the GM and the pia). The first surface is called the “white” surface, and the second is called the “pial” surface ( Figures 3A  and  4A  show pial surfaces). The LH and RH are modeled separately. All surfaces are constructed in the native anatomical space. 
 
 
 Cortical GM Metrics 
 In FreeSurfer, the distance between the white and pial surfaces at a vertex is defined to be the cortical thickness at that vertex ( Fischl & Dale, 2000 ). The area of a vertex is defined as the average area of the triangles of which the vertex is a member. The GM volume of a vertex is defined as the area times the thickness. The surface area of a region can be computed by adding up the area of the vertices in that region, and the same can be done to compute the GM volume. The surface curvature at a vertex can be computed based on its spatial relationship to neighboring vertices. The curvature is a quantification of the folding patterns. Thus, at each point along the subject’s surface, the thickness, area, volume, and curvature can be quantified, all with subvoxel accuracy. 
 
 
 Surface-based Intersubject Registration 
 The curvature is used to drive a nonlinear surface-based inter-subject registration procedure that aligns the cortical folding patterns of each subject to a standard surface space ( Fischl, Sereno, Tootell, & Dale, 1999 ). This approach is similar to performing a volume-based registration to Talairach or Montreal Neurological Institute space but is much more accurate for cortical areas ( Fischl et al., 2008 ). The thickness, area, and volume can be resampled into the standard space so that vertex-wise comparisons across subjects can be made in an exploratory analysis. The area and volume resampling includes a “jacobian correction” (similar to that described in  Winkler et al., 2012 ) to account for any stretching or compression in the registration. This correction is not needed for thickness because it is measured along a vector normal to any stretching or compression. 
 
 
 Cross-hemisphere Symmetric Registration Template 
 There are two standard space surface registration templates in FreeSurfer, one for each hemisphere. Simply registering a hemisphere to a contralateral template can create biases, that is, one will get different results depending upon whether one registers both hemispheres to the LH template or to the RH template. A symmetric template is needed, which can be generated in one of two ways: (1) regenerate the template from scratch by left–right reversing the subjects used in the template and reregistering with all data (i.e., treating the reversed subjects as new, additional subjects) or (2) left–right reversing the template itself and averaging with the non reversed atlas. This second approach is easy to implement and dominants in the field ( Josse et al., 2009 ;  Eckert et al., 2008 ;  Watkins et al., 2001 ). However, this approach has several drawbacks, namely a blurrier atlas is created because features are washed out, and there is no way to keep track of the amount of variance because of variability across hemispheres. For these reasons, we created a new surface template from scratch using an iterative technique described in  Fischl, Sereno, Tootell, et al. (1999)  modified to yield a symmetric template. The symmetric template was created using 42 participants from this study consisting of an equal number of LLD and RLD, each group represented by 3 men and 18 women. No BLD were used in the template construction. First, an initial template was created from only the LHs of these participants based on the registration to the LH standard template. Both LHs and RHs from all participants were aligned with this initial LH template. A new template was then created from these 84 surfaces, and the surfaces were reregistered to it. This new template is a mixture of LH and RH and so less biased than the initial LH-only template. This process was repeated 35 times to remove the influence of initializing with LH. To test whether this procedure leads to a symmetrical template, the entire template creation procedure was replicated initialing with the RH. The exploratory analysis described below was performed using both the LH- and RH-initialized templates. Similarity in the results is evidence of a symmetric template. 
 
 
 Anatomically Defined Cortical ROIs 
 FreeSurfer has the ability to automatically label the cortex in a way intended to replicate the labeling of a trained anatomist ( Destrieux, Fischl, Dale, & Halgren, 2010 ;  Desikan et al., 2006 ;  Fischl et al., 2004 ). This labeling goes beyond simply the mapping of an ROI atlas into the subject space because the boundaries of the labels are customized to each participant based on curvature statistics stored in the ROI atlas. Note that, whereas an anatomist uses explicit rules and landmarks to define specific areas, the automatic procedure relies only on implicit rules generated during the training process. This method has been validated using a jackknifing procedure ( Fischl et al., 2004 ). We used the Destrieux atlas ( Destrieux et al., 2010 ), which has 74 ROIs on each hemisphere and was derived from 12 participants not involved in this study. We selected five language-related ROIs from which to report the volume, area, and thickness (see  Destrieux et al., 2010 , for details on the landmarks used to define these ROIs): (1) opercular part of the inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis, POp), (2) triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus (pars triangularis; PTr), (3) PT, (4) anterior transverse temporal gyrus (Heschl’s gyrus, HG), (5) insula composed of superior, anterior, and inferior segments of the circular sulcus of the insula, short and long insular gyri, and the central sulcus of the insula. The PT is shown in an inflated hemisphere in  Figure 5 .We emphasize that the anatomical ROIs are independent of the interhemi-spheric registration. Note that the Destrieux PT definition includes both the posterior horizontal segment and the posterior ascending ramus (sometimes referred to as the planum parietale or PP). These ROIs were chosen for several reasons. POp and PTr approximate Broca’s area. PT has prominent anatomic asymmetries and is an area of language function. The insula has been found to have an interaction between anatomy and language function ( Keller et al., 2011 ). HG was chosen because of known anatomical asymmetry ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ;  Penhune, Cismaru, Dorsaint-Pierre, Petitto, & Zatorre, 2003 ;  Penhune, Zatorre, MacDonald, & Evans, 1996 ;  Rademacher, Caviness, Steinmetz, & Galaburda, 1993 ). Performing an anatomical ROI analysis also provides a means through which the FreeSurfer ROI results can be compared with those of other studies as well as with the exploratory analysis. 
 
 
 Exploratory Spatial Analysis 
 Both hemispheres of all 65 participants were registered to the symmetric template, and the vertex-wise cortical GM volume maps were mapped into the symmetric standard space. These were then surface-smoothed by 10 mm FWHM. For each participant, the volume LI at each vertex was computed as per  Equation 1 . A statistical analysis was performed at each vertex to evaluate the difference between the LLD and RLD participants using a two-group unsigned  t  test with 53 degrees of freedom (DOF). Clusters were defined as groups of contiguous vertices with vertex-wise  p  < .01 (the cluster forming threshold). The  p  value for a cluster was determined through Monte Carlo simulation in which white Gaussian noise was repeatedly synthesized on the surface, spatially smoothed, thresholded, and clustered to determine the distribution of cluster sizes under the null hypothesis ( Hagler, Saygin, & Sereno, 2006 ). The cluster search space was constrained by two a priori regions corresponding to an anterior language area (ALA) that surrounds Broca’s area and a posterior language area (PLA) that surrounds Wernicke’s area, which are often mentioned as traditional language areas ( Toga & Thompson, 2003 ). We defined the ALA by combining four of the Destrieux ROIs: (1) POp, (2) PTr, (3) horizontal and vertical ramus of the anterior segment of the lateral sulcus, and (4) inferior part of the precentral sulcus. We defined the PLA by combining Destrieux ROIs: (1) angular gyrus, (2) supramarginal gyrus, (3) PT, (4) transverse temporal sulcus, (5) posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus, (6) lateral aspect of the superior temporal gyrus (STG; posterior half), (7) STS (posterior two thirds), and (8) sulcus inter-medius primus of Jensen. The resulting ALA and PLA are shown in yellow outline in  Figure 2 . Because this is an exploratory analysis, the boundaries for these areas were selected to be rather large so as to reduce the chance of missing clusters. The ALA and PLA are larger and different than the anatomical ROIs above so that the exploratory analysis might allow the data to define new ROIs that are not necessarily defined by landmarks visible to an anatomist. A cluster analysis using the whole hemisphere was also performed to search for any clusters that might be outside of traditional language areas. 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Anatomically Defined ROIs 
 Figure 6  shows the average volume LI for the three groups. The PT, POp, insula, and HG where all highly significantly left-lateralized in both LLD and RLD ( p  < .0001). Post hoc analysis revealed that each ROI was significantly left lateralized in terms of surface area ( p  < .0001), but not thickness. The PTr was the only structure that was not significantly left lateralized ( p  = .31). All ROIs showed numerically greater volume LIs for LLD over RLD; however, the only structure to show a significant difference was insula ( p  = .0127, after correcting for five comparisons). The PT significance was trending toward a difference ( p  = .13, uncorrected). The numerical laterality difference was greater in PT than in insula, but the variability of insula was much smaller leading to a greater effect size. Both groups were left lateralized in insula, but LLD was more so. A post hoc analysis revealed that LLD and RLD differed significantly in insula area ( p  = .0127), but not thickness ( p  = .82), after correcting for five tests. The BLD group showed roughly the same laterality pattern across the ROIs as the LLD and RLD groups but was neither consistently greater than nor less than LLD or RLD. 
 
 
 Exploratory Analysis 
 A whole-hemisphere map of the LLD-RLD difference is shown in  Figure 2 . The left panel shows the results of the LH-initialized template; the right panel shows the results with the RH-initialized template.  Figure 2  is a significance map thresholded a vertex-wise uncorrected two-sided threshold of  p  < .01 where red/yellow indicates LLD > RLD and blue/cyan indicates RLD > LLD. These statistics are shown on an “inflated” cortical surface of the symmetric template where the light gray indicates a gyrus and the dark gray indicates a sulcus. Within the a priori regions (yellow boundaries), there is only one cluster in STG that survives multiple comparison correction (see also  Figures 3A  and  5B ). No significant clusters were found in the ALA. Outside these areas, there was a large cluster in the ventral occipitotemporal (vOT) cortex that survived whole hemisphere correction. See  Table 2  for a list of clusters, their  p  values, surface areas, and coordinates. There are some other candidate clusters in  Figure 2 , but they did not survive correction for multiple comparisons and so are not reported further. Both the maps in  Figure 2  and the cluster summaries in  Table 2  indicate the results are robust to initialization hemisphere. For both the STG and vOT clusters, the coordinates of the centroids between LH and RH initialization are different by only about 1 mm (after reversing the sign of the X coordinate). 
 
 
 Post hoc Tests and BLD Results 
 Post hoc tests were performed on the STG and vOT clusters to determine whether the difference in groups was being driven by laterality differences in one or both groups and whether the underlying differences were because of volume, area, or thickness differences.  Figure 3B  shows a bar plot of the LIs for the STG cluster volume, area, and thickness broken down by group along with  p  values corrected for eight post hoc tests. One can see that there is a large difference in volume LI between the groups; this is expected because this cluster was selected for a volume LI difference (and why the LLD–RLD  p  value for Volume LI is not given). The LLD group has a positive volume LI, and the RLD have a negative volume LI, both of which are significantly different than 0. This indicates that both groups are asymmetric with opposite laterality. The area LI is significantly different between the groups. The LLD group has a significantly positive area LI; the RLD group has a negative area LI, but it was not significant. The LLD group shows no thickness laterality, but the RLD group has a significantly thicker right cortex than left in this cluster. There is a thickness LI difference between groups, but it does not survive correction for multiple post hoc tests. The results for the BLD group within this cluster are also shown. On each measure, the BLD group is between the LLD and RLD groups. We point out that the BLD results are completely independent of the participants used to construct the registration template and the cluster. 
 A close-up of the vOT cluster is shown in  Figure 4A  along with the post hoc tests in  Figure 4B . The volume is significantly lateralized in both groups in opposite directions. There is a significant difference between groups in area lateralization but not in thickness. The RLD group is significantly rightward lateralized for both area and thickness. From this data, it appears that the difference in GM volume LI in the vOT is being driven by area and not thickness. The BLD group is between the LLD and RLD in volume and surface area. 
 
 
 Confirmatory Cluster Analysis 
 The exploratory method developed in this manuscript is novel, and so we would like to demonstrate that the STG and vOT clusters are not merely an artifact of the nonlinear registration procedure or resampling of the individual volume maps into template space. Ideally, the STG and vOT clusters would be labeled independently in each participant; these labels could then be used to compute LLD and RLD statistics to verify results from the exploratory analysis. The problem is to get clusters in each participant that are independent of the registration and resampling procedures. We cannot simply map the cluster from the template space back into the individual space because that would be dependent upon the registration. Instead, we exploit the geometrical relationship between the clusters and the labels of the Destrieux atlas. For example, the STG cluster can be approximated in the following way (see  Figure 5 ). First, the PT is divided into three sections along its long axis (the green–brown–green labels in  Figure 5A ). Next, the lateral aspect of the STG (LASTG) is divided into five sections (the pink-blue-pink labels in  Figure 5A ). When the second section of the PT and the first section of the LASTG are combined into a single ROI (orange outline in  Figure 5B ), the STG cluster is covered fairly well. The same geometric operations can be performed in each individual brain to get an approximation of the STG cluster without resorting to the registration used to create the STG cluster. The results ( Figure 7 ) have a similar pattern to that of the original cluster analysis. The volume LI for the LLD is still significantly greater than that of the RLD ( p  < .02), and the BLD is still between the LLD and RLD. The difference is that all LIs are shifted by about 0.13 to be more positive (e.g., RLD is now positive instead of negative). This shift is probably because of the fact that the approximate STG cluster does not cover the actual cluster perfectly. A similar analysis was applied to the vOT cluster with consistent findings. Although the confirmatory ROI is obviously informed by the exploratory map-based analysis, the boundaries of the constructed ROI in each participant are completely independent of the interhemispheric registration and so confirmatory relative to this registration. 
 
 
 Correlations with fMRI and Behavioral Measures 
 In addition to the anatomical information, we also have access to various functional language lateralization measures for these participants. These include fMRI of an LDT (Van der Haegen et al., 2012) and three behavioral tasks: Dichotic Listening (DL, Van der Haegen, Westerhausen, Hugdahl, & Brysbaert, under revision), VHF task with pictures as stimuli (VHFP), and VHF task with words as stimuli (VHFW;  Van der Haegen et al., 2011 ). We computed LIs for each of these behavioral and fMRI measures. We also have the fMRI results for the subvocal WG task; however, the correlation between the WG task LI and the cluster LIs is circular because the WG task was used to assign participants into LLD, RLD, and BLD. To gain further insight into the functional correlates of the anatomical asymmetries, we computed the correlation coefficient between all pairs of LIs. The resulting matrix is shown in  Table 3 . The behavioral tasks returned the expected asymmetries: a right ear advantage in the DL task for the LLD and a left ear advantage for the RLD, and RVF advantages for LLD versus LVF advantages for RLD. The only a priori defined ROI that correlated with function was the insula, which correlated with ear advantage in the DL task and fMRI laterality in the WG task. The exploratory clusters showed higher correlations with functional data: the STG cluster correlated with LDT and VHFP. The vOT cluster correlated with LDT and DL, but, surprisingly, not with the VHF tasks. The correlations in  Table 3  are based on all participants; further analyses indicated that the conclusions remain the same if the bilateral participants are omitted or when the analyses are limited to those participants for whom we have data on all measures. 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 This study tested the surprising finding of  Keller et al. (2011)  that only the volume of the insula differs between healthy LLD and RLD participants (language dominance based on asymmetry in the fMRI BOLD signals during a silent WG task). We made use of the MRI scans collected by  Van der Haegen et al. (2011) , augmented with 19 scans collected later (footnote 2). In addition, we made use of the FreeSurfer software, which allowed us to run exploratory analyses with a greater precision. 
 Our results replicate Keller et al. for all regions tested by them. Only the size of the insula differed significantly between LLD and RLD participants. No significant differences were found for Broca’s area or the PT, although the leftward asymmetry tended to be smaller for RLD participants than for LLD participants, which is intuitively more acceptable than the reverse trends reported by Keller et al. We also failed to replicate the rightward insular asymmetry in RLD participants, reported by Keller et al. As for the other brain regions, we found evidence for a reduced left asymmetry. In addition, we observed two new areas with reliable differences between the LLD and RLD groups (showing reversed asymmetries in the two groups). These were STG and vOT, two regions involved in language perception in the spoken and written modalities, respectively. 
 Our data, together with those of  Keller et al. (2011) , point to a divergence between the anatomical and functional asymmetries in participants with right speech dominance. Although the participants had Broca’s area clearly lateralized to the right and we know that most of them also had spoken and written language perception lateralized to the RH (Van der Haegen et al., 2012, under revision), their overall volume asymmetry was leftward ( Figure 6 ). This casts doubts on the hypothesis that the anatomical asymmetry of the human brain is the direct cause of the functional asymmetries observed. This finding also seems to put boundary conditions on the extent to which brain use can modulate GM volume. After all, despite strong functional asymmetries in language ( Van der Haegen et al., 2011 , 2012), tool use ( Vingerhoets et al., 2013 ), and visuospatial processing ( Cai et al., 2013 ), the anatomical differences between both groups were surprisingly small in size and area. 
 In the remainder of the discussion, we give a more detailed description of the findings in the different ROIs and we end with some methodological observations, given that this study also introduces various new ways of brain analysis. 
 
 PT 
 The PT has been claimed to have a central role in spoken language processing.  Geschwind and Levitsky (1968) , found significant anatomical laterality in PT, and hypothesized that this was related to language laterality. Several studies to test this hypothesis followed, many of which found that PT was lateralized to the left ( Keller et al., 2007 ,  2011 ;  Dos Santos Sequeira et al., 2006 ;  Eckert, Leonard, Possing, & Binder, 2006 ), although not all ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ).  Foundas, Leonard, Gilmore, Fennell, and Heilman (1994)  found PT asymmetry that was reversed with RLD but only had one RLD participant. Other studies have not been able to find a PT difference between LLD and RLD ( Keller et al., 2011 ;  Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ), although  Tzourio et al. (1998)  reported that the area of left PT (rather than LI) was predictive of language laterality. We also looked for unilateral differences in PT surface area and found none. In fact, we found no unilateral LLD–RLD differences on any of our measures. 
 As with other studies, we found a significant left later-alization to PT in both LLD and RLD. As with  Keller et al. (2011)  and  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006) , we did not find an LLD–RLD difference when analyzing the anatomically defined PT. The asymmetry in volume was driven by asymmetry in PT surface area and not in thickness. In the exploratory analysis, however, a small area that partially overlapped with both the PT and LASTG was found in which volume LI was greater for LLD than RLD. A post hoc analysis showed that the LLDs were leftward later-alized (positive LI) whereas the RLDs were rightward later-alized (negative LI). It also showed that LLD > RLD in surface area LI but not in thickness. The STG is specifically involved in processing the phonetic/phonological aspects of spoken language ( Turkeltaub & Coslett, 2010 ;  Desai, Liebenthal, Waldron, & Binder, 2008 ). It has also been linked to auditory STM ( Richardson et al., 2011 ). Interestingly, this region does not seem to fit well within  Hickok and Poeppel (2007)  model of speech processing, according to which STG is involved in the spectrotemporal analysis of auditory input and does so bilaterally. On the other hand, the STG cluster is close to an area called SPT (sylvian parietal temporal cortex).  Hickok and Poeppel (2007)  speculate that area SPT is involved in translation between sensory speech codes and the motor system (though this function extends beyond speech tasks). Given that the functional asymmetry was based on asymmetric fMRI results of a WG task, it is not impossible that the STG cluster overlaps with SPT. 
 At first glance, the exploratory analysis appears to contradict the ROI results, which did not show a difference in PT. However, the PT ROI was trending toward significance, and the STG cluster comprised only a small part of PT. Analyzing the entire PT may wash out this effect. An advantage of the exploratory technique is that it can find clusters that do not fall into standard anatomical definitions. This finding does add some support to the  Geschwind and Levitsky (1968)  hypothesis. 
 The only other research to apply an exploratory method to the study of LLD versus RLD was  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006) . They used VBM in a group of epilepsy patients.  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006)  did not find any LLD–RLD differences in the PT/STG area (although they did find that simple laterality was significantly positive). This could be for several reasons. First, they only had 11 RLD participants. Second, they used a sample of epilepsy patients who may have reorganized language areas ( Brazdil, Zakopcan, Kuba, Fanfrdlova, & Rektor, 2003 ). Finally, it may be that VBM is less sensitive than surface-based techniques to these types of effects. 
 Josse et al. (2009)  performed a similar VBM analysis. However, instead of classifying participants as LLD or RLD, they performed a voxel-by-voxel regression analysis between GM concentration asymmetry and fMRI activation asymmetry and found widespread correlation, including in the PT/STG region. Although this supports our results, there are several potential differences with our work.  Josse et al. (2009)  report having 12 RLD participants; however, by our definition of RLD (i.e., LI < -.6), they would have had only four RLD. Therefore, it is probably the case that our RLD participants are significantly more right lateralized for language. In addition, they found large correlations between GM density and functional activation across the brain even for non-language tasks. This suggests that the correlations may have been an artifact possibly caused by partial voluming, that is, if there is more GM in a voxel, then one would expect more functional activation in that voxel. 
 
 
 POp and PTr 
 The POp and PTr comprise Broca’s area, which is related to speech production. 4  Studies by  Keller et al. (2007 ,  2011 ) both found that POp was left lateralized but that PTr was not.  Keller et al. (2011)  did not find an LLD– RLD difference in either POp or PTr. Our anatomically defined ROI results are in complete agreement as are the exploratory results despite the fact that  Keller et al. (2007 ,  2011 ) employed manual labeling and used only right-handed participants. We also found that the POp laterality was driven by left–right differences in surface area, not thickness.  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006) , however, did find an LLD–RLD difference in GM concentration in Broca’s area using (exploratory) VBM. The use of an epilepsy patient population may contribute to this discrepancy.  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006)  also comment that their findings may be because of differences in curvature of the cortex that can occur in certain types of epilepsy and not because of change in GM volume. If so, then the differences may not have shown up in this surface-based because we only analyzed volume, area, and thickness. 
 
 
 Insula 
 There was a significant difference between LLD and RLD in the volume asymmetry of insula (in agreement with  Keller et al., 2011 ). This difference was driven by area asymmetries and not thickness (again in agreement with  Keller et al., 2011 ). The numerical difference between LIs for LLD and RLD was actually smaller for insula as compared with PT. The significance came from smaller variability, which may be because of the fact that the insula is a much larger structure and so its total volume will not be very sensitive to small changes in its boundaries or perhaps could be because of the fact that the circular sulcus and the gyri of the insula are more easily identified. In  Keller et al. (2011) , the variance of insula was also much less than for other structures, but they also found a large difference in laterality. In this study, both LLD and RLD had significant leftward asymmetries.  Keller et al. (2011)  showed a positive LI for LLD, but a negative LI for RLD. The reason for this is unclear but perhaps related to the use of left-handers in this study and right-handers in  Keller et al. (2011) . Interestingly, there was not a cluster in insula in the exploratory analysis. Further investigation showed a consistent but small LLD > RLD advantage across insula in the exploratory analysis. It appears that this advantage is not strong enough on a vertex-by-vertex basis to create a cluster, but it is strong enough when averaged over the entire insula.  Keller et al. (2011)  came to a similar conclusion when they explored the spatial pattern of LLD/RLD differences in insula. 
 Given our replication of Keller et al., we fully agree with those authors that the role of the insula in language processing needs further investigation, also given the correlations with DL performance ( Table 3 ). The insula seems to be particularly involved in overt speech, although there is also some evidence for a role in covert speech (Price, 2012), and insular lesions are related to aphasia ( Price, 2000 ;  Donnan, Darby, & Saling, 1997 ). On the other hand, the insula plays a role in a wide range of intermodal functions ( Flynn, Benson, & Ardila, 1999 ), making its involvement in language processing less pronounced than other peri-sylvian areas. Future research is needed to investigate whether the central location within the peri-sylvian network makes the insula one of the key regions to determine language asymmetry. 
 
 
 HG 
 HG, primary auditory cortex, has been studied in relation to language laterality ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ). There was not a significant difference in HG anatomical asymmetry between LLD and RLD in agreement with manual labelings in  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006) . We did find that HG was significantly lateralized to the left, in agreement with other studies ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ;  Penhune et al., 1996 ,  2003 ;  Rademacher et al., 1993 ). 
 
 
 vOT Cortex 
 The only other area to be significantly different between LLD and RLD was in the vOT with LLDs being more left-lateralized and RLDs more right-lateralized in GM volume.  Dorsaint-Pierre et al. (2006)  did not find an LLD–RLD difference in vOT. To our knowledge, this is the first report of anatomical asymmetry differences between LLD and RLD in vOT. This area has been linked to visual word recognition ( Dehaene & Cohen, 2011 ;  Ben-Shachar, Dougherty, Deutsch, & Wandell, 2007 ;  Cohen et al., 2000 ), face recognition ( Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997 ), and body and object recognition ( Taylor & Downing, 2011 ). The asymmetries observed are in line with the functional lateralization of visual word recognition (Van der Haegen et al., 2012;  Seghier & Price, 2011 ;  Cai et al., 2008 ,  2010 ). Reduced GM volume in the left or bilateral vOT regions has been found to be associated with dyslexia ( Raschle, Chang, & Gaab, 2011 ). The face recognition area (i.e., the fusiform face area) is also known to be functionally lateralized but in the opposite direction relative to the visual word recognition area. However, we do not see an area in  Figure 4  where RLD > LLD inside of vOT. A possible reason for this is that all the participants in this study were left-handers and the FFA is less later-alized in left-handers than right-handers ( Willems, Peelen, & Hagoort, 2010 ). Another reason might be that FFA and the visual word recognition area are complementary ( Plaut & Behrmann, 2011 ;  Dien, 2009 ) and cannot be separated anatomically. 
 It does not come as a surprise that asymmetry in the WG task predicts anatomical asymmetry in vOT. Evidence suggests that phonological information contributes to visual word recognition ( Price & Devlin, 2011 ). Hemisphere dominance for word reading tends to follow that of speech production (Van der Haegen et al., 2012;  Cai et al., 2008 ,  2010 ), perhaps reflecting the need for fast interactions between these areas. Also, see below for correlations between vOT and the LDT. In the history of the human species, reading is a very recent skill with no real evolutionary pressure for laterality yet. The fact that it is lateralized is arguably because of the close interactions with Broca’s area. 
 
 
 Bilateral Participants 
 Eleven participants did not show strong language laterality. In the anatomically defined ROI analysis, they showed a similar laterality pattern as the LLD and RLD participants, but there was no systematic relationship. In the exploratory and confirmatory analysis of the STG cluster, the LI for volume, area, and thickness consistently fell between LLD and RLD. 
 
 
 Correlations between fMRI and Behavioral Measures 
 In line with the absence of a clear reversal of the overall anatomical asymmetry in RLD participants ( Figure 1 ), most of the LIs in the anatomically defined ROIs were uncorrelated with functional asymmetries. This was true both for asymmetries based on fMRI BOLD signals (WG and LDT) and on behavioral data (DL, VHFP, and VHFW). Only insula showed correlations with the functional asymmetries (DL and WG). The STG cluster correlated with VHFP but, surprisingly, not with DL. The anatomical asymmetries in the vOT cluster correlated with DL and LDT, in line with the proposal that this area plays a central role in the integration of phonological and orthographic word information as mentioned above. The finding that anatomical vOT asymmetries are correlated with the ear advantage in DL is particularly noteworthy, as it is in line with the hypothesis that the orthography of a word helps the processing of spoken words in literate individuals ( Ziegler & Ferrand, 1988 ). It is surprising vOT is not correlated with the VHF differences in word naming and picture naming. 
 
 
 Statistical Model Selection 
 The statistical analysis requires a model of the relationship between the functional LI (fLI) and structural LI (sLI). One of two models is typically used: (1) a categorical model in which participants are divided into laterality classes; differences in class means are evidence of an interaction between structure and function, or (2) a continuous model in which it is assumed that fLI and sLI are linearly related; a nonzero slope is evidence of an interaction. There are advantages and disadvantages to both methods. Categorization models the fLI–sLI relationship as piece-wise constant. Some researchers (e.g.,  Keller et al., 2011 ) use two categories (LLD and RLD), others (e.g.,  Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ) use three (LLD, RLD, and BLD). We chose three for several reasons. First, bilateral participants may represent a qualitatively different language organization than the mirror reversal hypothesized between LLD and RLD. For example, in a Wada test, bilaterality may manifest as both hemispheres being impaired or neither being impaired ( Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ;  Risse, Gates, & Fangman, 1997 ). Second, having three classes makes the piece-wise constant model more accurate in the case where there is continuous variation. We chose a relatively high threshold of 0.6 to assure that our results were not influenced by bilateral participants (i.e., we would rather exclude a few true LLDs or RLDs rather than risk the inclusion of BLDs). 
 A continuous model is attractive because language laterality is never an “all-or-nothing” trait. The continuous model only requires one regressor, saving several DOFs relative to the categorical model—a very important point when sample sizes are small. The ability to include bilateral participants also increases the DOF, but, as mentioned above, it is not clear that the bilateral participants belong with the others. The continuous model requires a parametric function relating fLI and sLI (generally linear). This is a very strong assumption given that the sLI and fLI are computed from very different data and methods. In a voxelwise structural analysis, this relationship could change from region to region. 
 Thus, the categorical model makes fewer assumptions than the continuous model but may have less power. The exact nature of the fLI–sLI relationship is complex and will require much more data to sort out. For completeness, we performed a follow-up test using a continuous linear model. Although the exact  p  values changed, there were no changes in the conclusions made from either the ROI or the exploratory analysis (i.e., the STG and vOT clusters and insula ROI were still significant and no new areas became significant). 
 
 
 Methodological Considerations 
 This study exploited some unique methodologies. First, we had a relatively large sample ( n  = 21) of healthy RLD participants made possible by a low-cost and noninvasive screening procedure. The sample was mainly selected after screening 250 left-handers for behavioral signs of RLD. Our sample is twice as large as comparable studies ( n  = 10,  Keller et al., 2011 ;  n  = 11,  Dorsaint-Pierre et al., 2006 ;  n  = 4,  Eckert et al., 2006 ). One disadvantage of the study is that the participants are only left-handers and mostly women. This prevented us from exploring the relationship of handedness and gender on the interaction between language and anatomical laterality. 
 We employed automated surface-based methods to compute anatomical measures. These methods include 3-D mesh models that with subvoxel accuracy; surface-based registration that aligns folding patterns across subject and hemisphere; and automated algorithms that attempt to replicate the manual labeling of an anatomist. The volumes of the anatomically defined ROIs were in the range of published manual results but consistently smaller. For example, we measured the left PT volume (including PP) in LLD to be 2204 mm 3  whereas other studies ( Keller et al., 2007 ,  2011 ;  Dos Santos Sequeira et al., 2006 ) that employed manual labelings were in the range of 3000–4000 mm 3 . A possible limitation of the PT results is that the Destrieux definition of PT included the PP, which is normally excluded. This may have the effect of reducing asymmetry. Indeed, the PT LIs in this study (.09–.14) are much less than that of  Dos Santos Sequeira et al. (2006) . However, they are more than the PT LIs in  Keller et al. (2007)  (about .11) and about the same as in  Keller et al. (2011)  (.09–.14). The POp and PTr volumes in this study are about 66% of that found in  Keller et al. (2007) . Although some of this may have to do with the landmark definitions, it may also be because of partial voluming. Voxels that are partially in GM and WM will have an intensity that is darker than the typical WM voxel, and a manual rater may be inclined to label these as GM. The surface-based mesh model will cut through the middle of such voxels and thereby give a more accurate (and smaller) measure of GM volume. Despite this difference, the ratio of LH to RH PT volume in this study (1.3) is very close to that found in  Dos Santos Sequeira et al. (2006)  (1.4),  Keller et al. (2007)  (1.2), and  Keller et al. (2011)  (1.17). For POp, the simple volume LI was very similar for POp across the studies (0.12 for this study, 0.11 for  Keller et al., 2011 , and about 0.13 for  Keller et al., 2007 ). There is a striking similarity between the ROI results presented here and those of  Keller et al. (2011)  despite appreciable differences in methodology. Although the ROI results are similar to previous work, we point out that the exploratory results are novel. 
 The surface-based registration allowed an exploratory analysis to search for areas of significant LLD/RLD difference that do not lie cleanly within the boundaries prescribed by manual labels. Such a difference was found in a cluster whose extent covered only part of the PT. The exploratory effect did not show up in the ROI approach because this cluster did not fit neatly into an anatomically defined region. The exploratory approach also allows evaluating brain regions that are outside of traditional language areas and so not targeted for tedious manual labeling procedures. Such a region was found in vOT. 
 The interhemispheric registration procedure was verified in two ways. First, the entire study was replicated using the RH and LH as initial targets, with very similar results. Second, an ROI covering the exploratory STG cluster was defined based on anatomical landmarks (and so independent of the registration). This ROI showed significant differences between LLD and RLD. Although this by itself does not confirm a difference between LLD and RLD, it does show that the difference found in the exploratory analysis is not a byproduct or artifact of the registration method. The exploratory surface-based analysis is different from VBM analysis in several ways. It uses surface-based registration, which has been shown to be superior to volume-based in many instances ( Tucholka, Fritsch, Poline, & Thirion, 2012 ;  Zollei, Stevens, Huber, Kakunoori, & Fischl, 2010 ;  Postelnicu, Zollei, & Fischl, 2009 ;  Fischl et al., 2008 ). The surface-based method allows the differences in GM volume to be decomposed into effects of surface area and thickness. This is important for shedding light on the origins of asymmetry. For example, surface area and thickness are both highly heritable but genetically independent ( Winkler et al., 2010 ;  Panizzon et al., 2009 ). Separately measuring surface area and thickness can also be important in understanding disorders. For example, dyslexia and reading skills have been found to be related to surface area but not to thickness ( Frye et al., 2010 ). GM volume loss in aging is related to loss of surface area not cortical thinning; however, cortical thinning accompanies Alzheimer’s disease ( Dickerson et al., 2009 ). On the other hand, VBM may be sensitive to less specific aspects of morphometry ( Palaniyappan & Liddle, 2012 ). 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 The purpose of this study was to investigate the interaction between functional language laterality and anatomical laterality. There were several novel aspects to the study including the recruitment of a relatively large healthy sample of RLD participants made possible by a previously developed low-cost and noninvasive screening procedure. This study also used automated surface-based analysis techniques that provide several useful features: the ability to automatically delineate standard language-related anatomical ROIs such as PT, POp, and PTr; the ability to compute GM volume with subvoxel accuracy; the ability to decompose differences in GM volume into differences in surface area and thickness; and the ability to use surface-based registration to align folding patterns across hemisphere as well as participant for use in an exploratory analysis. The anatomical ROI-based results replicated those of a similar study using manual labeling in healthy right-handers ( Keller et al., 2011 ) in that no LLD–RLD differences were found in PT, POp, and PTr, but a strong difference was found in insula GM volume. Interestingly, the exploratory analysis did reveal a small LLD > RLD cluster in STG that overlapped with PT. This capability shows the utility of exploratory analysis for finding structural differences that may cross the boundaries of anatomically defined ROIs. The exploratory analysis also indicated an LLD–RLD difference in vOT, an area associated with visual word recognition. No other differences between LLD and RLD were found in the rest of the brain, including in Broca’s area. In all cases, differences in GM volume were attributable to a difference in cortical surface area and not cortical thickness. The sample used in this study was exclusively left-handed and mostly female, making it impossible to evaluate the effect of handedness and gender; however, the use of a practical language dominance screening procedure and automated surface-based analysis should make more large-scale studies of language dominance possible. 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 It was also found that participants with right hemisphere speech lateralization had an atypical left-ear advantage in a dichotic listening task (Van der Haegen et al., under revision), suggesting that the brain areas involved in spoken word recognition are atypically lateralized as well, but no fMRI data have been collected on this yet. 
 
 
 2 
 We tested 19 participants more after the  Van der Haegen et al. (2011)  manuscript was accepted for publication. Most of these additional participants were not previously screened with the VHF tasks. 
 
 
 3 
 As can be seen in the Results section, this turned out to be the case for about half of the participants. 
 
 
 4 
 Modern conceptions of Broca’s area are more complex than simply a “motor speech” area, for example,  Carreiras, Pattamadilok, Meseguer, Barber, and Devlin (2012)  have found evidence that Broca’s area is involved in the understanding of syntax. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 Support for this research was provided in part by the National Institutes of Health (R01NS052585-03), the National Institute on Aging (5R01AG029411, 5R01AG022381-08), the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (1R01NS069696-01A1), the National Center for Research Resources (P41-RR14075, R01 RR16594-01A1, the NCRR BIRN Morphometric Project BIRN002, and Functional Imaging Biomedical Informatics Research Network (FBIRN) U24 RR021382), and the National Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (R01 EB001550, R01 EB006758, 1K25 EB013649-01). The scanning was made possible by an Odysseus Grant paid by the Government of Flanders to M. B. 
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Weiss 
 PH 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Pieperhoff 
 P 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 S 
 
 
 Gurd 
 JM 
 
 
 
 Analysis of neural mechanisms underlying verbal fluency in cytoarchitectonically defined stereotaxic space-the roles of Brodmann areas 44 and 45 
 Neuroimae 
 2004 
 22 
 42 
 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Voxel-based morphometry-The methods 
 Neuroimae 
 2000 
 11 
 805 
 821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 RF 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Wandell 
 BA 
 
 
 Differential sensitivity to words and shapes in ventral occipito-temporal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 1604 
 1611 
 16956978 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benson 
 DF 
 
 
 Geschwind 
 N 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Aphasia and related disorders: A clinical approach 
 Principles of behavioral neurology 
 1985 
 Philadelphia 
 FA Davis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benson 
 RR 
 
 
 FitzGerald 
 DB 
 
 
 LeSueur 
 LL 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DN 
 
 
 Kwong 
 KK 
 
 
 Buchbinder 
 BR 
 
 
 
 Language dominance determined by whole brain functional MRI in patients with brain lesions 
 Neurology 
 1999 
 52 
 798 
 809 
 10078731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Swanson 
 SJ 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Morris 
 GL 
 
 
 Mueller 
 WM 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 
 Determination of language dominance using functional MRI: A comparison with the Wada test 
 Neurology 
 1996 
 46 
 978 
 984 
 8780076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brazdil 
 M 
 
 
 Zakopcan 
 J 
 
 
 Kuba 
 R 
 
 
 Fanfrdlova 
 Z 
 
 
 Rektor 
 I 
 
 
 Atypical hemispheric language dominance in left temporal lobe epilepsy as a result of the reorganization of language functions 
 Epilepsy & Behavior 
 2003 
 4 
 414 
 419 
 12899862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Lavidor 
 M 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Paulignan 
 Y 
 
 
 Nazir 
 TA 
 
 
 Cerebral lateralization of frontal lobe language processes and lateralization of the posterior visual word processing system 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 672 
 681 
 18052778 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Paulignan 
 Y 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Ibarrola 
 D 
 
 
 Nazir 
 TA 
 
 
 The left ventral occipito-temporal response to words depends on language lateralization but not on visual familiarity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 1153 
 1163 
 19684250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Complementary hemispheric specialization for language production and visuospatial attention 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A 
 2013 
 110 
 E322 
 E330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carreiras 
 M 
 
 
 Pattamadilok 
 C 
 
 
 Meseguer 
 E 
 
 
 Barber 
 H 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Broca’s area plays a causal role in morphosyntactic processing 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 816 
 820 
 22285905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Naccache 
 L 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 Henaff 
 MA 
 
 
 
 The visual word form area: Spatial and temporal characterization of an initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior split-brain patients 
 Brain 
 2000 
 123 
 291 
 307 
 10648437 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis I: Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 The unique role of the visual word form area in reading 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 254 
 262 
 21592844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Waldron 
 E 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Left posterior temporal regions are sensitive to auditory categorization 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 1174 
 1188 
 18284339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desikan 
 RS 
 
 
 Segonne 
 F 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Quinn 
 BT 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 
 An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 968 
 980 
 16530430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci using standard anatomical nomenclature 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 53 
 1 
 15 
 20547229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Feczko 
 E 
 
 
 Augustinack 
 JC 
 
 
 Pacheco 
 J 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 
 Differential effects of aging and Alzheimer’s disease on medial temporal lobe cortical thickness and surface area 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 2009 
 30 
 432 
 440 
 17869384 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dien 
 J 
 
 
 A tale of two recognition systems: Implications of the fusiform face area and the visual word form area for lateralized object recognition models 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 1 
 16 
 18805434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Donnan 
 GA 
 
 
 Darby 
 DG 
 
 
 Saling 
 MM 
 
 
 Identification of brain region for coordinating speech articulation 
 Lancet 
 1997 
 349 
 221 
 222 
 9014903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dorsaint-Pierre 
 R 
 
 
 Penhune 
 VB 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Neelin 
 P 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Bouffard 
 M 
 
 
 
 Asymmetries of the planum temporale and Heschl’s gyrus: Relationship to language lateralization 
 Brain 
 2006 
 129 
 1164 
 1176 
 16537567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dos Santos Sequeira 
 S 
 
 
 Woerner 
 W 
 
 
 Walter 
 C 
 
 
 Kreuder 
 F 
 
 
 Lueken 
 U 
 
 
 Westerhausen 
 R 
 
 
 
 Handedness, dichotic-listening ear advantage, and gender effects on planum temporale asymmetry-A volumetric investigation using structural magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 622 
 636 
 16098999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Leonard 
 CM 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Uncoupled leftward asymmetries for planum morphology and functional language processing 
 Brain and Language 
 2006 
 98 
 102 
 111 
 16697453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Lombardino 
 LJ 
 
 
 Walczak 
 AR 
 
 
 Bonihla 
 L 
 
 
 Leonard 
 CM 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Manual and automated measures of superior temporal gyrus asymmetry: Concordant structural predictors of verbal ability in children 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 41 
 813 
 822 
 18440244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance images 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2000 
 97 
 11044 
 11049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Rajendran 
 N 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Augustinack 
 J 
 
 
 Hinds 
 O 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BT 
 
 
 
 Cortical folding patterns and predicting cytoarchitecture 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 1973 
 1980 
 18079129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Dieterich 
 M 
 
 
 Haselgrove 
 C 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 
 Whole brain segmentation: Automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 33 
 341 
 355 
 11832223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 9 
 195 
 207 
 9931269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Tootell 
 RBH 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 High-resolution intersubject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 272 
 284 
 10619420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 Segonne 
 F 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 
 Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 11 
 22 
 14654453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flynn 
 FG 
 
 
 Benson 
 DF 
 
 
 Ardila 
 A 
 
 
 Anatomy of the insula—Functional and clinical correlates 
 Aphasiology 
 1999 
 13 
 55 
 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Foundas 
 AL 
 
 
 Leonard 
 CM 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 R 
 
 
 Fennell 
 E 
 
 
 Heilman 
 KM 
 
 
 Planum temporale asymmetry and language dominance 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1994 
 32 
 1225 
 1231 
 7845562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frye 
 RE 
 
 
 Liederman 
 J 
 
 
 Malmberg 
 B 
 
 
 McLean 
 J 
 
 
 Strickland 
 D 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 Surface area accounts for the relation of gray matter volume to reading-related skills and history of dyslexia 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 2625 
 2635 
 20154011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geschwind 
 N 
 
 
 Levitsky 
 W 
 
 
 Human brain: Left-right asymmetries in temporal speech region 
 Science 
 1968 
 161 
 186 
 187 
 5657070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagler 
 DJ 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Smoothing and cluster thresholding for cortical surface-based group analysis of fMRI data 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 33 
 1093 
 1103 
 17011792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heim 
 S 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Specialisation in Broca’s region for semantic, phonological, and syntactic fluency? 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 40 
 1362 
 1368 
 18296070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 D 
 
 
 The cortical organization of speech processing 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 393 
 402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hunter 
 ZR 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Visual half-field experiments are a good measure of cerebral language dominance if used properly: Evidence from fMRI 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 316 
 325 
 17716695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Josse 
 G 
 
 
 Kherif 
 F 
 
 
 Flandin 
 G 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Predicting language lateralization from gray matter 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 13516 
 13523 
 19864564 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Josse 
 G 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Left planum temporale: An anatomical marker of left hemispheric specialization for language comprehension 
 Brain Research, Cognitive Brain Research 
 2003 
 18 
 1 
 14 
 14659492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 McDermott 
 J 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 The fusiform face area: A module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 4302 
 4311 
 9151747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 SS 
 
 
 Highley 
 JR 
 
 
 Garcia-Finana 
 M 
 
 
 Sluming 
 V 
 
 
 Rezaie 
 R 
 
 
 Roberts 
 N 
 
 
 Sulcal variability, stereological measurement and asymmetry of Broca’s area on MR images 
 Journal of Anatomy 
 2007 
 211 
 534 
 555 
 17727624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 SS 
 
 
 Roberts 
 N 
 
 
 Garcia-Finana 
 M 
 
 
 Mohammadi 
 S 
 
 
 Ringelstein 
 EB 
 
 
 Knecht 
 S 
 
 
 
 Can the language-dominant hemisphere be predicted by brain anatomy? 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 2013 
 2029 
 20807056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knecht 
 S 
 
 
 Drager 
 B 
 
 
 Deppe 
 M 
 
 
 Bobe 
 L 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 H 
 
 
 Floel 
 A 
 
 
 
 Handedness and hemispheric language dominance in healthy humans 
 Brain 
 2000 
 123 
 2512 
 2518 
 11099452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kosslyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Seeing and imagining in the cerebral hemispheres: A computational approach 
 Psychological Review 
 1987 
 94 
 148 
 175 
 3575583 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loring 
 DW 
 
 
 Meador 
 KJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 GP 
 
 
 Murro 
 AM 
 
 
 Smith 
 JR 
 
 
 Flanigin 
 HF 
 
 
 
 Cerebral language lateralization: Evidence from intracarotid amobarbital testing 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1990 
 28 
 831 
 838 
 2247209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luders 
 E 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Jancke 
 L 
 
 
 Schlaug 
 G 
 
 
 A voxel-based approach to gray matter asymmetries 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 656 
 664 
 15193594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1971 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palaniyappan 
 L 
 
 
 Liddle 
 PF 
 
 
 Differential effects of surface area, gyrification and cortical thickness on voxel based morphometric deficits in schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 693 
 699 
 22227049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panizzon 
 MS 
 
 
 Fennema-Notestine 
 C 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Jernigan 
 TL 
 
 
 Prom-Wormley 
 E 
 
 
 Neale 
 M 
 
 
 
 Distinct genetic influences on cortical surface area and cortical thickness 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2728 
 2735 
 19299253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penhune 
 VB 
 
 
 Cismaru 
 R 
 
 
 Dorsaint-Pierre 
 R 
 
 
 Petitto 
 LA 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 RJ 
 
 
 The morphometry of auditory cortex in the congenitally deaf measured using MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 20 
 1215 
 1225 
 14568490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penhune 
 VB 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 RJ 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 JD 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Interhemispheric anatomical differences in human primary auditory cortex: Probabilistic mapping and volume measurement from magnetic resonance scans 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1996 
 6 
 661 
 672 
 8921202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plaut 
 DC 
 
 
 Behrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Complementary neural representations for faces and words: A computational exploration 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 2011 
 28 
 251 
 275 
 22185237 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postelnicu 
 G 
 
 
 Zollei 
 L 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Combined volumetric and surface registration 
 IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 
 2009 
 28 
 508 
 522 
 19273000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The anatomy of language: Contributions from functional neuroimaging 
 Journal of Anatomy 
 2000 
 197 
 335 
 359 
 11117622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 The interactive account of ventral occipitotemporal contributions to reading 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 246 
 253 
 21549634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pujol 
 J 
 
 
 Deus 
 J 
 
 
 Losilla 
 JM 
 
 
 Capdevila 
 A 
 
 
 Cerebral lateralization of language in normal left-handed people studied by functional MRI 
 Neurology 
 1999 
 52 
 1038 
 1043 
 10102425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rademacher 
 J 
 
 
 Caviness 
 VS 
 Jr. 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 Galaburda 
 AM 
 
 
 Topographical variation of the human primary cortices: Implications for neuroimaging, brain mapping, and neurobiology 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1993 
 3 
 313 
 329 
 8400809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raschle 
 NM 
 
 
 Chang 
 M 
 
 
 Gaab 
 N 
 
 
 Structural brain alterations associated with dyslexia predate reading onset 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 57 
 742 
 749 
 20884362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richardson 
 FM 
 
 
 Ramsden 
 S 
 
 
 Ellis 
 C 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Megnin 
 O 
 
 
 Catmur 
 C 
 
 
 
 Auditory short-term memory capacity correlates with gray matter density in the left posterior STS in cognitively normal and dyslexic adults 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 3746 
 3756 
 21568634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Risse 
 GL 
 
 
 Gates 
 JR 
 
 
 Fangman 
 MC 
 
 
 A reconsideration of bilateral language representation based on the intracarotid amobarbital procedure 
 Brain and Cognition 
 1997 
 33 
 118 
 132 
 9056279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Explaining left lateralization for words in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 14745 
 14753 
 21994390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Segonne 
 F 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Glessner 
 M 
 
 
 Salat 
 D 
 
 
 Hahn 
 HK 
 
 
 
 A hybrid approach to the skull stripping problem in MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 1060 
 1075 
 15219578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreer 
 J 
 
 
 Arnold 
 S 
 
 
 Quiske 
 A 
 
 
 Wohlfarth 
 R 
 
 
 Ziyeh 
 S 
 
 
 Altenmuller 
 D 
 
 
 
 Determination of hemisphere dominance for language: Comparison of frontal and temporal fMRI activation with intracarotid amytal testing 
 Neuroradiology 
 2002 
 44 
 467 
 474 
 12070719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Springer 
 JA 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Swanson 
 SJ 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PS 
 
 
 
 Language dominance in neurologically normal and epilepsy subjects: A functional MRI study 
 Brain 
 1999 
 122 
 2033 
 2046 
 10545389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JC 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 Division of labor between lateral and ventral extrastriate representations of faces, bodies, and objects 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 4122 
 4137 
 21736460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Mapping brain asymmetry 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2003 
 4 
 37 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tucholka 
 A 
 
 
 Fritsch 
 V 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 An empirical comparison of surface-based and volume-based group studies in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 63 
 1443 
 1453 
 22732555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Localization of sublexical speech perception components 
 Brain and Language 
 2010 
 114 
 1 
 15 
 20413149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tzourio 
 N 
 
 
 Nkanga-Ngila 
 B 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Left planum temporale surface correlates with functional dominance during story listening 
 NeuroReport 
 1998 
 9 
 829 
 833 
 9579674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 Papathanassiou 
 D 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Delcroix 
 N 
 
 
 
 Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 273 
 289 
 11771995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Colateralization of Broca’s area and the visual word form area in left-handers: fMRI evidence 
 Brain and Language 
 2012 
 122 
 171 
 178 
 22196742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Seurinck 
 R 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Further fMRI validation of the visual half field technique as an indicator of language laterality: A large-group analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2011 
 49 
 2879 
 2888 
 21708178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Westerhausen 
 R 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Speech dominance is a better predictor of functional brain asymmetry than handedness: A combined fMRI word generation and behavioral dichotic listening study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 under revision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vingerhoets 
 G 
 
 
 Alderweireldt 
 AS 
 
 
 Vandemaele 
 P 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 
 Praxis and language are linked: Evidence from co-lateralization in individuals with atypical language dominance 
 Cortex 
 2013 
 49 
 172 
 183 
 22172977 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wada 
 J 
 
 
 Rasmussen 
 T 
 
 
 Intracarotid-injection of sodium amytal for the lateralization of cerebral speech dominance, experimental and clinical observations 
 Journal of Neurosurgery 
 1960 
 17 
 266 
 282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Neelin 
 P 
 
 
 
 Structural asymmetries in the human brain: A voxel-based statistical analysis of 142 MRI scans 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 868 
 877 
 11532891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Willems 
 RM 
 
 
 Peelen 
 MV 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Cerebral lateralization of face-selective and body-selective visual areas depends on handedness 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 1719 
 1725 
 19889713 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winkler 
 AM 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 Blangero 
 J 
 
 
 Almasy 
 L 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 
 Cortical thickness or gray matter volume? The importance of selecting the phenotype for imaging genetics studies 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 53 
 1135 
 1146 
 20006715 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winkler 
 AM 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BT 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Greve 
 DN 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 
 Measuring and comparing brain cortical surface area and other areal quantities 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 61 
 1428 
 1443 
 22446492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ziegler 
 J 
 
 
 Ferrand 
 L 
 
 
 Orthography shapes the perception of speech: The consistency effect in auditory word recognition 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 1988 
 5 
 683 
 689 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zollei 
 L 
 
 
 Stevens 
 A 
 
 
 Huber 
 K 
 
 
 Kakunoori 
 S 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Improved tractography alignment using combined volumetric and surface registration 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 51 
 206 
 213 
 20153833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Distribution of the functional LI from the WG task for all participants. The horizontal dashed lines indicate the threshold of ±0.6. The vertical dashed lines indicate the categorical boundaries of LLD, BLD, and RLD. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Significance map of volume LI difference between LLD and RLD rendered on the inflated cortical surface of the symmetric template (uncorrected vertex-wise threshold  p  < .01). Red/yellow indicates that LLD > RLD; blue/cyan indicates that LLD < RLD. The yellow outlines indicate the boundaries of the a priori ROIs (ALA and PLA). (A) Results from the template initialized with the LH. (B) Results from the template initialized with the RH. From top to bottom: (1) lateral view, (2) inferior view, (3) medial view. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 (A) View of the left posterior sylvian fissure including the STG cluster on the folded symmetric template pial surface (same data as in  Figure 2A1 ). (B) LI results broken down by subject group and volume, area, and thickness (with standard deviation bars across subject) based upon averages from within the exploratory STG cluster. The  p  values are for post hoc tests of laterality or differences in laterality between LLD and RLD. The  p  values have been corrected for the eight post hoc tests. All  p  values are based on a two-sided  t  test with 53 DOF. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 (A) vOT cluster shown on the pial surface of the LH (view is inferior and slightly lateral). The green outline is the lateral occipito-temporal gyrus from the Destrieux atlas. This is the same data as in  Figure 2A2 . (B) LI results broken down by subject group and volume, area, and thickness (with standard deviation bars across subject) based upon averages from within the vOT cluster. The  p  values are for post hoc tests of laterality or differences in laterality between LLD and RLD. The  p  values have been corrected for the eight post hoc tests. All  p  values are based on a two-sided  t  test with 53 DOF. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Method used to geometrically construct an ROI to cover the STG cluster. (A) The PT was divided into three sections along its long axis (green–brown–green labels). The lateral aspect of the STG (LASTG) was divided into five sections (pink–blue– pink labels). (B) The second section of the PT and the first section of the LASTG are combined to cover the STG cluster fairly well (orange outline). The significance map is the same as in  Figure 2A1  and  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Mean volume LIs for anatomically defined ROIs (with standard deviation bars). Ins: Insula. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Comparison of Volume LI within the STG (exploratory) cluster and within the (confirmatory) anatomically constructed ROI (with standard deviation bars across subject). The bars for the LLD and RLD are the same as the “Volume” bars in  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participant Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 Total 
 Male 
 Female 
 Age (SD) 
 Handedness (SD) 
 fMRI LI (SD) 
 Template 
 
 
 
 
 LLD 
 34 
 8 
 26 
 20.4 (2.6) 
 −2.12 (1.06) 
 +0.78 (.09) 
 21 
 
 
 RLD 
 21 
 3 
 18 
 20.9 (2.8) 
 −2.35 (0.78) 
 −0.84 (.11) 
 21 
 
 
 BLD 
 10 
 4 
 6 
 21.0 (1.7) 
 −2.01 (1.36) 
 +0.14 (.43) 
 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Significant Clusters in the LLD–RLD Exploratory Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 Cluster 
 Initialization Hemisphere 
 Cluster p Value 
 Area (mm 2 ) 
 
 Centroid MNI305 Coordinates (XYZ) 
 
 
 
 
 STG 
 LH 
 .0076 
 207 
 −58.2 
 −39.9 12.7 
 
 
 
 RH 
 .0094 
 187 
 58.6 
 −39.3 13.5 
 
 
 vOT 
 LH 
 .0482 
 337 
 −36.9 
 −49.6 −17.8 
 
 
 
 RH 
 .0390 
 343 
 37.8 
 −49.2 −17.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Correlation Coefficients between Anatomical Asymmetries and Functional Data (Number of Participants in the Lower Left Half) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Measures 
 fMRI 
 Behavioral 
 
 
 
 PT 
 POp 
 PTr 
 HG 
 Insula 
 STG 
 vOT 
 WG 
 LDT 
 DL 
 VHFP 
 VHFW 
 
 
 
 
 PT 
 
 −.16 
 −.12 * 
 .11 
 −.06 
 .42 ** 
 .10 
 .17 * 
 .05 
 −.05 
 .07 
 .09 
 
 
 POp 
 65 
 
 −.05 
 .12 
 .12 
 −.03 
 .11 
 .16 
 .00 
 .16 
 .01 
 −.03 
 
 
 PTr 
 65 
 65 
 
 .10 
 .15 
 −.11 
 −.00 
 −.06 
 −.17 
 .25 
 −.18 
 −.02 
 
 
 HG 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 
 −.10 
 .03 
 −.15 
 .08 
 −.17 
 .07 
 .05 
 .08 
 
 
 Insula 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 
 .15 * 
 .27 ** 
 .38 * 
 −.03 
 .38 * 
 .16 
 .20 
 
 
 STG 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 
 .41 a 
 .46 a 
 .26 
 .20 
 .27 * 
 .11 
 
 
 vOT 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 
 .47 a 
 .31 * 
 .49 ** 
 .11 
 .06 
 
 
 WG 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 65 
 
 .62 ** 
 .58 ** 
 .51 ** 
 .53 ** 
 
 
 LDT 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 52 
 
 .23 
 .46 ** 
 .23 * 
 
 
 DL 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 35 
 
 .21 
 .38 * 
 
 
 VHFP 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 48 
 38 
 
 .60 ** 
 
 
 VHFW 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 58 
 48 
 38 
 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WG = LI fMRI BOLD signal in WG; LDT = LI fMRI BOLD signal in lexical decision; DL = LI accuracy dichotic listening; VHF p  = LI naming times pictures; VHFW = LI naming times words. 
 
 
 * 
 p  < .05 in this analysis or in the analysis of participants with data on all measures ( n  = 34). 
 
 
 ** 
 p  < .05 in both analyses. 
 
 
 a 
 A cell where the correlation is circular, for example, the STG and vOT clusters were defined based on fMRI activation in WG, so a high correlation is expected. 
 
 
 
 
