
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 23707590 
 3820094 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.061 
 NIHMS501073 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Risk-taking and social exclusion in adolescence: Neural mechanisms underlying peer influences on decision-making 
 
 
 
 
 Peake 
 Shannon J. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Dishion 
 Thomas J. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Stormshak 
 Elizabeth A. 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Moore 
 William E. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 Jennifer H. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, University of Oregon 
 2 Department of Psychology, Arizona State University 
 3 College of Education, University of Oregon 
 
 Corresponding Author: Jennifer H. Pfeifer, Department of Psychology, 1227 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1227,  jpfeifer@uoregon.edu , 541-346-1984 
 
 
 23 
 8 
 2013 
 
 
 24 
 5 
 2013 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2013 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2014 
 
 82 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.061 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Social exclusion and risk-taking are both common experiences of concern in adolescence, yet little is known about how the two may be related at behavioral or neural levels. In this fMRI study, adolescents (N=27, 14 male, 14–17 years-old) completed a series of tasks in the scanner assessing risky decision-making before and after an episode of social exclusion. In this particular context, exclusion was associated with greater behavioral risk-taking among adolescents with low self-reported resistance to peer influence (RPI). When making risky decisions after social exclusion, adolescents who had lower RPI exhibited higher levels of activity in right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ), and this response in rTPJ was a significant mediator of the relationship between RPI and greater risk-taking after social exclusion. Lower RPI was also associated with lower levels of activity in lPFC during crashes following social exclusion, but unlike rTPJ this response in lPFC was not a significant mediator of the relationship between RPI and greater risk-taking after social exclusion. The results suggest that mentalizing and/or attentional mechanisms have a unique direct effect on adolescents’ vulnerability to peer influence on risk-taking. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 T32 MH020012 || MH 
 
 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse : NIDA 
 P30 DA018760 || DA 
 
 
 
 
 Social interactions take on increased importance in adolescence ( Crone & Dahl, 2012 ) and often provide the context in which teens make decisions to engage in risky behaviors such as substance use, health-risking sexual behavior, and reckless driving ( Dishion & Owen, 2002 ;  La Greca et al., 2001 ;  Simons-Morton et al., 2005 ). One particularly powerful and distressing form of social interaction is exclusion or rejection by peers ( Williams, 2007 ), which can negatively affect individual and interpersonal behavior through decreased self-regulation ( Baumeister et al., 2005 ), aggression ( Ayduk et al., 2008 ), and self-defeating actions ( Twenge et al., 2002 ). Although previous neuroimaging studies have examined risky decisions and associated neural processes in adolescence ( Bjork et al., 2007 ;  Burnett et al., 2010 ;  van Leijenhorst et al., 2010 ) little is currently known about the neural mechanisms relating social exclusion and subsequent risk-taking behavior. This study employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the behavioral and neural consequences of social exclusion on risky decision-making. 
 
 1.1 Neuroimaging and adolescent risk-taking 
 Biological factors contributing to adolescent risky decision-making have been explored using neuroimaging methods in combination with tasks that examine reward processing and cognitive control. For example, reward sensitivity (specifically, reactivity during anticipation of rewards) typically exhibits a non-linear trajectory that peaks in adolescence relative to childhood and adulthood ( Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Galvan et al., 2006 ;  Galvan et al., 2010 ;  Geier et al., 2010 ;  Somerville et al., 2011 ;  Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010 ), although there are some exceptions to this pattern (e.g.,  Bjork et al., 2004 ). Further, greater neural responses in the ventral striatum (VS) during reward anticipation is associated with more drug use ( Bjork et al., 2011 ), and responses in nucleus accumbens to reward outcomes are stronger in teens with externalizing disorders that are often associated with risk behavior ( Bjork et al., 2010 ). In addition, adolescents can show decreased neural activity in cognitive regulatory structures such as lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) during risk decisions compared to adults (e.g.,  Eshel et al., 2007 ), but the evidence for this pattern is mixed ( Crone & Dahl, 2012 ). 
 Based on these results and findings from animal models of adolescence ( Spear, 2011 ), imbalances between the maturation rates of cortical and subcortical regions respectively associated with cognitive control and reward have been proposed as an explanation for heightened adolescent risk-taking ( Casey et al., 2011 ;  Ernst et al., 2009 ;  Somerville et al., 2010 ;  Steinberg, 2008 ;  Steinberg, 2010 ). These models suggest that approach or reward-seeking systems develop earlier in adolescence than avoidance or control systems, resulting in an imbalance that leads to heightened sensitivity to reward cues and insufficient cognitive control. However, outstanding methodological questions and results inconsistent with these models ( Blakemore & Robbins, 2012 ;  Johnson et al., 2009 ;  Pfeifer & Allen, 2012 ;  Romer et al., 2010 ) suggest that additional factors play a role in adolescent risky decision-making. 
 
 
 1.2 Social exclusion and adolescent risk-taking 
 Rejection, exclusion, and ostracism are all associated with various forms of negative behavior ( Williams, 2007 ). However, these terms can refer to different types of experiences, ranging from chronic rejection over time to a single episode of exclusion ( Leary et al., 2005 ). Within the developmental literature on peer relations, the term peer rejection generally refers to the social status of a child based on sociometric methods (i.e., peer nominations of children that are least liked), and represents cumulative effects of negative social treatment by peers ( Dodge et al., 2003 ;  Coie et al., 1992 ). Longitudinal studies link chronic peer rejection in childhood with increased risk-taking during adolescence in forms such as externalizing behavior, truancy, substance use, and association with deviant peers ( Dishion, Capaldi, Spracklen, & Li, 1995 ;  Prinstein & La Greca, 2004 ). Other approaches alternately use the terms rejection, exclusion, or ostracism to refer to an event in which an individual is left out of a group or denied participation in some activity ( Williams, 2007 ). In this manuscript, we use the term social exclusion to denote a single event or episode, and we use the term rejection in the more general sense of a person or group indicating that they do not value a personal relationship ( Leary et al., 2005 ). Repeated experiences of rejection by peers, such as those experienced by youth receiving a “rejected” sociometric status using peer nomination techniques, are referred to here by the term chronic peer rejection. 
 Single experiences of social exclusion have been linked to decreased self-regulation ( Baumeister et al., 2005 ;  DeWall et al., 2008 ), poor health choices ( Oaten et al., 2008 ), and taking irrational, self-defeating risks ( Twenge et al., 2002 ). In addition, reactions to social exclusion can include aggression ( Ayduk et al., 2008 ;  Twenge et al., 2007 ), attempts to affiliate ( Maner et al., 2007 ), or negative social actions ( Carter-Sowell et al., 2008 ;  Mallott et al., 2009 ), any of which could conceivably take the form of risk-taking behavior in peer contexts. That is, teens with threatened or unmet social needs might engage in risky activities or behaviors as a way to interact with or gain the recognition of peers. It is also possible that adolescents might respond to exclusion with risky behavior as a way of establishing a non-conforming identity, in effect “rejecting the rejectors” ( Sampson & Laub, 1997 ). Factors affecting the emotional magnitude and specific behavioral reactions to exclusion can vary by individual and context ( Molden et al., 2009 ;  Smart Richman & Leary, 2009 ). Adolescents with poor social skills or low self-esteem may be more likely to experience rejection ( Leary et al., 1995 ) and may be more emotionally affected than less vulnerable teens ( Prinstein & Aikins, 2004 ). More generally, susceptibility to peer influence varies by individual, and differences in the ability to resist peer influence are significant predictors of real-world risk behavior ( Monahan et al., 2009 ;  Steinberg & Monahan, 2007 ). 
 
 
 1.3 Neuroimaging of mentalizing in adolescence 
 A growing body of neuroimaging research examines the systems supporting various facets of adolescent social cognition that are relevant to peer relationships and social influences on decision-making ( Pfeifer & Blakemore, 2012 ). One particularly relevant facet of adolescent social cognition that has been examined using fMRI is mentalizing, or the ability to apprehend others’ mental states such as thoughts or feelings, and to use this information to understand others’ behavior ( Frith & Frith, 2007 ). According to a recent meta-analysis ( Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009 ), multiple complementary neural systems have been implicated in mentalizing. One set of regions, composed of temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and the cortical midline structures (CMS) including medial prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices (mPFC, mPPC) is responsive to more abstract representations of the thoughts and perspectives of others ( Uddin et al., 2007 ). 
 A relatively consistent pattern in this line of inquiry is that adolescents exhibit enhanced reactivity in mPFC during mentalizing, relative to adults ( Blakemore, 2008 ;  Blakemore et al., 2007 ;  Blakemore et al., 2010 ;  Burnett et al., 2008 ;  Gunther Moor et al., 2012 ;  Pfeifer et al., 2009 ;  Pfeifer & Blakemore, 2012 ;  van den Bos et al., 2011 ;  Wang et al., 2006 ). Another emerging developmental pattern is a linear increase in TPJ responses during mentalizing ( Gweon et al., 2012 ;  van den Bos et al., 2011 ). Prior work in our laboratory suggests that adolescents and adults also utilize TPJ to ascertain what others (parents, friends, and peers) think specifically about one’s self ( Pfeifer et al., 2009 ), and that adolescents engage in this reflective perspective-taking even when they are not prompted to do so. Taken together, this research suggests that when exploring peer influences on adolescent decision-making, it may be profitable to consider not only the VS and lPFC responses that are associated with risk decisions, but also the potential contribution of mentalizing responses in TPJ and CMS (mPFC and mPPC). 
 A recent and highly relevant study examining peer influence on decision-making, for example, concluded that the presence of peers during risk decisions heightened responses in VS and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) more for adolescents than adults ( Chein et al., 2011 ). The degree to which responses in VS increased under peer influence was inversely related to self-reported resistance to peer influence. Adults engaged lPFC more than adolescents, but this was not impacted by peer presence. One interpretation of these findings is in that particular context, peer influences on risk-taking in adolescence might be mediated by heightened VS and OFC responses that represent enhanced reward sensitization, rather than diminished cognitive control. Complicating this view, however, are studies in which adolescents exhibit  decreased  VS response to some reward conditions ( Geier et al., 2010 ;  van Leijenhorst et al., 2010 ; and  Bjork et al., 2010 ), or  increased  VS activity is associated with more adaptive functioning such as increased resistance to peer influence and decreased risky behavior ( Pfeifer et al., 2011 ). Collectively, these results suggest the existence of additional mechanisms for peer influence on decision-making during adolescence that vary according to the  kind  of social context experienced. 
 
 
 1.4 Current study 
 To examine the neural mechanisms underlying the effects of social exclusion on risk decisions in adolescence, the current study combines a behavioral measure of risk-taking (the Stoplight task;  Gardner & Steinberg, 2005 ) with a manipulation producing an experience of social exclusion (the Cyberball game;  Williams et al., 2000 ). The Stoplight task features a series of intersections at which subjects must decide whether to stop for a yellow traffic light (safe option) or try to make it through the intersection (risk option). While the risk option often results in a faster time, it is accompanied by the possibility of crashing and losing time if another car crosses the intersection. The social aspect of the study comes from the presence and actions of two hypothetical peers (implied to be watching the participant via Internet connection). After being trained on the task by playing five rounds alone (to eliminate learning effects), subjects first complete the Stoplight task while the peers are watching, then play the Stoplight task again after an experience of being excluded from a different game by the peers. During the second Stoplight task, the subject is being watched by the same peers that just excluded them. This manipulation creates an additional layer of risk decision factors representing the subject’s expected social evaluation of his or her performance by the peers, above and beyond the risk decisions of the task. 
 Although previous work has examined the influence of peers on risk decisions using neuroimaging techniques ( Chein et al., 2011 ), to our knowledge, no prior study has examined the effect of social exclusion on risk-taking. We predicted that social exclusion would have a significant behavioral effect on risk-taking, and would also be associated with patterns of brain activity (during risk decisions and/or when receiving feedback about decision outcomes) that significantly differ from those associated with simple peer presence. These differences may be expressed in our  a priori  regions of interest derived from the above literature review: VS, OFC, lateral PFC, CMS (mPFC and mPPC), and TPJ. In addition, we suspected the effects of exclusion on risk-taking behavior and associated brain activity might be influenced by individual differences in factors relating to adolescent responses to interpersonal relationships, specifically resistance to peer influence. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Twenty-seven adolescents participated in the experiment. Seven subjects were excluded, for various reasons: five for behavioral data lost due to software error, one for excessive movement that resulted in an unusable structural scan, and one due to scanner mechanical malfunction. Therefore, a total of 20 participants (10 girls, 10 boys, 14.0–16.8 years old,  M  = 15.3,  SD  = 0.8) were included in the following analyses. All subjects were right-handed and reported no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders and no MRI contraindications. All parents of participants provided written consent, and adolescent participants provided written assent, approved by the University of Oregon Institutional Review Board. Following the study, all adolescent participants were debriefed and received monetary compensation. 
 
 
 2.2 Task descriptions 
 The Stoplight task is a computerized driving task in which subjects must cross a series of traffic intersections ( Chein et al., 2011 ;  Gardner & Steinberg, 2005 ) as quickly as possible to reach a party being held in the distance by their friends. At each cross-street, subjects were presented with a traffic light that turned yellow at varying distances from the intersection and had to decide to either stop the car or try to make it through the intersection before the light turned red (see  Figure 1 ). No steering or accelerating options were possible. A Stop decision resulted in a 3 second delay while the subject’s car waited for the light to turn from red to green, resulting in a relatively slow overall time for the trial. A Go decision yielded a faster time for the trial with no stopping or waiting, but also carried the risk of crashing if a car was approaching from the cross street. Crashing resulted in a 6 second delay, making the time slower than if the subject had stopped for the red light. The subjects were presented with their overall time and the number of crashes at the end of each round. The probability of crashing was kept constant at 30% (i.e., three intersections out of every ten had cars approaching on the cross street, resulting in a crash if the subject made a Go decision), but this was not explicitly revealed to subjects. Timing of the onset of the yellow and red lights and the presence of a car on the cross street varied; parameters were randomized within five canonical round sequences and the order of rounds was randomized for each subject. Pilot sessions for this study, and previous studies using the Stoplight task ( Chein et al., 2011 ), found learning effects in the form of higher behavioral risk performance during initial rounds of the task followed by decreased and more stable risk patterns thereafter. To reduce these presumed learning effects, five practice rounds were included to allow risk performance to reach stable levels. These rounds were completed with no peers or experimental personnel present to establish a measure of baseline risk prior to the social exclusion manipulation. Practice rounds featured ten trials, each of which required a Stop or Go decision. Rounds in subsequent Peer and Exclusion conditions (see descriptions below) featured 30 trials of the same duration, light timing, and crash probability parameters as the practice rounds. The increased number of trials in Peer and Exclusion conditions was chosen to ensure adequate numbers of Stop and Go decision data points for statistical modeling. Total round time varied by subject decisions and outcomes, but was approximately 6 minutes per round for peer and exclusion conditions. 
 The social exclusion manipulation employed the Cyberball game ( Williams et al., 2000 ) which creates the subjective experience of being excluded using a computerized ball-toss game played by the subject and two peers ostensibly connected via the Internet. The subject viewed three computer figures representing the subject and the two peers (which were portrayed to be the same two individuals throughout all aspects of the experiment), and played a virtual game involving tossing a ball to each other. Unknown to the subject, the first round was programmed to result in equal throws, creating an inclusion condition in which every player receives the ball approximately 1/3 of the 25 total throws. The second round was programmed to include the subject for the first 1–2 throws, after which the peers throw only to each other, creating an exclusion condition in which the subject feels left out of the game. 
 
 
 2.3 Task sequence 
 Participants were informed that they would be playing several online games with two other adolescents who were located in different states (i.e., not peers that they would likely know from their city). In order to “meet” the other teens, the subjects recorded a brief video profile that consisted of the subject stating his or her name and an activity that they enjoyed. Typical profile statements were “Hi, my name is Julie and I like to play volleyball” or “Hey, I’m Matt and I like skateboarding.” Video recordings were then uploaded to a shared Internet file folder while subjects watched and were told that each participant would meet the other two by viewing the profiles during the fMRI session. Subjects then received instructions and demonstration of the two computer tasks (Stoplight task and Cyberball game). 
 After completing five practice rounds of the Stoplight task with no peers watching, subjects viewed the video profiles of two same-age adolescent peers (one male and one female), and were told that they would be interacting with these peers via computer desktop sharing software connected over the Internet. Subjects were then told that each participant would complete the Stoplight task while the other two participants watched. To facilitate the cover story, the subject was asked to confirm that they could see and hear the remote connection of each peer and was required to wait to begin their session until similar confirmation was received from the remote peers. The driving behavior of the peers was programmed to represent average to slightly above average performance. One peer completed the course with average risk (number of go decisions) and average performance (number of crashes and course time), while the other peer completed the course with slightly above-average risk and performance. Both performance levels were selected based on pilot testing results to be within the normal range of participant performance. After viewing each of the remote peer sessions, the subject completed the Stoplight task while being watched by these same remote peers (pre-exclusion condition). Next, subjects completed separate inclusion and exclusion rounds of the Cyberball game, ostensibly with the same peers. Following the Cyberball game, subjects completed the Stoplight task again and were told that their performance was still being watched, again by the same peers that previously excluded them from the Cyberball game (post-exclusion condition). All tasks except initial creation of the video profile were conducted in the scanner, but only fMRI data from the pre and post exclusion Stoplight tasks are analyzed or discussed here. Manipulation checks following the scanning procedure indicated that only 1 of the 20 subjects explicitly expressed disbelief that they were interacting with real peers, while 90% either believed they were interacting with real peers or were not certain (16 believed completely, 2 indicated they “weren’t sure,” 1 participant did not believe the peers were real, and 1 participant declined to respond to the question). 
 
 
 2.4 Questionnaires and surveys 
 Immediately following the scanner session, subjects completed the Need-Threat Scale (NTS), a 12-item self-report measure that assesses the extent to which social needs are satisfied, including items that measure subjects’ feelings of reduced self-esteem, belongingness, social control, and meaningful existence ( Williams et al., 2000 ). Items such as “I felt rejected” were measured on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 = “not at all” to 5 = “very much so” with half of the items reverse-scored. The total NTS score is the average of all item scores, with lower scores reflecting less social need satisfaction (i.e., more threat to social needs). NTS scores ranged from 1.33 to 3.92 ( M =  2.91,  SD  = 0.68). 
 Subjects also completed the 10-item Resistance to Peer Influence (RPI) scale, which measures the degree to which adolescents are influenced by the views and opinions of peers ( Steinberg & Monahan, 2007 ). The items present subjects with two statements reflecting contradictory positions on aspects of peer influence (e.g., Some people take more risks when they are with their friends than they do when they are alone - BUT - other people act just as risky when they are alone as when they are with their friends). Subjects first choose which statement describes the person they are most like then decide whether the statement is “sort of true for them” or “really true for them.” Items are scored on a scale of 1 to 4, with lower scores representing less resistance to peer influence (i.e., more susceptibility to the opinions of peers), and some items are reverse-coded. The total RPI score is the computed average of all item scores. RPI scores ranged from 1.80 to 3.50 ( M  = 2.99,  SD =  0.47). 
 Finally, real-world risk-taking behavior was assessed by a self-report measure of substance use, affiliation with deviant peers, and antisocial behavior originally developed and used by the Oregon Research Institute ( Metzler et al., 2001 ) and subsequently employed in several longitudinal studies tracking adolescent risk behavior (e.g.,  Stormshak et al., 2011 ). Substance use was defined by 8 items for cigarette, alcohol, marijuana, and other drug use in the last 30 days. Deviant peer affiliation was gauged by 19 items for the number of times in the last month the subject was with friends who engaged in antisocial behavior, for example carrying a weapon, stealing, illegal substance use, fighting, or who got arrested. Antisocial behavior was defined using 11 items that assessed the number of times in the last month that the subject lied to their parents, damaged property, stole, panhandled, or got in fights. Item response scales are similar to those used in the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System questionnaire, which monitors health-risk behaviors in a national sample of adolescents and young adults ( Eaton et al., 2010 ). Scales of risk behaviors engaged in by the subject during the last 30 days range from “never” to “more than 20 times.” Individual item scores were aggregated to create a composite of risk-taking (CRT) across substance use, deviant peer affiliation, and antisocial behavior. CRT scores ranged from 0 to 2.36 ( M  = 0.43,  SD =  0.58). 
 
 
 2.5 fMRI data acquisition 
 MRI data were acquired on a 3.0 Tesla Allegra head-only scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) at the Robert and Beverly Lewis Center for NeuroImaging at the University of Oregon. Blood oxygen-level dependent, echo-planar images (BOLD-EPI) were acquired with T2*-weighted gradient echo sequence (TE = 30 ms, TR = 2000 ms, flip angle = 80°, 64 × 64 voxel matrix, 200 mm field of view, bandwidth = 2605 Hz/pixel, 32 contiguous axial slices with interleaved acquisition, slice thickness = 4 mm, and in-plane resolution of 3.125 × 3.125 mm). This sequence also prospectively corrected for motion during acquisition using PACE ( Thesen et al., 2000 ). The first 2 scans were discarded to allow scanner magnetization to reach equilibrium. A total of 224 scans were collected during each of two functional runs. High-resolution structural scans were acquired using an inversion recovery T1-weighted 3D MP-RAGE pulse sequence (TE = 4.38 ms, TR = 2500 ms, TI = 1100 ms, flip angle = 8°, 256 × 192 voxel matrix, 256 × 192 rectangular field of view, bandwidth = 130 Hz/pixel, 160 contiguous axial slices coplanar to the functional scans, slice thickness = 1 mm, and in-plane resolution of 1 × 1 mm). Prior to each run, field map scans were acquired to obtain magnetization values used to correct for field inhomogeneity (TE = 4.99 ms, TR = 500 ms, flip angle = 55°, 64 × 64 voxel matrix, 200 mm field of view, bandwidth = 1530 Hz/pixel, 32 contiguous axial slices with interleaved acquisition, slice thickness = 4 mm, and in-plane resolution of 3.125 × 3.125 mm). Computer images for the tasks were projected from an LCD display onto a mirror above the subject’s eyes. Behavioral responses were acquired using a button box interfaced with task software. 
 
 
 2.6 fMRI data analysis 
 DICOM images were converted to NIfTI format via MRIConvert ( http://lcni.uoregon.edu/~jolinda/MRIConvert/ ) and non-brain tissue was removed using FSL’s Brain Extraction Tool ( Smith, 2002 ). Voxel displacement maps were generated to correct for field inhomogeneities using the FieldMap toolkit, and then used to unwarp and realign functional images in SPM8 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom). Anatomical images were coregistered to the mean functional image, then segmented into six tissue types using the unified segmentation approach ( Ashburner & Friston, 2005 ). DARTEL was used to create a group anatomical template, transformations from which were applied to warp functional data to the ICBM-152 template supplied with SPM8 ( Ashburner, 2007 ). Normalized data were smoothed using a 6-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. 
 In each participant’s fixed-effects analysis, a general linear model (GLM) was created with four regressors of interest, modeled as events: two decision regressors (Stop and Go) and two outcome regressors (Crash and NoCrash). The yellow light preceding a given decision (Stop or Go) served as the onset for that decision. The onset of the Crash event corresponded to another car crashing into the participant’s car. The NoCrash events had no obvious onset time. However, because the Crash events happened at most 2 seconds after the yellow light, we modeled the NoCrash event as being 2 seconds after the yellow light as well, the point at which the outcome of the risky decision was clear. A fifth regressor was used for the “Game Over” period at the end of each run, lasting from its onset until the end of the run. This was done to remove possible feedback effects from viewing the game score from the implicit baseline condition, which could alter contrasts comparing our conditions of interest with the implicit baseline. Six additional motion parameters, derived from the online parameters compiled during acquisition correction, were also used as regressors of no interest. A high-pass filter of 128 seconds was applied to eliminate low-frequency fluctuations in the signal, and AR(1) was used to correct for serial autocorrelations. The model was convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function, and the parameter estimates resulting from the GLM were used to create linear contrast images for each of four event conditions (decisions: Go, Stop and outcomes: Crash, NoCrash), in which each event was compared to an implicit baseline during which participants were “driving”, but not making any decisions or receiving any feedback, representing a high-level control condition. These fixed-effects contrast images were then entered into subsequent random-effects analyses. Monte Carlo simulations were conducted using AlphaSim (implemented in Neuroelf) to determine the minimum cluster size needed for an FWE rate of .05, given a voxel-wise threshold of p = .005. As such, results are reported at p < .005, uncorrected for magnitude, and an extent threshold of 19–23 or more contiguous voxels (depending on the analysis; precise thresholds are noted in figures and tables). We also used MarsBaR ( http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/ ) to extract parameter estimates for significant clusters in the group-level analyses, for correlations with questionnaires and survey measures. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral data 
 Risk-taking was defined as making a Go decision, expressed as a percentage of trials in the run. Risky decisions were found to increase following the social exclusion manipulation, but this effect failed to reach statistical significance ( t (19) = 1.84, two-tailed  p  = .08). The degree of increase in risk-taking was negatively correlated with resistance to peer influence (RPI) scores ( r (18) = −.55,  p  = .01; see  Figure 2 ), revealing that adolescents with greater susceptibility to peer influence displayed larger increases in risky decisions after being socially excluded by peers. Neither social need satisfaction as assessed by the Need-Threat Scale (NTS), nor the composite of real-world risk-taking behavior (CRT), were significantly related to changes in risk decisions after social exclusion ( r s(18) = −.14 and .21, respectively,  ns ). As expected, the RPI was significantly negatively correlated with the CRT ( r (18) = −.50,  p  = .024). The NTS was also significantly correlated with the RPI ( r (18) = .51,  p  = .021), indicating that adolescents with less resistance to peer influence also experienced lower levels of social need satisfaction after social exclusion. NTS was not significantly correlated with the CRT (r(18) = −.27,  ns ). 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI data: Decisions and outcomes 
 To confirm that the neural responses elicited by the Stoplight task were consistent with those observed in prior decision-making studies, we first examined main effects of decision type (collapsed across pre- and post-exclusion conditions), using one-sample t-tests. As expected, making a safe decision (Stop > Go) was associated with greater activity in right lateral PFC (see  Table 1 ), specifically in the inferior frontal gyrus – a region frequently associated with self-regulation ( Aron et al., 2004 ; Cohen, et al., 2013). In addition, making a risky decision (Go > Stop) elicited responses in the ventral striatum (VS), a region consistently implicated in reward motivation ( Knutson et al., 2008 ) and specifically responsive during Go decisions in a prior study using this paradigm ( Chein et al., 2011 ). A robust response during Stop decisions was also found in primary sensory regions including temporal lobe (bilateral superior temporal gyrus) and occipital lobe (lingual gyrus), which likely reflect the auditory and visual effects of the car coming to a stop (i.e., the sound of tires squealing, the light turning red, and sudden cessation of movement). A similar but more pronounced pattern of activation was found during Crash outcomes, most likely due to the auditory and visual effects of the car crash (see  Table 1 ). Note that all events in a given condition were compared to a baseline within that same run during which participants were “driving”, but not making any decisions or receiving any feedback about outcomes, representing a high-level control condition. 
 
 
 3.3 fMRI data: Effects of social exclusion on decisions and outcomes 
 To isolate the effects of social exclusion, each of the four events (decisions: Go, Stop and outcomes: Crash, NoCrash) were compared directly between pre- and post-exclusion (while controlling for baseline responses to “driving” within each run; see  Table 2  for a complete list of increases and decreases associated with social exclusion). Stop decisions after social exclusion compared to before (post Stop > pre Stop) were associated with greater activation in right dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) and a number of regions implicated in social cognition, including posterior cingulate cortex in mPPC, mPFC, bilateral TPJ, and medial OFC (see  Figure 3A ). In contrast, there were no significant increases in neural responses during Go decisions following social exclusion versus prior to it (post Go > pre Go). Meanwhile, crash outcomes following social exclusion compared to before (post Crash > pre Crash) were associated with increased activation in subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sACC), left ventrolateral PFC (vlPFC), and mPFC (see  Figure 3B ). We also made comparisons between decision events (Go > Stop; Stop > Go) as well as between outcome events (Crash > NoCrash; NoCrash > Crash) across conditions (pre > post exclusion; post > pre-exclusion), but none of these contrasts produced any significant interactions between exclusion conditions and decision events or outcome events. 
 
 
 3.4 fMRI data: Regression and mediation analyses focused on resistance to peer influence 
 Next, regression analyses were conducted to determine whether neural responses during risky decisions following exclusion (while being watched by the same peers that instigated the exclusion) were related to individual differences in susceptibility to peer influence (see  Table 3  for a complete listing of brain-behavior relationships based on resistance to peer influence). During risky decisions after social exclusion (Go post > Stop post), RPI was negatively correlated with responses in several structures including the right TPJ (see  Figure 4A ), a region associated with mentalizing and attention-shifting ( Mitchell, 2008 ;  Scholz et al., 2009 ), and positively correlated with responses in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a region associated with error detection and conflict resolution ( Botvinick et al., 2001 ;  Botvinick et al., 2004 ). In other words, adolescents with less resistance (more susceptibility) to peer influence had higher responses in right TPJ and lower responses in dorsal ACC during risky decisions. During negative outcomes after social exclusion (Crash post > NoCrash post), RPI was positively correlated with responses in both right and left lPFC (see  Figure 4B ). Similarly, RPI was positively correlated with responses in right lPFC during Crash outcomes after social exclusion relative to before (Crash post > Crash pre). In other words, adolescents with more resistance (less susceptibility) to peer influence had higher responses in lPFC during negative outcomes after social exclusion (both in comparison to positive outcomes after social exclusion, and negative outcomes prior to social exclusion). 
 Finally, we explored whether brain activity after social exclusion (in right TPJ during risky decisions, or in right lPFC during negative outcomes) mediated the observed significant relationship between susceptibility to peer influence and change in risk-taking following social exclusion. To do so, we first extracted parameter estimates from the clusters identified in the prior regression analyses (right TPJ during negative correlation with RPI in Go post > Stop post; right lPFC during positive correlation with RPI in Crash post > NoCrash post) using MarsBaR ( Brett et al., 2002 ). Next, we utilized the “INDIRECT” SPSS Macro for Multiple Mediation ( Preacher & Hayes, 2008 ). The results showed there was a significant indirect effect of resistance to peer influence through only one proposed mediating ROI, right TPJ, on the dependent variable, change in risk-taking behavior after social exclusion (unstandardized coefficient = 0.979, se = .405, Z med effect  = 2.42,  p  = .016; see Inline  Supplementary Figure 1 ). INDIRECT also uses bootstrapping to calculate bias-corrected estimates of indirect effects (in this case, 5,000 sample draws, with replacement). Estimation of the indirect effect using a nonparametric sampling procedure such as the INDIRECT bootstrapping method increases power while maintaining control over Type I error rate and does not require the assumption of normality of the sampling distribution, which is rarely the case in smaller samples (MacKinnon et al., 2004;  Preacher & Hayes, 2008 ). This analysis demonstrated that the bias-corrected 95% confidence interval for the indirect effect of RPI on change in risk-taking after social exclusion through right TPJ did not include zero (.1407–2.0224), providing additional support for the assertion that right TPJ mediated the effect of resistance to peer influence on change in risk-taking behavior after social exclusion. To further explore the functional role of right TPJ during risky (relative to safe) decisions after social exclusion, psychophysiological interactions (PPIs) were computed for each subject to examine differences in neural activity between Go and Stop trials during the run following social exclusion (for details of this exploratory PPI analysis, see Inline  Supplementary Figure 2 ). 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study explored the effects of social exclusion on behavioral risk-taking and associated brain function. Subjects performed a simulated driving task during neuroimaging, while in the implied presence of two online peers, and after an event where the peers socially included, then explicitly excluded the subjects from an online game. Increased risky behavior following social exclusion correlated with low resistance to peer influence. On average, after social exclusion relative to before, safe decisions elicited greater responses in regions associated with social cognition, including bilateral TPJ and cortical midline structures. Furthermore, after social exclusion relative to before, negative outcomes elicited greater responses in regions associated with self-regulation and negative affect, including lPFC and sACC. Finally, there were significant associations between individual differences in resistance to peer influence and post-exclusion neural responses during decisions or outcomes. In general, adolescents with low resistance to peer influence exhibited stronger activity during risky decisions in regions associated with social cognition including right TPJ, suggesting attention to the presence of peers and possible consideration of peer evaluations of adolescent decisions. Meanwhile, adolescents with high resistance to peer influence showed stronger activity during negative outcomes in regions associated with self-regulation like lPFC, which may influence their ability to regulate affective reactions to disappointing results. However, only right TPJ activity during risky decisions after social exclusion significantly mediated some degree of the relationship between resistance to peer influence and behavioral risk-taking after social exclusion. 
 
 4.1 Behavioral effects of social exclusion on risk-taking 
 As a group, adolescents took more risks following social inclusion and subsequent exclusion in the Cyberball task, although the increase did not reach statistical significance in this small sample. However, teens with greater susceptibility to peer influence did take significantly more risks after being excluded by peers, suggesting that individual differences may shape the strategies adolescents employ for risk decisions in social contexts ( Monahan et al., 2009 ;  Steinberg & Monahan, 2007 ). The low correlation between risk after exclusion and self-reported social need satisfaction (Need Threat Scale) suggests that some individuals with decreased social need satisfaction may respond with increased risk while others may respond with decreased risk. This divergence may represent different motivational strategies to rejection ( Smart Richman & Leary, 2009 ), which can include attempts to gain acceptance ( DeWall et al., 2008 ;  Maner et al., 2007 ), to harm others ( Twenge et al., 2002 ), or to withdraw from the rejecting situation ( Molden et al., 2009 ). Previous studies have also shown that responses to rejection and exclusion vary according to how the excluded individual perceives the intentions of the excluder ( Molden et al., 2009 ), and by their estimate of whether reaffiliating with the excluding group is possible ( Maner et al., 2007 ). Given the range of possible self-report and behavioral responses to rejection, a primary goal of this study was therefore to combine those methods with neuroimaging to identify common and individual factors affecting adolescent risk-taking. 
 
 
 4.2 Reward processing and cognitive control 
 Neuroimaging results of the main effect of decision type collapsed across pre- and postexclusion conditions confirmed activation in expected regions ( Cohen et al., 2012 ;  Aron et al., 2004 ;  Knutson et al., 2008 ), with safe decisions (Stop > Go) producing more activation in lPFC and risky decisions (Go > Stop) producing more activation in VS. Although the Stoplight task features elements of classic reward learning paradigms, the purpose of this study was to isolate the neural mechanisms underlying any effects of social exclusion on risk. To achieve this, each decision (Go, Stop) and outcome (Crash No Crash) following exclusion was contrasted with the same condition prior to exclusion. This controlled for the basic effects of expected value and reward prediction error, enabling the examination of effects specifically attributable to social contextual aspects of decisions. 
 
 
 4.3 Mentalizing and decision-making 
 Our novel finding that safe decisions elicited greater responses in bilateral TPJ, mPPC, and mPFC following social exclusion suggests that social cognitive processes play a role in decision-making for adolescents. All three regions are associated with mentalizing and Theory of Mind ( Scholz et al., 2009 ;  Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009 ), suggesting adolescents may be considering potential social evaluation by the peers who just excluded them and are currently watching their performance. All three regions are also centrally implicated in self-referential processing ( D’Argembeau et al., 2007 ; Northoff et al., 2011;  Pfeifer et al., 2007 ;  Pfeifer et al., 2009 ;  Pfeifer & Peake, 2011 ), raising the possibility that making safe decisions in such an amplified social-evaluative context may be more salient to adolescents’ social self-concept, although perhaps in a sample of high-risk teens the pattern would be reversed, as suggested by the brain-behavior correlations between RPI and right TPJ during risky decisions after social exclusion. 
 Taken together, the enhanced response of regions involved in social cognition suggests that typically-developing adolescents may be considering the thoughts and potential evaluation of peers when deciding  not  to take risks after being socially excluded. This illuminates an important additional mechanism for peer influences on decision-making during adolescence. The current dominant perspective is that peer influences are exerted on risk-taking primarily via heightened reward sensitivity (e.g.,  Chein et al., 2011 ). These results illustrate the value of considering multiple pathways for social influence that may vary according to the risk behaviors and interpersonal contexts being assessed, especially the role of mentalizing regions in social influences on risk-taking ( Blakemore & Robbins, 2012 ;  Pfeifer & Allen, 2012 ). 
 
 
 4.4 Resistance to peer influence, mentalizing during risky decisions, and regulation during negative outcomes 
 One of two particularly notable findings from the regression analyses is that while making risky decisions following social exclusion (Go post > Stop post), teens with  lower  resistance to peer influence demonstrated greater neural activation in right TPJ, a region associated with mentalizing ( Table 3 ;  Scholz et al., 2009 ;  Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009 ). Furthermore, bootstrapping analyses indicated there was a significant indirect effect of right TPJ responses, whereby it mediated the relationship between lower resistance to peer influence and higher behavioral risk-taking after social exclusion. These results suggest that, in contrast to teens with higher resistance to peer influence, adolescents with lower resistance to peer influence may be experiencing divided attention – which may include thinking more about the thoughts of the peers who just excluded them – and these processes of attention-shifting and mentalizing may affect their risk decisions. From a reward-learning perspective, decisions are assumed to track increased expected value ( Niv & Montague, 2008 ;  Schultz, 2010 ) and social reward can influence value calculations ( Evans et al., 2011 ;  Fehr, 2009 ). 
 In the context of the current study, it may be that the expected value of high-risk rewards becomes greater due to the increased motivational currency of social approval or social status, particularly following an episode of social exclusion for adolescents with low resistance to peer influence. This is consistent with a recent study showing that the effects of emotional preferences on decision-making are mediated by mentalizing networks ( Evans et al., 2011 ), including the TPJ regions found in the current study. We suggest that mentalizing is a reasonable cognitive response to social exclusion in our paradigm, not only because mentalizing during decisions may reflect a concern with the peers’ evaluations of one’s decisions, but also because reactions to exclusion or rejection depend on the perceived intentions of the excluder ( Molden et al., 2009 ;  Smart Richman & Leary, 2009 ). 
 The second notable set of findings from the regression analyses is that during processing of Crash outcomes following social exclusion (Crash post > NoCrash post), teens with  higher  resistance to peer influence exhibited greater activation in right and left lPFC, regions associated with cognitive control in general ( Hampshire et al., 2010 ) and with regulation or suppression of emotional responses in particular ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ;  Wager et al., 2008 ). Similarly, greater activation in right lPFC during Crash outcomes after social exclusion relative to before social exclusion (Crash post > Crash pre) was positively correlated with  higher  resistance to peer influence. Based on the aforementioned studies showing lPFC involvement in emotion regulation and suppression, this suggests that teens who are less susceptible to peer influence (i.e., those with higher RPI) show more activity potentially related to self-regulation when experiencing negative outcomes in a peer context. The ability to better regulate the effect of negative emotions may be related to the ability to make less emotional (more rational) decisions in peer contexts ( Figner et al., 2009 ). Although this finding is suggestive that lPFC plays a role in decreased risk after exclusion, the mediation analysis failed to find a significant indirect effect of RPI on post-exclusion risk through lPFC. This indicates that lPFC activity (considered as a possible proxy for self-regulation) is not sufficient to explain the difference in post-exclusion risk related to RPI. 
 Taken together, neural response profiles during processing of risky decisions and negative outcomes suggest that some teenagers are better able to regulate their actions and reactions following social exclusion, while other teenagers may experience an increase in the salience of the thoughts of peers after exclusion, or shift their attention from the choices at hand. These varying neural profiles represent different strategies or approaches to decision-making following social exclusion that may help explain why some adolescents engage in risky behavior. Once again, the results of this study reveal additional possible mechanisms of peer influence on adolescent decision-making. Beyond the contributions of reward sensitivity illustrated in prior research ( Chein et al., 2011 ), the brain-behavior relationships illustrated here suggest that mentalizing and regulation processes also serve to impact decision-making and outcome processing in ways that may amplify or buffer against risk-taking in adolescence. 
 
 
 4.5 Negative affect, regulation, and outcome processing 
 It is worth noting that increased responses during Crash outcomes following social exclusion were observed in subgenual ACC and lPFC, regions that have been implicated in negative affect and emotion regulation. Subgenual ACC activation is common in tasks involving distress associated with social exclusion ( Masten et al., 2009 ;  Sebastian et al., 2009 ), negative self-referential processing ( Yoshimura et al., 2009 ), and reappraisal of negative emotion ( Wager et al., 2008 ). Similarly, ventral lPFC has also been identified in studies of negative affect following social exclusion ( Sebastian et al., 2009 ), emotion regulation in labeling negative affect ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ), and negative emotion reappraisal ( Wager et al., 2008 ). Collectively, the pattern of increased activity in this network of regions points to the possibility that poor performance in the presence of peers (crashing) following exclusion generates even greater negative emotion and subsequent emotional regulation (which may include labeling or reappraisal). 
 
 
 4.6 Limitations and future directions 
 This study begins to explore the neural mechanisms underlying the effect of social exclusion on adolescent risk-taking. Due to our concern that the potential affective, motivational, and regulatory consequences of social exclusion might linger through multiple rounds of the Stoplight task, we chose to run a fixed sequence which could not counterbalance the order of pre and post exclusion rounds. The post-exclusion round was always performed after the pre-exclusion round, and as such any changes observed in neural responses may be due simply to boredom, fatigue, or adaptation (repetition suppression) – particularly significant decreases. However, this explanation seems less likely to account for significant increases from pre to post exclusion, such as those observed in social cognition and regulatory regions. An ideal follow-up study could utilize a between-subjects design that compares neural responses during decisionmaking and outcome processing across two conditions: post social exclusion, and post social inclusion. This would help to illuminate whether the differences between this study and the effects reported in a prior study of peer influence on adolescent risk-taking ( Chein et al., 2011 ), are due to the social exclusion manipulation per se, or some other aspect of our design such as the use of virtual rather than familiar peers. Any changes may also be due to other aspects of the intervening game of Cyberball, which featured both an inclusion and exclusion round. It is possible that interaction with peers during Cyberball could result in increased awareness of peers that influenced risk without being due specifically to exclusion. While this possibility exists, we feel that any potential additive effect of increased interaction would be a small contributor to the change in risk when compared to the effect of exclusion. This view is informed by the considerable number of Cyberball studies that have found strong exclusion effects in between-subjects designs where one group received only the inclusion condition and another group received both inclusion and exclusion rounds ( Boyes & French, 2009 ;  Carter-Sowell et al., 2008 ;  Geniole et al., 2011 ;  van Beest & Williams, 2006 ). 
 Another future direction to pursue is the use of this protocol in a higher-risk sample of adolescents. The typically-developing adolescents who participated in this study tended to engage in low rates of risky behavior such as substance use or affiliation with deviant peers, although there was meaningful variability in this measure that could provide clear  a priori  hypotheses about neural and behavioral differences. Comparing the reactions and underlying neurocognitive mechanisms of high-risk versus typically-developing adolescents to social exclusion and peer influence could reveal unique activation patterns that define the difference between adaptive and maladaptive response profiles. Studies could also manipulate the performance and behavior of the peer observers, to compare between reinforcement for risky decisions and reinforcement for safe decisions, which would be directly relevant to existing research on peer contagion effects in high-risk adolescents ( Gardner & Steinberg, 2005 ;  Steinberg et al., 2008 ). In addition, it is unclear whether these neural mechanisms of peer influence on decision-making in this context are unique to adolescents, or would also be observed in children and adults. Future research should undertake comparisons across these age groups to examine developmental trajectories and age-invariant patterns. 
 
 
 4.7 Conclusion 
 In conclusion, this study begins to illuminate some possible neural mechanisms of peer influence on decision-making (especially when taking risks and processing negative outcomes), in the specific context of social exclusion. Beyond a pathway previously identified in VS suggesting reward sensitivity may support some forms of peer influence on adolescent risk-taking ( Chein et al., 2011 ), this study suggests two additional relevant pathways. First, at the point of making a decision, engagement of TPJ in adolescents following social exclusion may be associated with mentalizing processes and/or shifting attention away from the decision, which mediates relations between resistance to peer influence and behavioral risk-taking after social exclusion. Thus, in normative development, this may actually be associated with playing it safe, but in youth with low self-reported resistance to peer influence it may instead facilitate more risky behavior. Second, when the outcome of a risky decision is known, engagement of lPFC in adolescents following social exclusion may indicate regulatory processes likewise play a critical role in supporting healthy decisions, perhaps especially when negative affect is already high. These findings may ultimately pave the way for new interventions to reduce adolescent risk-taking that focus not only on reward sensitivity, but also regulatory abilities, attentional control, and mentalizing processes. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 
 
 
 
 Support for this project was provided by the National Institute on Drug Abuse to the Center on Early Adolescence (DA018760, Tony Biglan, Oregon Research Institute, PI) and the NIMH Development, Emotion, Ecology, and Psychopathology Research Training grant to S.A.P. (5T32-MH20012, Elizabeth A. Stormshak, University of Oregon, Child and Family Center and College of Education, PI). Special thanks are due to Lauren Kahn and the University of Oregon Developmental Social Neuroscience lab. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at the Robert and Beverly Lewis Center for Neuroimaging at the University of Oregon. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errorsmaybe discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2004 
 Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 8 
 170 
 177 
 15050513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm 
 Neuroimage 
 38 
 95 
 113 
 17761438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Unified segmentation 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 839 
 851 
 15955494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ayduk 
 O 
 
 
 Gyurak 
 A 
 
 
 Luerssen 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Individual differences in the rejection-aggression link in the hot sauce paradigm: The case of Rejection Sensitivity 
 J Exp Soc Psychol 
 44 
 775 
 782 
 20228947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 DeWall 
 CN 
 
 
 Ciarocco 
 NJ 
 
 
 Twenge 
 JM 
 
 
 2005 
 Social exclusion impairs self-regulation 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 88 
 589 
 15796662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 2010 
 Incentive-elicited mesolimbic activation and externalizing symptomatology in adolescents 
 J Child Psychol Psyc 
 51 
 827 
 837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 GW 
 
 
 Caggiano 
 DM 
 
 
 Bennett 
 SM 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 2004 
 Incentive-elicited brain activation in adolescents: similarities and differences from young adults 
 J Neurosci 
 24 
 1793 
 1802 
 14985419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 2011 
 Psychosocial problems and recruitment of incentive neurocircuitry: Exploring individual differences in healthy adolescents 
 Dev Cognitive Neurosci 
 27 
 4839 
 4849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Danube 
 CL 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 2007 
 Developmental differences in posterior mesofrontal cortex recruitment by risky rewards 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 4839 
 49 
 17475792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2008 
 The social brain in adolescence 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 267 
 277 
 18354399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Imaging brain development: The adolescent brain 
 Neuroimage 
 61 
 397 
 406 
 22178817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 2012 
 Decision-making in the adolescent brain 
 Nat Neurosci 
 15 
 1184 
 1191 
 22929913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 2010 
 The role of puberty in the developing adolescent brain 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 31 
 926 
 933 
 20496383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 H 
 
 
 Choudhury 
 S 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Adolescent development of the neural circuitry for thinking about intentions 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2 
 130 
 139 
 17710201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boyes 
 ME 
 
 
 French 
 DJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Having a cyberball: Using a ball-throwing game as an experimental social stressor to examine the relationship between neuroticism and coping 
 Pers Indiv Differ 
 47 
 396 
 401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Conflict monitoring and cognitive control 
 Psychol Rev 
 108 
 624 
 11488380 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2004 
 Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: an update 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 8 
 539 
 546 
 15556023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Anton 
 J 
 
 
 Valabregue 
 R 
 
 
 Poline 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Region of interest analysis using an SPM toolbox [abstract] 
 Presented at the 8th International Conference on Functional Mapping of the Human Brain 
 June 2–6, 2002 
 Sendai, Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Bault 
 N 
 
 
 Coricelli 
 G 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Adolescents’ heightened risk-seeking in a probabilistic gambling task 
 Cognitive Dev 
 25 
 183 
 196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Bird 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Development during Adolescence of the Neural Processing of Social Emotion 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 21 
 1736 
 1750 
 18823226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carter-Sowell 
 AR 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 2008 
 Ostracism increases social susceptibility 
 Social Influence 
 3 
 143 
 153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Jones 
 RM 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 2011 
 Braking and Accelerating of the Adolescent Brain 
 Journal of Research on Adolescence 
 21 
 21 
 33 
 21475613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 L 
 
 
 Uckert 
 K 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2011 
 Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the brain’s reward circuitry 
 Dev Sci 
 14 
 F1 
 F10 
 21499511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JR 
 
 
 Berkman 
 ET 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2012 
 Intentional and incidental self-control in ventrolateral PFC 
 Principles of Frontal Lobe Functions 
 2 
 Oxford University Press 
 USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coie 
 JD 
 
 
 Lochman 
 JE 
 
 
 Terry 
 R 
 
 
 Hyman 
 C 
 
 
 1992 
 Predicting early adolescent disorder from childhood aggression and peer rejection 
 J Consult Clin Psych 
 60 
 783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 2012 
 Understanding adolescence as a period of social-affective engagement and goal flexibility 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 13 
 636 
 650 
 22903221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Argembeau 
 A 
 
 
 Ruby 
 P 
 
 
 Collette 
 F 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Balteau 
 E 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 Salmon 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Distinct regions of the medial prefrontal cortex are associated with self-referential processing and perspective taking 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 19 
 935 
 944 
 17536964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeWall 
 CN 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 Vohs 
 KD 
 
 
 2008 
 Satiated with belongingness? Effects of acceptance, rejection, and task framing on self-regulatory performance 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 95 
 1367 
 19025289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dishion 
 TJ 
 
 
 Capaldi 
 DM 
 
 
 Spracklen 
 KM 
 
 
 Li 
 F 
 
 
 1995 
 Peer ecology of male adolescent drug use 
 Dev Psychopathol 
 7 
 803 
 824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dishion 
 TJ 
 
 
 Owen 
 LD 
 
 
 2002 
 A longitudinal analysis of friendships and substance use: Bidirectional influence from adolescence to adulthood 
 Dev Psychol 
 38 
 480 
 12090479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dodge 
 KA 
 
 
 Lansford 
 JE 
 
 
 Burks 
 VS 
 
 
 Bates 
 JE 
 
 
 Pettit 
 GS 
 
 
 Fontaine 
 R 
 
 
 Price 
 JM 
 
 
 2003 
 Peer rejection and social information-processing factors in the development of aggressive behavior problems in children 
 Child Dev 
 74 
 374 
 393 
 12705561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eaton 
 DK 
 
 
 Kann 
 L 
 
 
 Kinchen 
 S 
 
 
 Shanklin 
 S 
 
 
 Ross 
 J 
 
 
 Hawkins 
 J 
 
 
 Harris 
 WA 
 
 
 Lowry 
 R 
 
 
 McManus 
 T 
 
 
 Chyen 
 D 
 
 
 2010 
 Youth risk behavior surveillance-United States, 2009 
 MMWR Surveill Summ 
 59 
 1 
 142 
 20520591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Jazbec 
 S 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Blair 
 J 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 2005 
 Amygdala and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and omission of gains in adults and adolescents 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 1279 
 1291 
 15850746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Romeo 
 RD 
 
 
 Andersen 
 SL 
 
 
 2009 
 Neurobiology of the development of motivated behaviors in adolescence: a window into a neural systems model 
 Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
 93 
 199 
 211 
 19136024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eshel 
 N 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJ 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural substrates of choice selection in adults and adolescents: development of the ventrolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 1270 
 1279 
 17118409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evans 
 S 
 
 
 Fleming 
 SM 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Averbeck 
 BB 
 
 
 2011 
 Effects of Emotional Preferences on Value-based Decision-making Are Mediated by Mentalizing and Not Reward Networks 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 23 
 2197 
 2210 
 20946058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fehr 
 E 
 
 
 2009 
 Social preferences and the brain 
 Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain 
 Academic Press 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figner 
 B 
 
 
 Mackinlay 
 RJ 
 
 
 Wilkening 
 F 
 
 
 Weber 
 EU 
 
 
 2009 
 Affective and deliberative processes in risky choice: age differences in risk taking in the Columbia card task 
 J Exp Psychol Learn 
 35 
 709 
 730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 2007 
 Social cognition in humans 
 Current Biology 
 17 
 R724 
 R732 
 17714666 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 Adolescent development of the reward system 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 4 
 6 
 20179786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Parra 
 CE 
 
 
 Penn 
 J 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Earlier development of the accumbens relative to orbitofrontal cortex might underlie risk-taking behavior in adolescents 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 6885 
 6892 
 16793895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gardner 
 M 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2005 
 Peer influence on risk taking, risk preference, and risky decision making in adolescence and adulthood: An experimental study 
 Dev Psychol 
 41 
 625 
 634 
 16060809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geier 
 CF 
 
 
 Terwilliger 
 R 
 
 
 Teslovich 
 T 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 2010 
 Immaturities in reward processing and its influence on inhibitory control in adolescence 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 1613 
 1629 
 19875675 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geniole 
 SN 
 
 
 Carre 
 JM 
 
 
 McCormick 
 CM 
 
 
 2011 
 State, not trait, neuroendocrine function predicts costly reactive aggression in men after social exclusion and inclusion 
 Biol Psychol 
 87 
 137 
 145 
 21382439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Güroğlu 
 B 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Van der Molen 
 MW 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 2012 
 Social exclusion and punishment of excluders: Neural correlates and developmental trajectories 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 708 
 717 
 21791248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gweon 
 H 
 
 
 Dodell-Feder 
 D 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 2012 
 Theory of Mind performance in children correlates with functional specialization of a brain region for thinking about thoughts 
 Child Dev 
 83 
 1853 
 1868 
 22849953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampshire 
 A 
 
 
 Chamberlain 
 SR 
 
 
 Monti 
 MM 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2010 
 The role of the right inferior frontal gyrus: inhibition and attentional control 
 Neuroimage 
 50 
 1313 
 1319 
 20056157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SB 
 
 
 Blum 
 RW 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 2009 
 Adolescent maturity and the brain: the promise and pitfalls of neuroscience research in adolescent health policy 
 J Adolescent Health 
 45 
 216 
 221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Phillips 
 PEM 
 
 
 2008 
 Representation of subjective value in the striatum 
 Academic Press 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 La Greca 
 AM 
 
 
 Prinstein 
 MJ 
 
 
 Fetter 
 MD 
 
 
 2001 
 Adolescent peer crowd affiliation: Linkages with health-risk behaviors and close friendships 
 J Pediatr Psychol 
 26 
 131 
 11259515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leary 
 MR 
 
 
 2005 
 Varieties of interpersonal rejection 
 Cambridge University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leary 
 MR 
 
 
 Schreindorfer 
 LS 
 
 
 Haupt 
 AL 
 
 
 1995 
 The role of low self-esteem in emotional and behavioral problems: Why is low self-esteem dysfunctional? 
 J Soc Clin Psychol 
 14 
 297 
 314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Crockett 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Way 
 BM 
 
 
 2007 
 Putting feelings into words: affect labeling disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective stimuli 
 Psychol Sci 
 18 
 421 
 428 
 17576282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacKinnon 
 DP 
 
 
 Fairchild 
 AJ 
 
 
 Fritz 
 MS 
 
 
 2007 
 Mediation analysis 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 58 
 593 
 614 
 16968208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mallott 
 MA 
 
 
 Maner 
 JK 
 
 
 DeWall 
 N 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 NB 
 
 
 2009 
 Compensatory deficits following rejection: The role of social anxiety in disrupting affiliative behavior 
 Depress Anxiety 
 26 
 438 
 446 
 19319992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maner 
 JK 
 
 
 DeWall 
 CN 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 Schaller 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Does Social Exclusion Motivate Interpersonal Reconnection? Resolving the “Porcupine Problem” 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 92 
 42 
 17201541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Borofsky 
 LA 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 McNealy 
 K 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural correlates of social exclusion during adolescence: understanding the distress of peer rejection 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 4 
 143 
 157 
 19470528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metzler 
 CW 
 
 
 Biglan 
 A 
 
 
 Rusby 
 JC 
 
 
 Sprague 
 JR 
 
 
 2001 
 Evaluation of a comprehensive behavior management program to improve school-wide positive behavior support 
 Education & Treatment of Children 
 24 
 448 
 479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 2008 
 Activity in right temporo-parietal junction is not selective for theory-of-mind 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 262 
 271 
 17551089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molden 
 DC 
 
 
 Lucas 
 GM 
 
 
 Gardner 
 WL 
 
 
 Dean 
 K 
 
 
 Knowles 
 ML 
 
 
 2009 
 Motivations for prevention or promotion following social exclusion: Being rejected versus being ignored 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 96 
 415 
 19159140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monahan 
 KC 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Cauffman 
 E 
 
 
 2009 
 Affiliation with antisocial peers, susceptibility to peer influence, and antisocial behavior during the transition to adulthood 
 Dev Psychol 
 45 
 1520 
 1530 
 19899911 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 2008 
 Theoretical and empirical studies of learning 
 Academic Press 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 Qin 
 P 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 TE 
 
 
 2010 
 Brain imaging of the self-Conceptual, anatomical and methodological issues 
 Conscious Cogn 
 20 
 52 
 63 
 20932778 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oaten 
 M 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 Jones 
 A 
 
 
 Zadro 
 L 
 
 
 2008 
 The effects of ostracism on self-regulation in the socially anxious 
 J Soc Clin Psychol 
 27 
 471 
 504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 2012 
 Arrested development? Reconsidering dual-systems models of brain function in adolescence and disorders 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 16 
 322 
 329 
 22613872 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Adolescent social cognitive and affective neuroscience: past, present, and future 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 7 
 1 
 10 
 22228750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Peake 
 SJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Self-Development: integrating cognitive, socioemotional, and neuroimaging perspectives 
 Dev Cognitive Neurosci 
 2 
 55 
 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 “I know you are but what am I?!”: neural bases of self- and social knowledge retrieval in children and adults 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 19 
 1323 
 1337 
 17651006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Borofsky 
 LA 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural correlates of direct and reflected self-appraisals in adolescents and adults: when social perspective-taking informs self-perception 
 Child Dev 
 80 
 1016 
 1038 
 19630891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Moore 
 WE 
 III 
 
 
 Oswald 
 TM 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Entering adolescence: resistance to peer influence, risky behavior, and neural changes in emotion reactivity 
 Neuron 
 69 
 1029 
 1036 
 21382560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preacher 
 KJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 AF 
 
 
 2008 
 Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models 
 Behav Res Methods 
 40 
 879 
 891 
 18697684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prinstein 
 MJ 
 
 
 Aikins 
 JW 
 
 
 2004 
 Cognitive moderators of the longitudinal association between peer rejection and adolescent depressive symptoms 
 J Abnorm Child Psychol 
 32 
 147 
 158 
 15164857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prinstein 
 MJ 
 
 
 La Greca 
 AM 
 
 
 2004 
 Childhood peer rejection and aggression as predictors of adolescent girls’ externalizing and health risk behaviors: A 6-year longitudinal study 
 J Consult Clin Psych 
 72 
 103 
 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Romer 
 D 
 
 
 2010 
 Adolescent risk taking, impulsivity, and brain development: Implications for prevention 
 Dev Psychobio 
 52 
 263 
 276 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sampson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Laub 
 JH 
 
 
 1997 
 A Life-Course Theory of Cumulative Disadvantage and the Stability of Delinquency 
 Transaction 
 New Brunswick, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scholz 
 J 
 
 
 Triantafyllou 
 C 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Brown 
 EN 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 2009 
 Distinct regions of right temporo-parietal junction are selective for theory of mind and exogenous attention 
 PLoS One 
 4 
 e4869 
 19290043 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 2010 
 Dopamine signals for reward value and risk: basic and recent data 
 Behav Brain Funct 
 6 
 24 
 20416052 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sebastian 
 C 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Charman 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 Reactions to Ostracism in Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Conditions 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 39 
 1122 
 1130 
 19330434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simons-Morton 
 B 
 
 
 Lerner 
 N 
 
 
 Singer 
 J 
 
 
 2005 
 The observed effects of teenage passengers on the risky driving behavior of teenage drivers 
 Accid Anal Prev 
 37 
 973 
 982 
 15921652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smart Richman 
 L 
 
 
 Leary 
 MR 
 
 
 2009 
 Reactions to discrimination, stigmatization, ostracism, and other forms of interpersonal rejection: A multimotive model 
 Psychol Rev 
 116 
 365 
 19348546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2002 
 Fast robust automated brain extraction 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 17 
 143 
 155 
 12391568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Hare 
 T 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Frontostriatal maturation predicts cognitive control failure to appetitive cues in adolescents 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 23 
 2123 
 2134 
 20809855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Jones 
 RM 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2010 
 A time of change: behavioral and neural correlates of adolescent sensitivity to appetitive and aversive environmental cues 
 Brain Cogn 
 72 
 124 
 133 
 19695759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 2011 
 Rewards, aversions and affect in adolescence: Emerging convergences across laboratory animal and human data 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 1 
 390 
 403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2008 
 A Social Neuroscience Perspective on Adolescent Risk-Taking 
 Dev Rev 
 28 
 78 
 106 
 18509515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2010 
 A dual systems model of adolescent risk-taking 
 Dev Psychobiol 
 52 
 216 
 224 
 20213754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 Cauffman 
 E 
 
 
 Banich 
 M 
 
 
 Graham 
 S 
 
 
 Woolard 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Age differences in sensation seeking and impulsivity as indexed by behavior and self-report: evidence for a dual systems model 
 Dev Psychol 
 44 
 1764 
 1778 
 18999337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Monahan 
 KC 
 
 
 2007 
 Age differences in resistance to peer influence 
 Dev Psychol 
 43 
 1531 
 1543 
 18020830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stormshak 
 EA 
 
 
 Connell 
 AM 
 
 
 Véronneau 
 MH 
 
 
 Myers 
 MW 
 
 
 Dishion 
 TJ 
 
 
 Kavanagh 
 K 
 
 
 Caruthers 
 AS 
 
 
 2011 
 An ecological approach to promoting early adolescent mental health and social adaptation: family-centered intervention in public middle schools 
 Child Dev 
 82 
 209 
 225 
 21291438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thesen 
 S 
 
 
 Heid 
 O 
 
 
 Mueller 
 E 
 
 
 Schad 
 LR 
 
 
 2000 
 Prospective acquisition correction for head motion with image-based tracking for real-time fMRI 
 Magnet Reson Med 
 44 
 457 
 465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Twenge 
 JM 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 DeWall 
 CN 
 
 
 Ciarocco 
 NJ 
 
 
 Bartels 
 JM 
 
 
 2007 
 Social exclusion decreases prosocial behavior 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 92 
 56 
 66 
 17201542 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Twenge 
 JM 
 
 
 Catanese 
 KR 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 2002 
 Social exclusion causes self-defeating behavior 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 83 
 606 
 12219857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Lange 
 C 
 
 
 Keenan 
 JP 
 
 
 2007 
 The self and social cognition: the role of cortical midline structures and mirror neurons 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 153 
 157 
 17300981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Beest 
 I 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 2006 
 When inclusion costs and ostracism pays, ostracism still hurts 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 91 
 918 
 928 
 17059310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van den Bos 
 W 
 
 
 van Dijk 
 E 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 M 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 2011 
 Changing Brains, Changing Perspectives The Neurocognitive Development of Reciprocity 
 Psych Sci 
 22 
 60 
 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Moor 
 BG 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 PM 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 2010 
 Adolescent risky decision-making: neurocognitive development of reward and control regions 
 Neuroimage 
 51 
 345 
 355 
 20188198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Overwalle 
 F 
 
 
 Baetens 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror and mentalizing systems: a meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 48 
 564 
 584 
 19524046 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Davidson 
 ML 
 
 
 Hughes 
 BL 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2008 
 Prefrontal-subcortical pathways mediating successful emotion regulation 
 Neuron 
 59 
 1037 
 1050 
 18817740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 AT 
 
 
 Lee 
 SS 
 
 
 Sigman 
 M 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Developmental changes in the neural basis of interpreting communicative intent 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 1 
 107 
 121 
 18985123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 2007 
 Ostracism 
 Psychology 
 58 
 425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 Cheung 
 CK 
 
 
 Choi 
 W 
 
 
 2000 
 Cyberostracism: effects of being ignored over the Internet 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 79 
 748 
 762 
 11079239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yoshimura 
 S 
 
 
 Ueda 
 K 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 S 
 
 
 Onoda 
 K 
 
 
 Okamoto 
 Y 
 
 
 Yamawaki 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Self-referential processing of negative stimuli within the ventral anterior cingulate gyrus and right amygdala 
 Brain Cogn 
 69 
 218 
 225 
 18723260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Task design and protocol sequence. 
 Panel A depicts the Stoplight task and the possible decisions and outcomes. Panel B depicts the overall protocol sequence. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Resistance to peer influence and behavioral risk-taking after social exclusion. 
 Adolescents with low resistance to peer influence took significantly more risks following social exclusion than adolescents with high resistance to peer influence. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Effects of social exclusion on decisions and outcomes. 
 Panel A depicts regional increases in posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), and temporoparietal junction (TPJ) during decisions to stop following social exclusion. Panel B depicts regional increases in subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC), and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) during negative outcomes (crashes) following social exclusion. x, y, and z refer to the left-right, anterior-posterior, and superior-inferior dimensions in MNI space, respectively. Results thresholded at p < .005, k = 19, and displayed on an average group structural. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Relationship between brain activity following social exclusion and resistance to peer influence during risky decisions and negative outcomes. 
 Panel A depicts the negative correlation between resistance to peer influence (RPI) and activity in right temporoparietal junction (TPJ) during risky decisions (go > stop) after social exclusion. 
 Panel B depicts the positive correlation between RPI and activity in both left and right lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) during negative outcomes (crash > nocrash) after social exclusion. x and z refer to the left-right and superior-inferior dimensions in MNI space. Results thresholded at p < .005, k = 19, and displayed on an average group structural. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Main Effects of Decisions and Outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI
 
 
 
 Area 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decisions > Stop Decisions 
 
 
 
 Right superior frontal gyrus 
 5.01 
 67 
 18 
 −3 
 51 
 
 
 Right ventral striatum (caudate) 
 4.48 
 145 
 6 
 9 
 −3 
 
 
 Left ventral striatum (lentiform nucleus) 
 4.25 
 27 
 −12 
 0 
 −9 
 
 
 Left insula 
 4.23 
 30 
 −36 
 12 
 9 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus 
 4.18 
 43 
 −12 
 0 
 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stop Decisions > Go Decisions 
 
 
 
 Right superior temporal gyrus 
 9.81 
 2004 
 48 
 −48 
 15 
 
 
 Right middle temporal gyrus 
 8.98 
 469 * 
 54 
 −3 
 −18 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus 
 8.30 
 421 * 
 −48 
 36 
 6 
 
 
 Left postcentral gyrus 
 7.89 
 127 * 
 −57 
 −6 
 18 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus 
 7.66 
 656 * 
 −60 
 −21 
 3 
 
 
 Left declive 
 7.53 
 925 * 
 −36 
 −54 
 −18 
 
 
 Left culmen 
 7.44 
 123 * 
 −21 
 −45 
 −21 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus 
 7.31 
 543 * 
 −51 
 −45 
 6 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus 
 7.29 
 90 * 
 −42 
 36 
 −6 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 6.55 
 982 * 
 −3 
 −54 
 36 
 
 
 Left fusiform gyrus 
 6.39 
 104 * 
 −21 
 −63 
 −9 
 
 
 Left dorsomedial prefrontal cortex 
 6.25 
 102 * 
 −12 
 30 
 42 
 
 
 Left inferior temporal gyrus 
 5.93 
 45 * 
 −60 
 −24 
 −15 
 
 
 Right culmen 
 5.90 
 138 * 
 24 
 −33 
 −27 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus 
 5.60 
 99 * 
 −27 
 21 
 54 
 
 
 Right lingual gyrus 
 5.35 
 74 * 
 15 
 −48 
 0 
 
 
 Right declive 
 5.33 
 23 * 
 36 
 −60 
 −18 
 
 
 Left temporoparietal junction (supramarginal gyrus) 
 5.04 
 66 * 
 −51 
 −54 
 39 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 4.77 
 29 * 
 −6 
 −84 
 18 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus 
 6.30 
 803 
 45 
 27 
 15 
 
 
 Left medial prefrontal cortex 
 5.45 
 159 
 −12 
 60 
 15 
 
 
 Right medial frontal gyrus 
 5.44 
 124 
 6 
 −18 
 57 
 
 
 Left medial frontal gyrus 
 5.14 
 60 * 
 −6 
 −27 
 60 
 
 
 Right dorsomedial prefrontal cortex 
 4.30 
 37 
 15 
 30 
 42 
 
 
 Right inferior semi-lunar lobule 
 3.92 
 54 
 15 
 −78 
 36 
 
 
 Right postcentral gyrus 
 3.90 
 38 
 51 
 −21 
 51 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal cortex 
 3.66 
 29 
 0 
 48 
 −18 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobule 
 3.35 
 27 
 33 
 −48 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcomes > NoCrash Outcomes 
 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus 
 11.90 
 788 
 −45 
 −24 
 3 
 
 
 Right superior temporal gyrus 
 9.84 
 1103 
 48 
 −18 
 6 
 
 
 Right inferior frontal gyrus 
 7.01 
 130 * 
 39 
 24 
 9 
 
 
 Right culmen 
 9.03 
 1384 
 24 
 −51 
 −12 
 
 
 Left declive 
 8.29 
 1174 * 
 −27 
 −60 
 −12 
 
 
 Lingual gyrus 
 8.25 
 355 * 
 0 
 −87 
 −6 
 
 
 Right parahippocampal gyrus 
 6.33 
 35 * 
 18 
 −30 
 −6 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 5.39 
 28 * 
 15 
 −93 
 18 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus 
 4.82 
 37 
 −36 
 24 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NoCrash Outcomes > Crash Outcomes 
 
 
 
 Medial cerebellum (pyramis) 
 9.15 
 493 
 0 
 −72 
 −27 
 
 
 Right anterior lobe 
 6.51 
 94 * 
 12 
 −48 
 −27 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus 
 7.91 
 524 
 −27 
 −12 
 45 
 
 
 Left ventral striatum (lentiform nucleus) 
 6.95 
 284 * 
 −15 
 9 
 −12 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus 
 6.87 
 221 * 
 39 
 30 
 27 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus 
 5.94 
 97 * 
 −42 
 45 
 0 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus 
 5.90 
 90 * 
 30 
 6 
 54 
 
 
 Left inferior parietal lobule 
 5.89 
 299 * 
 −48 
 −36 
 54 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus 
 5.80 
 78 * 
 −18 
 −21 
 60 
 
 
 Left dorsal striatum (caudate) 
 5.67 
 115 * 
 −21 
 0 
 24 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 5.61 
 100 * 
 −15 
 −36 
 12 
 
 
 Left superior frontal gyrus 
 5.60 
 83 * 
 −9 
 15 
 51 
 
 
 Right ventral striatum (lentiform nucleus) 
 7.15 
 239 
 15 
 15 
 −12 
 
 
 Right dorsal striatum (caudate) 
 6.97 
 269 * 
 18 
 9 
 18 
 
 
 Perigenual anterior cingulate cortex 
 6.62 
 56 * 
 12 
 33 
 −6 
 
 
 Left inferior semi-lunar lobule 
 6.56 
 63 
 −36 
 −66 
 −39 
 
 
 Right middle frontal gyrus 
 6.49 
 114 
 33 
 54 
 −3 
 
 
 Right inferior parietal lobule 
 6.22 
 138 
 45 
 −39 
 51 
 
 
 Left parahippocampal gyrus 
 5.97 
 78 
 −36 
 −45 
 −3 
 
 
 Right thalamus 
 5.56 
 24 
 15 
 −30 
 12 
 
 
 Bilateral thalamus 
 5.21 
 29 
 0 
 −9 
 9 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate cortex 
 3.80 
 40 
 6 
 −33 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; x, y, and z refer to the left-right, anterior-posterior, and superior-inferior dimensions, respectively; t refers to the t statistic at those coordinates; k refers to cluster extent in voxels (3×3×3 mm); 
 
 
 * 
 denotes a local submaximum (and local extent) derived from a larger cluster, the peak maximum (and local, not total, extent) of which is noted in the uppermost line above the line(s) demarcated as submaxima. Results thresholded at p < .005, k = 23. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Impact of Social Exclusion on Processing Decisions and Outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI
 
 
 
 Area 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decision Post-Exclusion > Go Decision Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stop Decision Post-Exclusion > Stop Decision Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 4.48 
 42 
 −18 
 18 
 54 
 
 
 Right precentral gyrus 
 4.38 
 24 
 15 
 −18 
 63 
 
 
 Right medial prefrontal cortex 
 4.23 
 43 
 18 
 51 
 −3 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal cortex 
 3.88 
 23 
 0 
 39 
 −15 
 
 
 Left temporoparietal junction (angular gyrus) 
 3.56 
 28 
 −39 
 −63 
 39 
 
 
 Right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 3.51 
 81 
 30 
 24 
 42 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate cortex 
 3.45 
 55 
 3 
 −30 
 30 
 
 
 Right temporoparietal junction (angular gyrus) 
 3.37 
 19 
 42 
 −51 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcome Post-Exclusion > Crash Outcome Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Subgenual anterior cingulate cortex 
 3.88 
 20 
 −9 
 33 
 −3 
 
 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 3.68 
 23 
 −39 
 39 
 −9 
 
 
 Right medial prefrontal cortex 
 3.52 
 27 
 15 
 45 
 −6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No Crash Outcome Post-Exclusion > NoCrash Outcome Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus 
 3.85 
 23 
 −24 
 39 
 15 
 
 
 Right putamen 
 3.37 
 24 
 21 
 −3 
 0 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 3.29 
 25 
 9 
 −72 
 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decisions Pre-Exclusion > Go Decisions Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus 
 4.17 
 24 
 −33 
 −57 
 6 
 
 
 Right claustrum 
 3.38 
 31 
 27 
 12 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stop Decisions Pre-Exclusion > Stop Decisions Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Left thalamus 
 3.87 
 27 
 −9 
 −27 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion > Crash Outcomes Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NoCrash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion > NoCrash Outcomes Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
 Right midbrain 
 3.44 
 19 
 15 
 −24 
 −18 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; x, y, and z refer to the left-right, anterior-posterior, and superior-inferior dimensions, respectively; t refers to the t statistic at those coordinates (local maxima or submaxima); k refers to cluster extent in voxels (3×3×3 mm). 
 
 
 Results thresholded at p < .005, k = 19. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Areas of Significant Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI
 
 
 
 Area 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decisions Post-Exclusion > Stop Decisions Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Right temporoparietal junction (posterior superior temporal sulcus) 
 4.57 
 30 
 45 
 −57 
 24 
 
 
 Left tuber/uvula 
 4.41 
 42 
 −39 
 −60 
 −36 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus 
 4.27 
 36 
 −51 
 −36 
 −9 
 
 
 Left declive 
 3.95 
 23 
 −9 
 −75 
 −24 
 
 
 Right culmen 
 3.37 
 19 
 9 
 −54 
 −6 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex 
 5.50 
 25 
 −12 
 −3 
 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcomes Post-Exclusion > NoCrash Outcomes Post-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Left lingual gyrus 
 4.35 
 39 
 −27 
 −69 
 3 
 
 
 
 Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 
 Left lateral prefrontal cortex 
 5.50 
 37 
 −54 
 27 
 6 
 
 
 Right lateral prefrontal cortex 
 4.53 
 49 
 48 
 33 
 9 
 
 
 Left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 4.27 
 48 
 −45 
 3 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decisions Pre-Exclusion > Stop Decisions Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus 
 4.73 
 63 
 −39 
 24 
 21 
 
 
 Right parahippocampal gyrus 
 4.30 
 21 
 12 
 −39 
 3 
 
 
 Medial prefrontal cortex 
 4.25 
 70 
 3 
 57 
 −3 
 
 
 Right lateral prefrontal cortex 
 4.12 
 43 
 42 
 39 
 9 
 
 
 Right lateral orbitofrontal cortex 
 3.82 
 20 
 21 
 39 
 −18 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion > NoCrash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Right parahippocampal gyrus 
 4.39 
 24 
 21 
 −36 
 −18 
 
 
 Bilateral thalamus 
 3.83 
 22 
 0 
 −24 
 3 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Go Decisions Post-Exclusion > Go Decisions Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus 
 5.03 
 20 
 −30 
 −15 
 51 
 
 
 Left postcentral gyrus 
 4.14 
 25 
 −57 
 −18 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stop Decisions Post-Exclusion > Stop Decisions Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Right occipital gyrus 
 4.35 
 21 
 27 
 −90 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crash Outcomes Post-Exclusion > Crash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Right lateral prefrontal cortex 
 4.41 
 24 
 48 
 36 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No Crash Outcomes Post-Exclusion > NoCrash Outcomes Pre-Exclusion 
 
 
 
   Negative Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 Left temporoparietal junction (angular gyrus) 
 5.07 
 32 
 −45 
 −66 
 36 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 4.82 
 37 
 −12 
 −54 
 33 
 
 
 Left precentral gyrus 
 4.52 
 23 
 −51 
 0 
 27 
 
 
   Positive Correlation with Resistance to Peer Influence 
 
 
 No areas above threshold 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; x, y, and z refer to the left-right, anterior-posterior, and superior-inferior dimensions, respectively; t refers to the t statistic at those coordinates (local maxima or submaxima); k refers to cluster extent in voxels (3×3×3 mm). 
 
 
 Results thresholded at p < .005, k = 19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Adolescents completed a driving risk task before and after social exclusion by peers. 
 
 
 Teens with low resistance to peer influence (RPI) took more risks after exclusion. 
 
 
 Low RPI teens showed increased neural activity in regions of mentalizing during risk. 
 
 
 Signal in temporoparietal junction mediated the effect of RPI on post-exclusion risk. 
 
 
 Thinking about evaluation by peers may affect risk decisions for susceptible teens. 
 
 
 
 
