
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 23770411 
 4263481 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.021 
 NIHMS494584 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Structural Brain Correlates of Human Sleep Oscillations 
 
 
 
 
 Saletin 
 Jared M. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 van der Helm 
 Els 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Walker 
 Matthew P. 
 
 1 
 2 
 * 
 
 
 1 Sleep and Neuroimaging Laboratory, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-1650, USA 
 2 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-1650, USA 
 
 * Correspondence should be addressed to: Matthew P. Walker, Department of Psychology, Tolman Hall 3331, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-1650, USA,  mpwalker@berkeley.edu , Phone: 510-642-5292, Fax:510-642-5293 
 
 
 3 
 10 
 2014 
 
 
 14 
 6 
 2013 
 
 
 12 
 2013 
 
 
 11 
 12 
 2014 
 
 83 
 658 
 668 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Sleep is strongly conserved within species, yet marked and perplexing inter-individual differences in sleep physiology are observed. Combining EEG sleep recordings and high-resolution structural brain imaging, here we demonstrate that the morphology of the human brain offers one explanatory factor of such inter-individual variability. Grey matter volume in interoceptive and exteroceptive cortices correlated with the expression of slower NREM sleep spindle frequencies, supporting their proposed role in sleep protection against conscious perception. Conversely, and consistent with an involvement in declarative memory processing, grey matter volume in bilateral hippocampus was associated with faster NREM sleep spindle frequencies. In contrast to spindles, grey matter volume in the homeostatic sleep-regulating center of the basal forebrain/hypothalamus, together with the medial prefrontal cortex, accounted for individual differences in NREM slow wave oscillations. Together, such findings indicate that the qualitative and quantitative expression of human sleep physiology is significantly related to anatomically specific differences in macroscopic brain structure. 
 
 
 Sleep Spindles 
 Slow Waves 
 Grey Matter 
 VBM 
 EEG 
 NREM Sleep 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Sleep is strongly conserved across phylogeny. In the human, sleep EEG physiology is remarkably stable within an individual from one night to the next ( Werth et al., 1997 ). However striking differences in these same sleep EEG features are observed from one individual to the next ( De Gennaro et al., 2005 ), the reasons for which are largely unknown. Most prominent are inter-individual differences in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, specifically slow waves ( Mongrain et al., 2006 ;  Tucker et al., 2007 ;  Viola et al., 2012 ) and sleep spindles ( De Gennaro et al., 2005 ;  Werth et al., 1997 ). Furthermore, these sleep EEG features also demonstrate evidence of partial genetic determination ( Vandewalle et al., 2009 ;  Viola et al., 2007 ), further suggesting they represent a stable, trait-like physiological property. Here, we examine one potential factor explaining these trait inter-individual differences in sleep EEG physiology—brain structure. The morphology of the brain is a known determinant of function, evidenced by circumstances of development, degeneration, and brain damage ( Kanai and Rees, 2011 ). Despite such relationships, the possibility that individual differences in human brain structure predict individual differences in sleep physiology remains largely uncharacterized. 
 Although limited structural evidence exists, candidate anatomical regions of interest that may in turn explain individual differences in sleep spindles and slow waves emerge their proposed functional role (e.g. learning and memory) or functional and/or electrical source generators. For example, sleep spindles have been implicated in the inhibitory “gating” of exteroceptive and interoceptive sensory perception ( De Gennaro et al., 2005 ), thereby preserving the sleep state from both exogenous (e.g. audition ( Dang-Vu et al., 2010a )) and endogenous (e.g. pain ( Landis et al., 2004 )) sources. This protective function appears to be dependent upon mutually inhibitory thalamo-cortical circuitry ( Contreras and Steriade, 1996 ;  De Gennaro and Ferrara, 2003 ), implicating the thalamus as one potential structural region of interest (ROI) accounting for inter-individual differences in trait-varying properties of sleep spindles. Related, downstream cortical areas where processing of such exogenous and endogenous stimuli that pose the greatest likelihood of sleep disruption, namely auditory cortex and insular cortex, respectively, offer additional candidate ROIs. Indeed, functional neuroimaging reports have described activation in both primary auditory ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008a ) and insula cortices ( Schabus et al., 2007 ) during the occurrence of sleep spindle events. Finally, and contrasting with a sleep-protective role, an emerging function assigned to faster frequency spindles has focused on hippocampal-dependent memory processing ( Diekelmann and Born, 2010 ). Inter-individual differences in faster frequency sleep spindles predict hippocampal-dependent learning ability ( Mander et al., 2011 ). Furthermore, faster frequency sleep spindle events coincide with hippocampal activation, as assessed by event-related fMRI ( Schabus et al., 2007 ). 
 As with spindles, target anatomical regions that may contribute to inter-individual difference in slow wave features are informed by reports examining the functional properties of slow waves (including density and amplitude). The basal forebrain represents one such candidate due to its well defined role in sleep homeostasis and regulation ( Modirrousta et al., 2007 ), regulated changes in slow wave density following prolonged wakefulness ( Mistlberger et al., 1987 ). Beyond the basal forebrain, midline prefrontal cortex and insula cortex both represent additional target regions of interest accounting for slow wave differences between individuals, particularly their amplitude. For example, slow waves are not simply dominant over topographic midline prefrontal EEG derivations ( Feinberg et al., 2011 ), but these frontal derivations also display the greatest extent of inter-individual variability in slow waves as a function of genotype ( Viola et al., 2012 ) and chronotype ( Mongrain et al., 2006 ). Moreover, inter-individual differences in the homeostatic rebound of slow waves following sleep deprivation are similarly observed in the EEG over midline prefrontal cortex ( Goel et al., 2009 ;  Rusterholz and Achermann, 2011 ). EEG source analyses of slow waves have not only localized source generators in cingulate cortex, consistent with a midline prefrontal dominance of slow waves, but also insula cortex ( Murphy et al., 2009 ). The known cytoarchitecture of the insula cortex and its connectivity to prefrontal cortex has therefore been proposed to support propagation of slow waves between these potential generator regions ( Petrides and Pandya, 1999 ;  van der Kooy et al., 1982 ). 
 Guided  a priori  by these candidate regions here we examine whether macroscopic differences in human brain structure, indexed by grey matter volume, explain stable inter-individual variability ( De Gennaro et al., 2005 ) in the canonical oscillations of sleep: sleep spindles and slow waves. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 Twenty-two healthy adults (21.2 ± 2.25 years [mean ± s.d.], (range 19 – 26), 10 males) participated in the study. Exclusion criteria, assessed using a pre-screening questionnaire, included a history of sleep disorders, neurologic disorders or closed head injury, Axis I psychiatric disorders according to the DSM-IV criteria encompassing major mental disorders, history of drug abuse, and current use of anti-depressant or hypnotic medication. Participants abstained from alcohol and caffeine for a minimum of 48 hours prior to sleep recording. Additionally, sleep schedules were standardized prior to in-lab recordings (7–9 h of sleep per night, with morning wake time between 06:30 and 08:30), as verified by nightly sleep logs. The study was approved by the local human studies committee, with all participants providing their written informed consent. 
 
 Polysomnography recording and sleep stage classification 
 Polysomnography (PSG) sleep monitoring was recorded using a Grass Technologies Comet XL system (Astro-Med, Inc., West Warwick, RI). Electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded at 19 standard locations conforming to the International 10–20 System ( Jasper, 1958 ) (FP1, FP2, F7, F3, FZ, F4, F8, T3, C3, CZ, C4, T4, T5, P3, PZ, P4, T6, O1, O2). Electrooculography (EOG) was recorded at the right and left outer canthi (right superior; left inferior). Electromyography (EMG) was recorded via three electrodes (one mental, two sub-mental). Finally, electrocardiography (ECG) was recorded using two electrodes: below the left and right clavicle. Reference electrodes were placed at both the left and right mastoid (A1, A2). Data were digitized at 400Hz. All data were stored unfiltered (recovered frequency range of 0.1–100 Hz), except for a 60Hz notch filter. For recording only, each channel was referenced to a forehead scalp reference. Sleep staging was performed in accordance with standardized techniques ( Rechtschaffen and Kales, 1968 ) from the C3-A2 derivation, and NREM-REM cycles were defined according to modified criteria of Feinberg and Floyd, 1979 ( Aeschbach and Borbély, 1993 ). 
 
 
 Polysomnography EEG signal processing 
 Following sleep scoring, each EEG channel was re-referenced to the average of the left and right mastoids for quantitative signal processing. All EEG analyses were performed in MATLAB 7.5 (The Mathworks, Natick, MA), including the add-in toolbox EEGLAB ( http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/ ). The EEG was bandpassed filtered offline (EEGLAB function eegfilt) using Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filters (low-pass at 50Hz, high-pass at 0.5Hz). A high-pass cutoff frequency of 0.5 Hz was chosen to remove possible slow artifact in the EEG. Signals were then visually marked for artifact in 5-second epochs. Each 5-second epoch of data used for artifact-rejection was matched its corresponding scored sleep. 
 Slow waves were detected using an established procedure ( Kurth et al., 2010 ;  Massimini et al., 2007 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;  Riedner et al., 2007 ). Following artifact rejection, a low-pass FIR filter was applied to EEG data removing all activity above 4Hz (yielding a frequency distribution of (0.5–4 Hz, as in previous slow wave detection analyses) ( Kurth et al., 2010 ;  Massimini et al., 2007 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;  Riedner et al., 2007 ). In short (but see ( Riedner et al., 2007 ) for details) the algorithm determines negative and positive peaks occurring in the EEG time series after each zero-crossing (change in amplitude from negative-to-positive, or vice-versa), detecting slow waves in each channel independently. Multiple peaks occurring between zero-crossings were considered part of the same slow wave. Waves were then sorted according to sleep stage. Any detections occurring during Stage 1 were excluded from analysis. Further, analyses were limited only to defined NREM periods ( Aeschbach and Borbély, 1993 ). Finally, all waves occurring within artifact-marked 5-second epochs were removed from analysis. Analysis of slow waves slow waves focused on two orthogonal metrics - amplitude and density, respectively (slow wave activity (SWA; power in the 0.75–4.75 Hz band) was not chosen since this composite measure cannot distinguish between the amplitude of slow waves and their rate of incidence (density) ( Carrier et al., 2011 )). For slow wave amplitude, the negative peak (μV) of each NREM slow wave was averaged to create a single NREM average for each EEG channel, in each subject. Slow wave density was calculated as the number of artifact-free detected slow waves in each channel divided by the amount of artifact-free NREM sleep time recorded, resulting in a single NREM value for each EEG channel, in each subject. Both slow wave metrics were then included in the MRI regression analyses, with parameters derived from the Fz (frontal midline) EEG derivation chosen, due to the known topography and concentration of slow waves over midline frontal cortex, both in the current study ( Fig. 4 ), and prior reports ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008b ;  Kurth et al., 2010 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;  Riedner et al., 2007 ). 
 Sleep spindles were detected for each channel of EEG by an established automatic algorithm ( Ferrarelli et al., 2007 ;  Mander et al., 2011 ;  Saletin et al., 2011 ). Band-pass FIR filters were first applied to EEG sleep data (spindle range: high-pass: 11 Hz; low-pass: 15 Hz), restricting only those events falling within the spindle frequency range (11 – 15Hz) ( Schabus et al., 2007 ). Examining the broad spindle band (11–15 Hz) rather then limiting analyses to previously defined slow (11–13 Hz) or fast (13–15 Hz) bands allows unbiased determination of individual spindle frequency known to vary broadly, in trait-like manner across individuals ( Werth, et al., 1997 ). NREM epochs were then extracted (NREM stages 2, 3 and 4) based on visual scoring and all artifact-free epochs were then concatenated into one continuous NREM time series for analysis. The amplitude of the rectified signal from NREM sleep was used as a unique time series, identifying amplitude fluctuations exceeding channel-wise threshold values, with the lower and upper values set at two and eight times the average amplitude for each channel separately. The boundaries of spindle events were then defined when amplitude fluctuations dropped below the cut-off threshold. For each participant, spindle frequency was calculated for each spindle defined as the number of peak’s in the EEG signal occurring within the spindle event, divided by the duration of the spindle, yielding a frequency measure in cycles per second (Hz). Channel-specific NREM average spindle frequency was determined by then averaging across the frequencies of all detected spindles in each channel. Individual-wise spindle frequency across the broad range of spindle frequencies, unlike other parameters such as amplitude or density, demonstrates stable trait-like inter-individual differences, previously described as a purported sleep spindle “fingerprint” within individuals, stable across multiple nights ( De Gennaro et al., 2005 ;  Werth et al., 1997 ). Sleep spindles have a known topography as a function of frequency. Slow spindles are frontal dominant, while fast spindles show parietal dominance ( De Gennaro and Ferrara, 2003 ;  Mander et al., 2011 ;  Saletin et al., 2011 ;  Schabus et al., 2007 ). To most fully describe inter-individual variability in spindle frequency we examined spindles across the entire (11 – 15 Hz) frequency range. In an attempt to remove the influence of this topography on subject-wise metrics of spindle frequency, frequency estimates (itself an average of individual events) were averaged over traditional midline electrodes (frontal (Fz), central (Cz) and parietal (Pz), rather than using any one single electrode for analysis. This average allowed for the characterization of an individuals’ average spindle frequency across the anterior/posterior head axis, allowing for equal contribution of slow- and fast-spindle frequency across these spindle-dominant areas. Following averaging, each individual’s representative spindle frequency was used in structural imaging regression analyses. 
 
 
 EEG source localization of slow waves 
 EEG source analysis of slow waves ( Murphy et al., 2009 ) were additionally performed to allow assessment of whether potential structural brain correlates of NREM slow waves converged on homologous regions associated with the electrical generation of slow waves. Standardized low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA) ( Pascual-Marqui, 2002 ) was calculated for the EEG at the negative peak of the slow wave, as described below. No source analysis was performed for sleep spindles, as, unlike slow waves, the spindle is a multi-peak oscillation. While studies have attempted to source components of sleep spindle activity ( Ventouras et al., 2007 ), or to discrete frequency bins across a band ( Anderer et al., 2001 ), there is no clear spindle-analogue sLORETA calculation for spindles as with the slow wave. As such, only sLORETA of slow waves was performed. The sLORETA approach to source analysis computed solutions using a head model based on the MNI152 template ( Mazziotta et al., 2001 ). Solution space is limited to cortical grey matter, making sLORETA more precise than other methods of source localization that are not anatomically constrained, and is made up of 6239 voxels at 5 mm resolution ( Pascual-Marqui, 2002 ). While the anatomical precision of sLORETA, and of all source analysis techniques, varies depending on the number of electrodes in the EEG montage ( Laarne et al., 2000 ), numerous studies have employed source analysis using montage arrays of similar or lower resolution to the current study, indicating sufficient coverage of the scalp to provide robust source estimates ( Bela et al., 2007 ;  Clemens et al., 2008 ;  Clemens et al., 2009 ;  Isotani et al., 2001 ;  Pascual-Marqui et al., 1999 ;  Ponomarev et al., 2010 ;  Tislerova et al., 2008 ;  Veiga et al., 2003 ). Interpretation of sLORETA findings is limited to the lobular level of resolution, and not beyond, fitting with prior expectations of this array density ( Bela et al., 2007 ;  Clemens et al., 2008 ;  Clemens et al., 2009 ;  Isotani et al., 2001 ;  Pascual-Marqui et al., 1999 ;  Ponomarev et al., 2010 ;  Tislerova et al., 2008 ;  Veiga et al., 2003 ). Consistent with previous EEG source analyses of slow waves ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), NREM filtered (0.5 – 4 Hz) was marked at the maximal negative peak of each slow wave (detected at Fz, based on wave amplitude topography). In an event-related potential approach, 1-second epochs were extracted around the negative peak (500 ms on either side). Each epoch, corresponding to one wave, was averaged within- and then between-subjects, yielding a single grand average epoch for the group (each individual participant’s FZ average epoch depicted in  Fig. 4 ). Finally, this 1-second epoch was submitted to sLORETA analyses in the time-domain. Source localization was centered on the negative peak of the grand-average waveform. 
 
 
 Structural magnetic resonance imaging 
 Structural MRI was performed on a Siemens Magnetom Trio 3T scanner equipped with a 32-channel head coil. Two concomitant high-resolution MPRAGE T1-weighted anatomical scans were obtained for each participant, each consisting of 176 sagittal slices (1 mm isotropic voxels) acquired with a repetition-time (TR) of 2300 ms and an echo-time (TE) of 2.52 ms. Individual estimates of grey matter volume, a stable trait-like measure previously demonstrated to offer sensitivity to inter-individual variability in brain morphology ( Thompson et al., 2001 ), was calculated using the validated voxel-based morphometry approach (VBM) ( Ashburner and Friston, 2000 ;  Dumontheil et al., 2010 ;  Mak et al., 2010 ;  Ridgway et al., 2009 ). VBM analysis quantified the signal intensity of each voxel in the brain for a grey matter segmentation image, given the differential signal intensity yielded by magnetic resonance properties of grey and white matter, respectively. These grey matter voxel intensities were entered into whole-brain regression analyses, comparing grey matter volume and a given experimental variable, in this case, sleep EEG physiological parameters. While other methods for grey matter imaging exist, allowing for manual ( Neylan et al., 2010 ) or semi-automated segmentation of brain volumes ( Schmitz et al., 2011 ), the VBM procedure has been repeatedly used and validated for whole-brain imaging of voxel-wise grey matter volume ( Celle et al., 2010 ;  Dumontheil et al., 2010 ;  Giorgio et al., 2010 ;  Mak et al., 2010 ;  Mueller et al., 2011 ;  Pereira et al., 2010 ;  Ridgway et al., 2009 ). 
 Image processing used Statistical Parametric Mapping ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ) in conjunction with the VBM 5.1 Toolbox for SPM5 ( http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/ ). To maximize signal-to-noise, and therefore the ability to detect structural differences between participants, the two anatomical T1-weighted MPRAGE scans were first realigned (SPM8 Realign: 2 nd  Degree B-Spline Interpolation) to each other and then averaged. One participant contributed only 1 scan, due to technical issues during acquisition. Segmentation of anatomical images into grey matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was estimated for each participant’s mean anatomical scan using the VBM5.1 Toolbox, implementing default settings ( Koutsouleris et al., 2009 ), including iterative weighting of a hidden markov random field (HMRF). While the standard SPM segmentation uses prior information to estimate the tissue classes of each voxel, VBM5.1 uses a Bayesian approach not dependent on tissue priors, which can allow for greater accuracy in tissue segmentation ( Koutsouleris et al., 2009 ). Following segmentation, DARTEL was used in SPM8 ( Ashburner, 2007 ) to generate a study-specific group template average using standard procedures, including 6 iterations of template fitting, and the use linear elastic energy for regularization. Following template registration, this template was normalized to MNI space and the resulting transformation matrix was used to normalize the DARTEL flow fields and individual tissue images of all 22 subjects into standard space (DARTEL routine: “Normalise to MNI Space”). The normalization maintained a voxel size of 1 mm isotropic, included modulation to preserve regional signal intensities, and included a 8 mm Gaussian FWHM smoothing-kernel to reduce signal-to-noise for statistical analyses. 
 An explicit thresholding mask based on the signal-to-noise of the data was calculated according to prior procedures ( Ridgway et al., 2009 ), optimizing the threshold of the each individual’s grey matter image given the distribution of data across the group as a whole, aiming to remove low-signal noise from analyses. Finally, total intracranial volume (TIV) was calculated from each participant’s native-space GM, WM, and CSF segmentations calculated from VBM5.1. Total intracranial volume was calculated from the native-space tissue maps according to the “get_totals” routine for SPM commonly used to calculate global measures of brain volume in structural imaging studies (e.g. ( Ansell et al., 2012 ;  Benedetti et al., 2012 ;  Benedetti et al., 2011 ;  D’Agata et al., 2011 ;  Eckert et al., 2008 ;  Wolk et al., 2009 ), etc.). This measure of total intracranial volume was verified against an independent analysis using the reconstruction scheme in the different software package FreeSurfer ( Fischl and Dale, 2000 ), which derives intracranial volumes from cortical surface reconstruction, with the two methods resulting in remarkably similar estimates (correlations between the values from each method: r = 0.924, p < 0.0001). Cross-sectional analyses of EEG data raise concerns of differences in skull thickness that, beyond the electrical signal itself, could lead to amplitude differences. However, considering that the variance of EEG amplitude explained by skull thickness across frontal, temporal and parietal regions ranges from r 2 = 0.01 to r 2  =0.13 ( Hagemann et al., 2008 ) it would suggest any such contribution is likely modest. 
 
 
 Statistical Analyses 
 To examine the bidirectional nature of inter-individual difference in sleep spindle frequency, positive and negative contrast maps were generated, reflecting areas where grey matter volume correlated with increasingly faster, or slower spindle frequency, respectively. Slow wave regression models were then created for the average negative amplitude of the slow waves, and the density of slow waves, in NREM sleep, respectively. Separate statistical models for each analysis were created to minimize the impact of co-linearity between sleep spindles and slow waves (Steriade et al., 1993) and between specific properties of slow waves themselves ( Carrier et al., 2011 ). For the slow wave analyses, one subject was removed from the regression (yielding n = 21) based on prominent artifact in their recording within the slow wave frequency range (~ 0.6 Hz). In all statistical models, proportional scaling to TIV (total intracranial volume) was used to account for total brain size, as in previous VBM studies ( Bendlin et al., 2008 ). The current results did not change when age was included as an additional covariate in the model. 
 Statistical analysis was performed using a two-step approach, as in previous studies ( Altena et al., 2010 ;  Gong et al., 2005 ;  Joo et al., 2009 ;  Joo et al., 2010 ;  Kim et al., 2008 ;  O’Donoghue et al., 2005 ;  Yaouhi et al., 2009 ). First, at the whole-brain level, uncorrected results were identified at a voxel-wise p-value of 0.001 (30 voxel extent threshold), followed next by analysis of clusters within candidate ROIs that survived this initial threshold. These clusters were subsequently submitted to small volume correction (SVC) at the family-wise-error rate of  p < 0.05, cluster level ( Joo et al., 2009 ;  Kim et al., 2008 ;  Nichols and Hayasaka, 2003 ;  Yaouhi et al., 2009 ). This two-step analysis approach allowed both for a strict test of our hypothesis-driven ROIs targets, while still offering an exploratory investigation of associations outside these ROIs; important considering the current study represents a first investigation of structural grey matter associations with sleep EEG physiology in the adult brain. Figures were generated by overlaying statistical images on the ch2better.nii.gz template provided in the MRIcron visualization software, in standardized space. Images for display were thresholded at a p < 0.005. 
 
 
 Definition of small volume correction (SVC) regions of interest (ROI) 
 For slow wave regression models, SVC was performed on  a priori  anatomical ROIs derived from convergent source EEG analyses ( Murphy et al., 2009 ) and functional neuroimaging studies ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008b ;  Maquet et al., 1997 ), resulting in ROIs in bilateral cingulate, insula (anterior and posterior) and orbital frontal cortices (defined within the validated wfu_pickatlas SPM toolbox [ www.fmri.wfubmc.edu/cms/software ]; ( Maldjian et al., 2003 ). These areas are congruent with the both the results of EEG source analyses ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), as well as known topography dominance of slow waves and their inter-individual differences occurring over midline frontal cortex ( Carrier et al., 2011 ;  Esser et al., 2007 ;  Feinberg et al., 2011 ;  Huber et al., 2004 ;  Mongrain et al., 2006 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;  Rusterholz and Achermann, 2011 ). Finally, a mask in the region of the basal forebrain and hypothalamus was created, identified from neurophysiology studies demonstrating it as the seat of sleep-wake regulation ( Kalinchuk et al., 2010 ;  Modirrousta et al., 2007 ;  Monti, 2011 ), a process that is represented by slow waves in the EEG ( Achermann and Borbély, 2003 ;  Esser et al., 2007 ;  Riedner et al., 2007 ;  Tononi and Cirelli, 2006 ), as well as from neuroimaging findings demonstrating associations between the basal forebrain/hypothalamus and slow wave activity ( Dang-Vu et al., 2010b ;  Maquet et al., 1997 ). The ROI was defined by creating 8 mm diameter sphere drawn around previously published coordinates (MNI voxel coordinates [ x, y, z ]: [2, 2, −4]) from a functional neuroimaging study of slow wave sleep ( Maquet et al., 1997 ). The choice of a sphere defined functionally, rather than the use of an anatomical ROI was based upon the known heterogeneity of function within the anatomical region of the basal fore-brain/hypothalamus that prevents the anatomical delineation of sleep-related nuclei at the resolution of structural MRI ( Maquet et al., 1997 ;  Szymusiak, 1995 ). All ROIs are considered independent tests based on differential anatomical networks implicated in the generation and regulation of each different physiological oscillation. 
 For sleep spindles, ROIs were created based on  a priori  regions of interest, also using the wfu_pickatlas toolbox. First, based on animal neurophysiology ( Steriade et al., 1985 ) and human functional neuroimaging studies ( Schabus et al., 2007 ) indicating the thalamus in spindle generation, bilateral thalamic ROIs were created. Second, sensory ROIs were constructed building on the proposed role of sleep spindles in protecting sleep against external and internal conscious sensation. ROIs focused on the anatomical cortical regions associated with the two sensory percepts most prevalent to sleep disruption: exteroceptive audition (and interoceptive pain somatosensation ( Dang-Vu et al., 2010a ;  Landis et al., 2004 ;  Pivik et al., 1999 ). ROIs were generated in bilateral primary auditory cortex (Heschl’s Gyrus) ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008a ) and bilateral anterior and posterior insula cortices ( Schabus et al., 2007 ), respectively. Finally, ROIs in the hippocampus were constructed based on growing evidence for the role of sleep spindles in episodic memory processing ( Diekelmann and Born, 2010 ), together with of their coinciding relationship with hippocampus sharp-wave ripples ( Diekelmann and Born, 2010 ), as well as the occurrence of BOLD fMRI hippocampal activity occurring during fast sleep spindles ( Schabus et al., 2007 ). These hippocampus ROIs were created for the bilateral anterior and posterior hippocampus proper using the standard AAL atlas segmentations, separated into anterior and posterior sections along the longitudinal axes at the center-of-mass ( Wendelken and Bunge, 2010 ). These segmentations therefore allow a focus on the hippocampus proper (thus not including parahippocampal gyrus regions). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Grey matter volume associations with sleep spindle frequency 
 Contrary to our first prediction, no voxels in the thalamus demonstrated a significant relationship between grey matter volume and sleep spindle frequency, in either the slower (negative correlation) or faster (positive correlation) direction (all voxels p > 0.001; all clusters FWE corrected, p > 0.2). 
 Grey matter volume in exteroceptive and interoceptivesensory cortical ROIs did, however, significantly negatively correlated with sleep spindle frequency. Specifically, greater grey matter volume in both bilateral auditory cortices (Heschl’s Gyrus;  Fig. 1 ), as well as anterior and posterior regions of bilateral insula cortex correlated were predictive of slower sleep spindle frequencies ( Fig. 1  and  Table 1A ), on average. Interestingly, and further compatible with a sleep protection hypothesis ( Dang-Vu et al., 2010a ;  De Gennaro and Ferrara, 2003 ;  Landis et al., 2004 ), this same sleep spindle metric explained inter-individual differences in both sleep efficiency ( R 2  =  0.22,  P  = 0.027; those with slower frequency spindles experienced fewer awakenings during the night), and less time spent awake after sleep onset (WASO; a metric of sleep stability), albeit non-significantly ( R 2  = 0.21,  P  = 0.06). Beyond our  a priori  regions, initial uncorrected whole brain (p< 0.001 at the voxel level) analyses further revealed grey matter associations with slower frequency spindle activity within select frontal and temporal cortex regions ( Supplemental Results, Table S2 ). 
 Conversely, significant and bilateral positive associations were identified with grey matter volume in the hippocampus and sleep spindle frequency, specifically within posterior regions of the hippocampal complex ( Fig. 2 ;  Table 1B ). Greater grey matter volume in this area was associated with faster sleep spindle frequency, across individuals. This positive association between greater grey matter in the hippocampus and sleep spindle frequency was exclusive, with no other regions approaching significance, even at the more liberal statistical threshold of the whole-brain analyses (p< 0.001 at the voxel level). 
 To further examine the robustness of the differential predictors of sleep spindle frequency, SVC results were further submitted to a secondary level of family wise error correction across all ROIs combined (rather than considering each as independent). For the negative correlates of sleep spindle frequency (family of tests: thalamus, insula, auditory cortex), results in the insula as well as the auditory cortex remained significant at the cluster and peak-voxel level. Likewise, for positive correlates of sleep spindle frequency (family of tests: hippocampus, thalamus), results in the hippocampus remain significant at both levels of analysis. 
 
 
 Sleep Spindle Frequency by Topographic Location 
 The choice to use a spindle measure averaged across three midline topographical locations (FZ, CZ, and PZ) was intended to incorporate both frontal-dominant slow frequency and parietal-dominant fast frequency spindles ( De Gennaro, et al., 2003 ). While this approach allows for a broad classification of individual-wise spindle frequency across topography, it may preclude sensitivity to any one of these channels individually. It may also inadvertently bias results to the slow-dominant frequencies of FZ, or the fast-dominant frequencies of PZ, respectively. To explore these concerns, analyses were repeated using values derived from FZ, CZ, and PZ derivations separately, rather than using their integrated average. Results from each individual electrode ( Supplemental Tables S5–S7  and  Figure S8 ) continue to support the current main findings. Specifically, significant spindle associations with grey matter volume in the hippocampus were identified for CZ and PZ derivations independently (not reaching significance for FZ). Further, significant associations with sensory cortex were identified for FZ and CZ derivations independently (while not meeting significance for PZ). Together, the homology between these individual-electrode results and those in the above main results suggests that using a midline average approach provides a representative spindle frequency metric sensitive to spindles over both frontal slow frequency-dominant and parietal fast frequency-dominant topographic distributions, while not being overtly influenced by any one electrode. 
 
 
 Grey matter volume associations with slow waves 
 The density of NREM slow waves was significantly, and positively, correlated with grey matter volume in the basal forebrain - a region known regulating homeostatic sleep characteristics including slow wave sleep ( Kalinchuk et al., 2010 ;  Modirrousta et al., 2007 ;  Monti, 2011 ), and itself a know representative marker of homeostatic sleep pressure ( Esser et al., 2007 ) ( Fig. 3 ;  Table 1C ). In contrast to density, the amplitude of slow waves was positively correlated with grey matter volume in medial prefrontal cortex, over which the highest magnitude and individual differences in slow waves are known to be expressed ( Carrier et al., 2011 ;  Esser et al., 2007 ;  Feinberg et al., 2011 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;  Vandewalle et al., 2009 ;  Viola et al., 2007 ). Specifically, grey matter volume in both orbital frontal cortex as well as in middle cingulate cortex were significantly and positively correlated with slow wave amplitude across participants ( Fig 4 ;  Table 1D ). Counter to our predictions ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), no voxels in the insula cortex demonstrated significant relationships with slow wave parameters at the whole-brain level (all voxels p > 0.001; all clusters FWE corrected, p > 0.25). 
 Beyond these ROIs, uncorrected whole-brain analyses (p< 0.001 at the voxel level) revealed that grey matter volume in the cerebellum, together with select regions in parietal and temporal also accounted for individual differences in slow wave density ( Supplemental Results, Table S3 ). Discrete frontal and temporal regions also positively correlated within slow wave amplitude, whereas grey matter in occipital cortex as well as the cerebellum negatively correlated with slow wave amplitude ( Supplemental Results, Table S4 ). 
 As with spindle analysis, to additional determine the robustness of predictors of slow wave properties, SVC results were submitted to a secondary level of error correction all ROIs combined (rather than considering each as independent), as described above (family of tests including: basal-forebrain/hypothalamus, insula, medial prefrontal cortex). Findings in the basal-forebrain/hypothalamus remain significant at both cluster and peak voxel levels, whereas results in the mesial orbital frontal cortex remain significant only at the peak voxel level. Results in the anterior cingulate cortex did not survive this secondary correction, emerging only at super-threshold levels of significance. 
 Finally, to examine electrical source generation homology with structural regions correlating with NREM slow waves, EEG current source density analysis was performed, offered cross-methodological convergence. EEG source localization of the slow waves, time-locked to the peak of the slow wave revealed neural generators in remarkably similar medial frontal regions ( Fig. 4 ); areas consistent with previous source analyses of slow waves ( Murphy et al., 2009 ). Such descriptive homology between structural (grey matter volume) and functional (EEG source analysis) measures indicates that frontal brain morphology that is associated with slow wave expression converges with frontal brain source generators of the same slow wave EEG expression. 
 
 
 Oscillation specificity effects 
 Two further analyses were conducted to determine the specificity of sleep spindle and slow wave anatomical relationships. The first analysis aimed to determine whether the amount of time spent in NREM sleep, the brain state from which sleep spindles and slow waves arise, itself correlated with overlapping regional grey matter volume; a finding that would limited the specificity of any spindle and slow wave structural associations. No overlap between our grey matter volume correlates with sleep spindles or slow waves in our  a priori  regions of interest was observed ( See 
 Supplemental Results, Figure S6 ). The second analysis examined whether power spectral analysis of sleep EEG in an independent frequency range (alpha: 8 – 11 Hz; ( Achermann, 2009 )) correlated with homologous or independent regions to spindles and slow waves. NREM alpha power was chosen since it represents a frequency band that is proximal to the spindle frequency range, and it is also known to be highly coherent across the scalp during slow wave sleep ( Achermann and Borbély, 1998 ). Demonstrating specificity, no overlap was identified between the structural regions correlating with slow wave and spindle and those correlating with NREM alpha activity ( Supplemental Results, Figure S7 ). 
 Therefore, neither the total amount of time spent in NREM sleep, nor characteristics of other related NREM electrical oscillations, were associated with the anatomical brain regions associated with spindles and slow waves. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Taken together, our findings demonstrate that inter-individual differences in sleep EEG features are correlated with regional differences of grey matter volume in the human brain, highlighting the notion that structural brain morphology is significantly associated with the qualitative and quantitative expression of human sleep physiology. In the following sections, we discuss possible functional implications and interpretations of these associations for each sleep oscillatory property separately. 
 
 Structural brain correlates of sleep spindles frequency 
 Consistent with theories of sleep protection against exogenous and endogenous conscious perception ( De Gennaro and Ferrara, 2003 ), grey matter volume in auditory and insular cortices negatively correlated with sleep spindle frequency, predictive of slower sleep spindles across individuals. These associations between slower sleep spindle frequency and greater grey matter volume in sensory areas may reflect the role of sleep spindles (of slower frequency) in the protection from sensory disruption (both extereoceptive, and intereoceptive) during sleep. Indeed, focusing on audition as the prime exogenous route of sensory sleep interference, recent findings have demonstrated that inter-individual variability in sleep spindles over sensory cortex predicts the extent to which the sleep state is protected and hence conserved in response to experimental auditory stimulation ( Dang-Vu et al., 2010a ). Circumstances of acquired hearing loss have further been associated with decreases in auditory grey matter and congruent reductions in slow-frequency spindles ( Landgrebe et al., 2009 ;  Scrofani et al., 1996 ). These associations between slower sleep spindle frequency and grey matter volume in sensory areas may reflect the role of sleep spindles (of slower frequency) in the protection from sensory disruption (both extereoceptive, and intereoceptive) during sleep. 
 Beyond exogenous (auditory) stimuli, endogenous sensory information, most notably pain, is similarly recognized to markedly disrupt sleep ( Buenaver and Smith, 2007 ). Chronic pain has been associated independently with decreases in the number of sleep spindles ( Landis et al., 2004 ) and reductions in insula cortex integrity ( Kim et al., 2008 ). While remaining speculative, the association between grey matter volume in insula cortex sleep spindle frequency in the current study provides a basis on which these previously independent findings in chronic pain may be united. The loss of insular grey matter in chronic pain may represent one putative mechanism that leads to decreases in slow sleep spindle activity, and with it, the susceptibility to interoceptive pain sensation during sleep ( Buenaver and Smith, 2007 ); a proposal that can be empirically tested in future studies. While the insula is involved in processes other than pain perception, the reported loss of insular grey matter in chronic pain may represent one putative mechanism, to mediate a reduction in slow sleep spindle activity, and with it, increased susceptibility to interoceptive pain sensation during sleep ( Buenaver and Smith, 2007 ). While this model remains speculative, future patient-cohort studies employing structural MRI, in conjunction with quantitative sensory testing, and sleep EEG recordings will be able to further elucidate such a mechanism. 
 In contrast to slower spindles, faster frequency sleep spindles (commonly in the range of 13 – 15 Hz) continue to be implicated in hippocampal-dependent memory processing ( Diekelmann and Born, 2010 ). For example, inter-individual differences in sleep spindles, including fast sleep spindles, are associated with the benefit of prior sleep on subsequent hippocampal encoding ability ( Mander et al., 2011 ), and sleep after learning in the offline consolidation of episodic memory ( Gais et al., 2002 ;  Rauchs et al., 2008 ;  Saletin et al., 2011 ;  Schabus et al., 2004 ;  Schabus et al., 2006 ;  Schabus et al., 2008 ). Likewise fMRI-identified functional activity in the hippocampus coinciding with sleep spindles has been related to learning and memory processes ( Andrade et al., 2011 ;  Bergmann et al., 2012 ). Offering unique structural evidence, we demonstrated that hippocampal grey matter volume was exclusively positively correlated with spindle frequency across individuals. While no memory tasks were included in the present study to test the functional outcome of this association, the significant relationship between hippocampus grey matter volume and faster spindle frequency is consistent with a broad collection of pathological circumstances describing not only marked impairments in sleep spindle activity, but co-occurring deficits in hippocampal grey matter and episodic memory, including Alzheimer’s disease, Schizophrenia as well as sleep apnea ( Barnes et al., 2009 ;  Ferrarelli et al., 2007 ;  Hedden and Gabrieli, 2004 ;  Himanen et al., 2003 ;  Joo et al., 2010 ;  Kloepfer et al., 2009 ;  Rauchs et al., 2008 ;  Tamminga et al., 2010 ). Our findings offer a foundation on which these coinciding features may be considered interrelated, suggesting a testable link between deficits in hippocampal structure, impoverished sleep spindle activity, memory impairment. As above, future studies in patient populations with memory impairment will be able to examine the potential causal pathway between hippocampal integrity, spindle activity and memory function. 
 Counter to our hypothesis, no structural relationships were identified between spindle frequency and the thalamus. One potential explanation for this lack of association is that the thalamus is not well segmented by T1-weighted structural MRI (Eggert, et al., 2012). Alternatively, even with accurate segmentation, the absence of an association in the present data does not challenge the established role of the thalamus in generating spindles ( Steriade et al., 1985 ). Instead, our results may be interpreted in the context of quantity relative to quality. While thalamic processes are critical for the instigation of sleep spindle events (quantity) ( Roth et al., 2000 ;  Steriade et al., 1985 ), the EEG expression of qualitative features of spindles (e.g. individual frequency) may be less dependent on thalamic structure and more dependent on downstream cortical regions. This interpretation is consistent with previous EEG source analyses of sleep spindle demonstrating differential cortical (rather than thalamic) source associations of fast and slow sleep spindles ( Anderer et al., 2001 ;  Ventouras et al., 2007 ). 
 Beyond our  a priori  regions of interest, several additional regions emerged that were negatively correlated with spindle frequency, at the whole-brain level. These regions included select frontal lobe areas, most prominent in bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. This latter associations is of potential note given both the known frontal-dominant EEG surface expression of slow sleep spindles ( De Gennaro and Ferrara, 2003 ;  Schabus et al., 2007 ), and a recent report of congruent lateral prefrontal cortex fMRI BOLD activity associated with sleep spindle occurrence ( Schabus et al., 2007 ). While grey matter associations with primary sensory and perceptual areas are consistent with a potential protective function of spindles, a role for human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in sensory gating has recently been advanced ( Mayer et al., 2009 ). Within this context, our findings offer tentative support to a framework where primary sensory and perceptual areas (here, auditory and insula cortex), in cooperation with high-order rating networks in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, may form sleep-spindle regulating anatomical network capable of gating sensory interference and hence maintain the sleep state. 
 The current regression technique relies on examining the negative and positive contrasts of the same model to identify areas of grey matter volume predictive of inter-individual differences in slower or faster sleep spindle frequencies. As a result, each voxel can only be associated in a negative or positive manner, and not predictive in both directions (although this does not preclude the possibility of generators common to fast and slow spindles). 
 
 
 Structural brain correlates of slow waves 
 The basal forebrain forms a major part of the neural circuitry that supports homeostatic sleep-wake regulation ( Kalinchuk et al., 2010 ;  Modirrousta et al., 2007 ;  Monti, 2011 ). This homeostatic sleep process is manifest in the cortical EEG by way of the slow wave ( Esser et al., 2007 ), which respond in a proportional manner to sleep need ( Dijk et al., 1993 ;  Esser et al., 2007 ). While varying considerably between individuals, levels of slow wave expression under rested conditions are highly consistent within individuals in a trait-like manner ( Tucker et al., 2007 ), potentially influenced by genotypic variations ( Viola et al., 2007 ). We demonstrate that brain structure affords one explanatory factor of inter-individual variance in slow waves, which itself may be determined by genotypic influence. Specifically, grey matter volume in the basal forebrain accounted for nearly 50% of the inter-individual variability in slow wave density; a finding anatomically consistent with the marked disruption of slow waves and their regulation that occurs following lesions of the basal forebrain ( Lai et al., 1999 ;  Srividya et al., 2004 ). One testable prediction emerging from these findings is that grey matter integrity of the basal forebrain should serve as a predictor of inter-individual variability in homeostatic sleep regulation, indexed by slow waves, and perhaps most powerfully in response to the condition of sleep deprivation ( Dijk et al., 1993 ). 
 Beyond slow wave density, slow waves have a known frontal-dominant topography of amplitude on the scalp ( Kurth et al., 2010 ;  Riedner et al., 2007 ). Consistent with that topography, we identified that grey matter volume within select midline prefrontal regions of the anterior cingulate and orbital frontal cortex positively correlated with slow wave amplitude. Offering convergent evidence, homologous medial prefrontal regions (peak source activity in the cingulate cortex) were identified using EEG source analysis of slow wave peak oscillations; similar to previous EEG source analysis of slow waves ( Murphy et al., 2009 ). While these findings offer similarity between structural cortical associations and both current and previous source analyses of slow waves, caution should be taken in interpretation beyond the lobular level of resolution, due to the lower resolution of the EEG array in the current study. While remaining tentative, such convergence across reports increasingly supports the midline frontal cortex as critical in the determination of NREM slow wave EEG generation. More broadly, the association between slow waves and regions of medial frontal cortex is consistent with ontogenetic differences in slow wave activity across the lifespan, since both frontal cortex grey matter and slow waves express congruent developmental alterations early in life ( Kurth et al., 2010 ) and pernicious reductions later in life ( Buchmann et al., 2011b ;  Carrier et al., 2011 ). 
 While the insula cortex was a target region potentially accounting for inter-individual difference in slow waves, based on previous EEG source analysis ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), no associations were identified for insula cortex were identified, for either metric of NREM slow waves. While the insula cortex may be involved in the generation of slow waves ( Murphy et al., 2009 ), grey matter volume of the insula, in this study, does not appear to modulate the expression of those waves across individuals. 
 For slow wave density, two additional regions of relevance were observed from the whole brain results. First, grey matter volume in parahippocampal gyrus also was associated with differences in the density of slow waves, offering homologous anatomical regions to those demonstrated as active during the coincidence of (rather than individual differences in) slow waves, visualized using fMRI ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008b ). Second, grey matter volume in a number of sub-areas within the cerebellum further demonstrated a positive relationship with slow wave density. While unexpected, considering slow waves are known to derive from cortical sources, it is of note that the incidence of slow waves in the EEG co-occurs with fMRI BOLD signal increases in similar cerebellar regions ( Dang-Vu et al., 2008b ). 
 It should be noted that our current analyses do not dissociate NREM K-Complexes from slow waves, which themselves may have potentially influenced our slow wave findings. Despite their similarity in frequency and amplitude to slow waves ( Amzica and Steriade, 1997 ), K-Complexes make up a comparatively small proportion of the NREM EEG. As such, the influence of such K-Complexes on current findings is likely limited, although future studies separating each will be required to verify this assumption. 
 Building on these results, prospective longitudinal studies will be required to determine the directional nature of these relationships, offering a complement to developmental cross-sectional approaches ( Buchmann et al., 2011b ) and examinations in clinical populations ( Benson et al., 1996 ;  Joo et al., 2010 ;  Macey et al., 2002 ;  O’Donoghue et al., 2005 ;  van Kammen et al., 1988 ;  Wiegand et al., 1991 ). While the current study focused on grey matter, future structural investigations will likely benefit from examining additional anatomical metrics, including quantification of white matter fiber tracts between regions that may govern the propagation of electrical sleep oscillatory activity beyond grey matter morphology in any one region ( Buchmann et al., 2011a ). Such investigations may enhance macroscopic brain structural accounts of physiological sleep generation and expression, both in healthy populations as well as clinical disorders expressing co-morbid sleep abnormalities. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Edwin Robertson for his helpful input on this manuscript. The authors would also like to thank Drs. Giulio Tononi, Reto Huber, and colleagues for their generous sharing of analytical software, and Stephanie Greer for technical assistance. Finally, the authors thank all the participants who took part in this study and the undergraduate research assistants who helped run the study. This research was supported by National Institutes of Health: National Institute on Aging (RO1AG031164 [MPW]) and National Institute of Mental Health (R01MH093537 [MPW]), and the National Science Foundation (GRFP [JMS]). 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 EEG analysis applied to sleep 
 Epileptologie 
 26 
 28 
 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 Borbély 
 AA 
 
 
 1998 
 Coherence analysis of the human sleep electroencephalogram 
 Neuroscience 
 85 
 1195 
 1208 
 9681957 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 Borbély 
 AA 
 
 
 2003 
 Mathematical models of sleep regulation 
 Front Biosci 
 8 
 s683 
 693 
 12700054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aeschbach 
 D 
 
 
 Borbély 
 A 
 
 
 1993 
 All-night dynamics of the human sleep EEG 
 Journal of sleep research 
 2 
 70 
 81 
 10607074 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Altena 
 E 
 
 
 Vrenken 
 H 
 
 
 Van Der Werf 
 YD 
 
 
 van den Heuvel 
 OA 
 
 
 Van Someren 
 EJW 
 
 
 2010 
 Reduced orbitofrontal and parietal gray matter in chronic insomnia: a voxel-based morphometric study 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 67 
 182 
 185 
 19782344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amzica 
 F 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 1997 
 The K-complex: its slow (<1-Hz) rhythmicity and relation to delta waves 
 Neurology 
 49 
 952 
 959 
 9339673 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Klösch 
 G 
 
 
 Gruber 
 G 
 
 
 Trenker 
 E 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Zeitlhofer 
 J 
 
 
 Barbanoj 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rappelsberger 
 P 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 2001 
 Low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography revealed simultaneously active frontal and parietal sleep spindle sources in the human cortex 
 Neuroscience 
 103 
 581 
 592 
 11274780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrade 
 KC 
 
 
 Spoormaker 
 VI 
 
 
 Dresler 
 M 
 
 
 Wehrle 
 R 
 
 
 Holsboer 
 F 
 
 
 Samann 
 PG 
 
 
 Czisch 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Sleep spindles and hippocampal functional connectivity in human NREM sleep 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 31 
 10331 
 10339 
 21753010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ansell 
 EB 
 
 
 Rando 
 K 
 
 
 Tuit 
 K 
 
 
 Guarnaccia 
 J 
 
 
 Sinha 
 R 
 
 
 2012 
 Cumulative adversity and smaller gray matter volume in medial prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and insula regions 
 Biological psychiatry 
 72 
 57 
 64 
 22218286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm 
 NeuroImage 
 38 
 95 
 113 
 17761438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2000 
 Voxel-based morphometry--the methods 
 NeuroImage 
 11 
 805 
 821 
 10860804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barnes 
 J 
 
 
 Bartlett 
 JW 
 
 
 van de Pol 
 LA 
 
 
 Loy 
 CT 
 
 
 Scahill 
 RI 
 
 
 Frost 
 C 
 
 
 Thompson 
 P 
 
 
 Fox 
 NC 
 
 
 2009 
 A meta-analysis of hippocampal atrophy rates in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 30 
 1711 
 1723 
 18346820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bela 
 C 
 
 
 Monika 
 B 
 
 
 Marton 
 T 
 
 
 Istvan 
 K 
 
 
 2007 
 Valproate selectively reduces EEG activity in anterior parts of the cortex in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. A low resolution electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) study 
 Epilepsy Res 
 75 
 186 
 191 
 17624734 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bendlin 
 BB 
 
 
 Ries 
 ML 
 
 
 Lazar 
 M 
 
 
 Alexander 
 AL 
 
 
 Dempsey 
 RJ 
 
 
 Rowley 
 HA 
 
 
 Sherman 
 JE 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 2008 
 Longitudinal changes in patients with traumatic brain injury assessed with diffusion-tensor and volumetric imaging 
 NeuroImage 
 42 
 503 
 514 
 18556217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benedetti 
 F 
 
 
 Poletti 
 S 
 
 
 Radaelli 
 D 
 
 
 Pozzi 
 E 
 
 
 Giacosa 
 C 
 
 
 Ruffini 
 C 
 
 
 Falini 
 A 
 
 
 Smeraldi 
 E 
 
 
 2012 
 Caudate gray matter volume in obsessive-compulsive disorder is influenced by adverse childhood experiences and ongoing drug treatment 
 Journal of clinical psychopharmacology 
 32 
 544 
 547 
 22722505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benedetti 
 F 
 
 
 Radaelli 
 D 
 
 
 Poletti 
 S 
 
 
 Falini 
 A 
 
 
 Cavallaro 
 R 
 
 
 Dallaspezia 
 S 
 
 
 Riccaboni 
 R 
 
 
 Scotti 
 G 
 
 
 Smeraldi 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 Emotional reactivity in chronic schizophrenia: structural and functional brain correlates and the influence of adverse childhood experiences 
 Psychological medicine 
 41 
 509 
 519 
 20529416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benson 
 KL 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 Lim 
 KO 
 
 
 Lauriello 
 J 
 
 
 Zarcone 
 VP 
 Jr 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 1996 
 Slow wave sleep and computed tomographic measures of brain morphology in schizophrenia 
 Psychiatry Res 
 60 
 125 
 134 
 8723303 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bergmann 
 TO 
 
 
 Molle 
 M 
 
 
 Diedrichs 
 J 
 
 
 Born 
 J 
 
 
 Siebner 
 HR 
 
 
 2012 
 Sleep spindle-related reactivation of category-specific cortical regions after learning face-scene associations 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 2733 
 2742 
 22037418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchmann 
 A 
 
 
 Kurth 
 S 
 
 
 Ringli 
 M 
 
 
 Geiger 
 A 
 
 
 Jenni 
 OG 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 2011a 
 Anatomical markers of sleep slow wave activity derived from structural magnetic resonance images 
 Journal of sleep research 
 20 
 506 
 513 
 21435064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchmann 
 A 
 
 
 Ringli 
 M 
 
 
 Kurth 
 S 
 
 
 Schaerer 
 M 
 
 
 Geiger 
 A 
 
 
 Jenni 
 OG 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 2011b 
 EEG Sleep Slow-Wave Activity as a Mirror of Cortical Maturation 
 Cerebral cortex 
 21 
 607 
 615 
 20624840 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buenaver 
 LF 
 
 
 Smith 
 MT 
 
 
 2007 
 Sleep in rheumatic diseases and other painful conditions 
 Curr Treat Options Neurol 
 9 
 325 
 336 
 17716596 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carrier 
 J 
 
 
 Viens 
 I 
 
 
 Poirier 
 G 
 
 
 Robillard 
 R 
 
 
 Lafortune 
 M 
 
 
 Vandewalle 
 G 
 
 
 Martin 
 N 
 
 
 Barakat 
 M 
 
 
 Paquet 
 J 
 
 
 Filipini 
 D 
 
 
 2011 
 Sleep slow wave changes during the middle years of life 
 The European journal of neuroscience 
 33 
 758 
 766 
 21226772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celle 
 S 
 
 
 Roche 
 F 
 
 
 Peyron 
 R 
 
 
 Faillenot 
 I 
 
 
 Laurent 
 B 
 
 
 Pichot 
 V 
 
 
 Barthélémy 
 JC 
 
 
 Sforza 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Lack of specific gray matter alterations in restless legs syndrome in elderly subjects 
 Journal of neurology 
 257 
 344 
 348 
 19768657 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clemens 
 B 
 
 
 Bank 
 J 
 
 
 Piros 
 P 
 
 
 Bessenyei 
 M 
 
 
 Veto 
 S 
 
 
 Toth 
 M 
 
 
 Kondakor 
 I 
 
 
 2008 
 Three-dimensional localization of abnormal EEG activity in migraine: a low resolution electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) study of migraine patients in the pain-free interval 
 Brain Topogr 
 21 
 36 
 42 
 18679787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clemens 
 B 
 
 
 Piros 
 P 
 
 
 Bessenyei 
 M 
 
 
 Varga 
 E 
 
 
 Puskas 
 S 
 
 
 Fekete 
 I 
 
 
 2009 
 The electrophysiological “delayed effect” of focal interictal epileptiform discharges. A low resolution electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) study 
 Epilepsy Res 
 85 
 270 
 278 
 19442489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contreras 
 D 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 1996 
 Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically generated rhythm 
 J Physiol (Lond) 
 490  
 Pt 1 
 159 
 179 
 8745285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Agata 
 F 
 
 
 Caroppo 
 P 
 
 
 Boghi 
 A 
 
 
 Coriasco 
 M 
 
 
 Caglio 
 M 
 
 
 Baudino 
 B 
 
 
 Sacco 
 K 
 
 
 Cauda 
 F 
 
 
 Geda 
 E 
 
 
 Bergui 
 M 
 
 
 Geminiani 
 G 
 
 
 Bradac 
 GB 
 
 
 Orsi 
 L 
 
 
 Mortara 
 P 
 
 
 2011 
 Linking coordinative and executive dysfunctions to atrophy in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 patients 
 Brain structure & function 
 216 
 275 
 288 
 21461742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dang-Vu 
 T 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Boly 
 M 
 
 
 Bonjean 
 M 
 
 
 Darsaud 
 A 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 2008a 
 Processing of Sounds During Sleep Spindles in Humans: An EEG/fMRI Study of Auditory Stimulation in NREM Sleep 
 Sleep 
 31 
 A4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dang-Vu 
 TT 
 
 
 McKinney 
 SM 
 
 
 Buxton 
 OM 
 
 
 Solet 
 JM 
 
 
 Ellenbogen 
 JM 
 
 
 2010a 
 Spontaneous brain rhythms predict sleep stability in the face of noise 
 Current biology : CB 
 20 
 R626 
 627 
 20692606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dang-Vu 
 TT 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Desseilles 
 M 
 
 
 Albouy 
 G 
 
 
 Boly 
 M 
 
 
 Darsaud 
 A 
 
 
 Gais 
 S 
 
 
 Rauchs 
 G 
 
 
 Sterpenich 
 V 
 
 
 Vandewalle 
 G 
 
 
 Carrier 
 J 
 
 
 Moonen 
 G 
 
 
 Balteau 
 E 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 2008b 
 Spontaneous neural activity during human slow wave sleep 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 105 
 15160 
 15165 
 18815373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dang-Vu 
 TT 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Desseilles 
 M 
 
 
 Sterpenich 
 V 
 
 
 Bonjean 
 M 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 2010b 
 Functional neuroimaging insights into the physiology of human sleep 
 Sleep 
 33 
 1589 
 1603 
 21120121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Gennaro 
 L 
 
 
 Ferrara 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Sleep spindles: an overview 
 Sleep medicine reviews 
 7 
 423 
 440 
 14573378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Gennaro 
 L 
 
 
 Ferrara 
 M 
 
 
 Vecchio 
 F 
 
 
 Curcio 
 G 
 
 
 Bertini 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 An electroencephalographic fingerprint of human sleep 
 NeuroImage 
 26 
 114 
 122 
 15862211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diekelmann 
 S 
 
 
 Born 
 J 
 
 
 2010 
 The memory function of sleep 
 Nature reviews Neuroscience 
 11 
 114 
 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dijk 
 DJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 B 
 
 
 Czeisler 
 CA 
 
 
 1993 
 Dynamics of electroencephalographic sleep spindles and slow wave activity in men: effect of sleep deprivation 
 Brain research 
 626 
 190 
 199 
 8281430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dumontheil 
 I 
 
 
 Houlton 
 R 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Development of relational reasoning during adolescence 
 Dev Sci 
 13 
 F15 
 24 
 20977551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Lombardino 
 LJ 
 
 
 Walczak 
 AR 
 
 
 Bonihla 
 L 
 
 
 Leonard 
 CM 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 2008 
 Manual and automated measures of superior temporal gyrus asymmetry: concordant structural predictors of verbal ability in children 
 NeuroImage 
 41 
 813 
 822 
 18440244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esser 
 SK 
 
 
 Hill 
 SL 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Sleep homeostasis and cortical synchronization: I. Modeling the effects of synaptic strength on sleep slow waves 
 Sleep 
 30 
 1617 
 1630 
 18246972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 I 
 
 
 de Bie 
 E 
 
 
 Davis 
 NM 
 
 
 Campbell 
 IG 
 
 
 2011 
 Topographic Differences in the Adolescent Maturation of the Slow Wave EEG during NREM Sleep 
 Sleep 
 34 
 325 
 333 
 21358849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferrarelli 
 F 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 Peterson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Massimini 
 M 
 
 
 Murphy 
 M 
 
 
 Riedner 
 BA 
 
 
 Watson 
 A 
 
 
 Bria 
 P 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Reduced sleep spindle activity in schizophrenia patients 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 164 
 483 
 492 
 17329474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2000 
 Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance images 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 97 
 11050 
 11055 
 10984517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gais 
 S 
 
 
 Molle 
 M 
 
 
 Helms 
 K 
 
 
 Born 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Learning-dependent increases in sleep spindle density 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 22 
 6830 
 6834 
 12151563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giorgio 
 A 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Chadwick 
 M 
 
 
 James 
 S 
 
 
 Winmill 
 L 
 
 
 Douaud 
 G 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 James 
 AC 
 
 
 2010 
 Longitudinal changes in grey and white matter during adolescence 
 NeuroImage 
 49 
 94 
 103 
 19679191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goel 
 N 
 
 
 Banks 
 S 
 
 
 Mignot 
 E 
 
 
 Dinges 
 DF 
 
 
 2009 
 PER3 polymorphism predicts cumulative sleep homeostatic but not neurobehavioral changes to chronic partial sleep deprivation 
 PloS one 
 4 
 e5874 
 19516903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gong 
 QY 
 
 
 Sluming 
 V 
 
 
 Mayes 
 A 
 
 
 Keller 
 S 
 
 
 Barrick 
 T 
 
 
 Cezayirli 
 E 
 
 
 Roberts 
 N 
 
 
 2005 
 Voxel-based morphometry and stereology provide convergent evidence of the importance of medial prefrontal cortex for fluid intelligence in healthy adults 
 NeuroImage 
 25 
 1175 
 1186 
 15850735 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagemann 
 D 
 
 
 Hewig 
 J 
 
 
 Walter 
 C 
 
 
 Naumann 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Skull thickness and magnitude of EEG alpha activity 
 Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology 
 119 
 1271 
 1280 
 18387340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2004 
 Insights into the ageing mind: a view from cognitive neuroscience 
 Nature reviews Neuroscience 
 5 
 87 
 96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Himanen 
 SL 
 
 
 Virkkala 
 J 
 
 
 Huupponen 
 E 
 
 
 Hasan 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Spindle frequency remains slow in sleep apnea patients throughout the night 
 Sleep Med 
 4 
 229 
 234 
 14592327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 Ghilardi 
 MF 
 
 
 Massimini 
 M 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Local sleep and learning 
 Nature 
 430 
 78 
 81 
 15184907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isotani 
 T 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 D 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Kochi 
 K 
 
 
 Wackermann 
 J 
 
 
 Saito 
 N 
 
 
 Yagyu 
 T 
 
 
 Kinoshita 
 T 
 
 
 Sasada 
 K 
 
 
 2001 
 EEG source localization and global dimensional complexity in high- and low- hypnotizable subjects: a pilot study 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 44 
 192 
 198 
 11702020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jasper 
 HH 
 
 
 1958 
 The ten-twenty electrode system of the International Federation 
 Electroencphalography Clinical Neuroscience 
 10 
 367 
 380 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joo 
 EY 
 
 
 Tae 
 WS 
 
 
 Kim 
 ST 
 
 
 Hong 
 SB 
 
 
 2009 
 Gray matter concentration abnormality in brains of narcolepsy patients 
 Korean J Radiol 
 10 
 552 
 558 
 19885310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joo 
 EY 
 
 
 Tae 
 WS 
 
 
 Lee 
 MJ 
 
 
 Kang 
 JW 
 
 
 Park 
 HS 
 
 
 Lee 
 JY 
 
 
 Suh 
 M 
 
 
 Hong 
 SB 
 
 
 2010 
 Reduced brain gray matter concentration in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 
 Sleep 
 33 
 235 
 241 
 20175407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kalinchuk 
 AV 
 
 
 McCarley 
 RW 
 
 
 Porkka-Heiskanen 
 T 
 
 
 Basheer 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 Sleep deprivation triggers inducible nitric oxide-dependent nitric oxide production in wake-active basal forebrain neurons 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 30 
 13254 
 13264 
 20926651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanai 
 R 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 2011 
 The structural basis of inter-individual differences in human behaviour and cognition 
 Nature reviews Neuroscience 
 12 
 231 
 242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 JH 
 
 
 Suh 
 SI 
 
 
 Seol 
 HY 
 
 
 Oh 
 K 
 
 
 Seo 
 WK 
 
 
 Yu 
 SW 
 
 
 Park 
 KW 
 
 
 Koh 
 SB 
 
 
 2008 
 Regional grey matter changes in patients with migraine: a voxel-based morphometry study 
 Cephalalgia 
 28 
 598 
 604 
 18422725 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kloepfer 
 C 
 
 
 Riemann 
 D 
 
 
 Nofzinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Feige 
 B 
 
 
 Unterrainer 
 J 
 
 
 O’Hara 
 R 
 
 
 Sorichter 
 S 
 
 
 Nissen 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 Memory before and after sleep in patients with moderate obstructive sleep apnea 
 J Clin Sleep Med 
 5 
 540 
 548 
 20465021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koutsouleris 
 N 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 GJE 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Bottlender 
 R 
 
 
 Scheuerecker 
 J 
 
 
 McGuire 
 P 
 
 
 Burgermeister 
 B 
 
 
 Born 
 C 
 
 
 Reiser 
 M 
 
 
 Möller 
 HJ 
 
 
 Meisenzahl 
 EM 
 
 
 2009 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of different vulnerability states for psychosis and their clinical outcomes 
 Br J Psychiatry 
 195 
 218 
 226 
 19721111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kurth 
 S 
 
 
 Jenni 
 OG 
 
 
 Riedner 
 BA 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 Carskadon 
 MA 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 Characteristics of sleep slow waves in children and adolescents 
 Sleep 
 33 
 475 
 480 
 20394316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laarne 
 PH 
 
 
 Tenhunen-Eskelinen 
 ML 
 
 
 Hyttinen 
 JK 
 
 
 Eskola 
 HJ 
 
 
 2000 
 Effect of EEG electrode density on dipole localization accuracy using two realistically shaped skull resistivity models 
 Brain Topogr 
 12 
 249 
 254 
 10912732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lai 
 YY 
 
 
 Shalita 
 T 
 
 
 Hajnik 
 T 
 
 
 Wu 
 JP 
 
 
 Kuo 
 JS 
 
 
 Chia 
 LG 
 
 
 Siegel 
 JM 
 
 
 1999 
 Neurotoxic N-methyl-D-aspartate lesion of the ventral midbrain and mesopontine junction alters sleep-wake organization 
 Neuroscience 
 90 
 469 
 483 
 10215152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landgrebe 
 M 
 
 
 Langguth 
 B 
 
 
 Rosengarth 
 K 
 
 
 Braun 
 S 
 
 
 Koch 
 A 
 
 
 Kleinjung 
 T 
 
 
 May 
 A 
 
 
 de Ridder 
 D 
 
 
 Hajak 
 G 
 
 
 2009 
 Structural brain changes in tinnitus: grey matter decrease in auditory and non-auditory brain areas 
 NeuroImage 
 46 
 213 
 218 
 19413945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landis 
 CA 
 
 
 Lentz 
 MJ 
 
 
 Rothermel 
 J 
 
 
 Buchwald 
 D 
 
 
 Shaver 
 JLF 
 
 
 2004 
 Decreased sleep spindles and spindle activity in midlife women with fibromyalgia and pain 
 Sleep 
 27 
 741 
 750 
 15283010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macey 
 PM 
 
 
 Henderson 
 LA 
 
 
 Macey 
 KE 
 
 
 Alger 
 JR 
 
 
 Frysinger 
 RC 
 
 
 Woo 
 MA 
 
 
 Harper 
 RK 
 
 
 Yan-Go 
 FL 
 
 
 Harper 
 RM 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain morphology associated with obstructive sleep apnea 
 Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
 166 
 1382 
 1387 
 12421746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mak 
 HK-F 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Z 
 
 
 Yau 
 KK-W 
 
 
 Zhang 
 L 
 
 
 Chan 
 Q 
 
 
 Chu 
 L-W 
 
 
 2010 
 Efficacy of Voxel-Based Morphometry with DARTEL and Standard Registration as Imaging Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients and Cognitively Normal Older Adults at 3.0 Tesla MR Imaging 
 Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 2003 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 1233 
 1239 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mander 
 BA 
 
 
 Santhanam 
 S 
 
 
 Saletin 
 JM 
 
 
 Walker 
 MP 
 
 
 2011 
 Wake deterioration and sleep restoration of human learning 
 Current biology : CB 
 21 
 R183 
 R184 
 21377092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Delfiore 
 G 
 
 
 Aerts 
 J 
 
 
 Péters 
 JM 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Franck 
 G 
 
 
 1997 
 Functional neuroanatomy of human slow wave sleep 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 17 
 2807 
 2812 
 9092602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Massimini 
 M 
 
 
 Ferrarelli 
 F 
 
 
 Esser 
 SK 
 
 
 Riedner 
 BA 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 M 
 
 
 Peterson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Triggering sleep slow waves by transcranial magnetic stimulation 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 104 
 8496 
 8501 
 17483481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayer 
 AR 
 
 
 Hanlon 
 FM 
 
 
 Franco 
 AR 
 
 
 Teshiba 
 TM 
 
 
 Thoma 
 RJ 
 
 
 Clark 
 VP 
 
 
 Canive 
 JM 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural networks underlying auditory sensory gating 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 182 
 189 
 18801443 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 J 
 
 
 Toga 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 J 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Woods 
 R 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Simpson 
 G 
 
 
 Pike 
 B 
 
 
 Holmes 
 C 
 
 
 Collins 
 L 
 
 
 Thompson 
 P 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 D 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Schormann 
 T 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 Geyer 
 S 
 
 
 Parsons 
 L 
 
 
 Narr 
 K 
 
 
 Kabani 
 N 
 
 
 Le Goualher 
 G 
 
 
 Feidler 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 K 
 
 
 Boomsma 
 D 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 H 
 
 
 Cannon 
 T 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 2001 
 A four-dimensional probabilistic atlas of the human brain 
 Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 
 8 
 401 
 430 
 11522763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mistlberger 
 R 
 
 
 Bergmann 
 B 
 
 
 Rechtschaffen 
 A 
 
 
 1987 
 Period-amplitude analysis of rat electroencephalogram: effects of sleep deprivation and exercise 
 Sleep 
 10 
 508 
 522 
 3432853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modirrousta 
 M 
 
 
 Mainville 
 L 
 
 
 Jones 
 BE 
 
 
 2007 
 Dynamic changes in GABAA receptors on basal forebrain cholinergic neurons following sleep deprivation and recovery 
 BMC neuroscience 
 8 
 15 
 17316437 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mongrain 
 V 
 
 
 Carrier 
 J 
 
 
 Dumont 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Difference in sleep regulation between morning and evening circadian types as indexed by antero-posterior analyses of the sleep EEG 
 The European journal of neuroscience 
 23 
 497 
 504 
 16420456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monti 
 JM 
 
 
 2011 
 Serotonin control of sleep-wake behavior 
 Sleep medicine reviews 
 15 
 269 
 281 
 21459634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mueller 
 SC 
 
 
 Merke 
 DP 
 
 
 Leschek 
 EW 
 
 
 Fromm 
 S 
 
 
 Vanryzin 
 C 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Increased medial temporal lobe and striatal grey-matter volume in a rare disorder of androgen excess: a voxel-based morphometry (VBM) study 
 Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 
 14 
 445 
 457 
 20860880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 M 
 
 
 Riedner 
 B 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 Massimini 
 M 
 
 
 Ferrarelli 
 F 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2009 
 Source modeling sleep slow waves 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neylan 
 TC 
 
 
 Mueller 
 SG 
 
 
 Wang 
 Z 
 
 
 Metzler 
 TJ 
 
 
 Lenoci 
 M 
 
 
 Truran 
 D 
 
 
 Marmar 
 CR 
 
 
 Weiner 
 MW 
 
 
 Schuff 
 N 
 
 
 2010 
 Insomnia severity is associated with a decreased volume of the CA3/dentate gyrus hippocampal subfield 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 68 
 494 
 496 
 20598672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Hayasaka 
 S 
 
 
 2003 
 Controlling the familywise error rate in functional neuroimaging: a comparative review 
 Stat Methods Med Res 
 12 
 419 
 446 
 14599004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Donoghue 
 FJ 
 
 
 Briellmann 
 RS 
 
 
 Rochford 
 PD 
 
 
 Abbott 
 DF 
 
 
 Pell 
 GS 
 
 
 Chan 
 CHP 
 
 
 Tarquinio 
 N 
 
 
 Jackson 
 GD 
 
 
 Pierce 
 RJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Cerebral structural changes in severe obstructive sleep apnea 
 Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
 171 
 1185 
 1190 
 15699018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 2002 
 Standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA): technical details 
 Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 
 24 
 Suppl D 
 5 
 12 
 12575463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 D 
 
 
 Koenig 
 T 
 
 
 Kochi 
 K 
 
 
 Merlo 
 MC 
 
 
 Hell 
 D 
 
 
 Koukkou 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 Low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) functional imaging in acute, neuroleptic-naive, first-episode, productive schizophrenia 
 Psychiatry Res 
 90 
 169 
 179 
 10466736 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pereira 
 JMS 
 
 
 Xiong 
 L 
 
 
 Acosta-Cabronero 
 J 
 
 
 Pengas 
 G 
 
 
 Williams 
 GB 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Registration accuracy for VBM studies varies according to region and degenerative disease grouping 
 NeuroImage 
 49 
 2205 
 2215 
 19892022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1999 
 Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: comparative cytoarchitectonic analysis in the human and the macaque brain and corticocortical connection patterns 
 The European journal of neuroscience 
 11 
 1011 
 1036 
 10103094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pivik 
 RT 
 
 
 Joncas 
 S 
 
 
 Busby 
 KA 
 
 
 1999 
 Sleep spindles and arousal: the effects of age and sensory stimulation 
 Sleep research online : SRO 
 2 
 89 
 100 
 11382889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ponomarev 
 VA 
 
 
 Gurskaia 
 OE 
 
 
 Kropotov Iu 
 D 
 
 
 Artiushkova 
 LV 
 
 
 Muller 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 The comparison of clustering methods of EEG independent components in healthy subjects and patients with post concussion syndrome after traumatic brain injury 
 Fiziol Cheloveka 
 36 
 5 
 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rauchs 
 G 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Parapatics 
 S 
 
 
 Bertran 
 F 
 
 
 Clochon 
 P 
 
 
 Hot 
 P 
 
 
 Denise 
 P 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 Gruber 
 G 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 2008 
 Is there a link between sleep changes and memory in Alzheimer’s disease? 
 Neuroreport 
 19 
 1159 
 1162 
 18596620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rechtschaffen 
 A 
 
 
 Kales 
 A 
 
 
 1968 
 A manual of standardized terminology, techniques and scoring system for sleep stages of human subjects 
 US Government Printing Office, US Public Health Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridgway 
 GR 
 
 
 Omar 
 R 
 
 
 Ourselin 
 S 
 
 
 Hill 
 DLG 
 
 
 Warren 
 JD 
 
 
 Fox 
 NC 
 
 
 2009 
 Issues with threshold masking in voxel-based morphometry of atrophied brains 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 99 
 111 
 18848632 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riedner 
 BA 
 
 
 Vyazovskiy 
 VV 
 
 
 Huber 
 R 
 
 
 Massimini 
 M 
 
 
 Esser 
 S 
 
 
 Murphy 
 M 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Sleep homeostasis and cortical synchronization: III. A high-density EEG study of sleep slow waves in humans 
 Sleep 
 30 
 1643 
 1657 
 18246974 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roth 
 C 
 
 
 Jeanmonod 
 D 
 
 
 Magnin 
 M 
 
 
 Morel 
 A 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 2000 
 Effects of medial thalamotomy and pallido-thalamic tractotomy on sleep and waking EEG in pain and Parkinsonian patients 
 Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology 
 111 
 1266 
 1275 
 10880802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rusterholz 
 T 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 2011 
 Topographical aspects in the dynamics of sleep homeostasis in young men: individual patterns 
 BMC neuroscience 
 12 
 84 
 21846365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saletin 
 JM 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 AN 
 
 
 Walker 
 MP 
 
 
 2011 
 The Role of Sleep in Directed Forgetting and Remembering of Human Memories 
 Cerebral cortex 
 10.1093/cercor/bhr034 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Dang-Vu 
 TT 
 
 
 Albouy 
 G 
 
 
 Balteau 
 E 
 
 
 Boly 
 M 
 
 
 Carrier 
 J 
 
 
 Darsaud 
 A 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Desseilles 
 M 
 
 
 Gais 
 S 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Rauchs 
 G 
 
 
 Schnakers 
 C 
 
 
 Sterpenich 
 V 
 
 
 Vandewalle 
 G 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 2007 
 Hemodynamic cerebral correlates of sleep spindles during human non-rapid eye movement sleep 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 104 
 13164 
 13169 
 17670944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Gruber 
 G 
 
 
 Parapatics 
 S 
 
 
 Sauter 
 C 
 
 
 Klosch 
 G 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 Zeitlhofer 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 Sleep spindles and their significance for declarative memory consolidation 
 Sleep 
 27 
 1479 
 1485 
 15683137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Hodlmoser 
 K 
 
 
 Gruber 
 G 
 
 
 Sauter 
 C 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Klosch 
 G 
 
 
 Parapatics 
 S 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Zeitlhofer 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Sleep spindle-related activity in the human EEG and its relation to general cognitive and learning abilities 
 The European journal of neuroscience 
 23 
 1738 
 1746 
 16623830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Hoedlmoser 
 K 
 
 
 Pecherstorfer 
 T 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Gruber 
 G 
 
 
 Parapatics 
 S 
 
 
 Sauter 
 C 
 
 
 Kloesch 
 G 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 Zeitlhofer 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Interindividual sleep spindle differences and their relation to learning-related enhancements 
 Brain research 
 1191 
 127 
 135 
 18164280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 SK 
 
 
 Hjorth 
 JJJ 
 
 
 Joemai 
 RMS 
 
 
 Wijntjes 
 R 
 
 
 Eijgenraam 
 S 
 
 
 de Bruijn 
 P 
 
 
 Georgiou 
 C 
 
 
 de Jong 
 APH 
 
 
 van Ooyen 
 A 
 
 
 Verhage 
 M 
 
 
 Cornelisse 
 LN 
 
 
 Toonen 
 RF 
 
 
 Veldkamp 
 W 
 
 
 2011 
 Automated analysis of neuronal morphology, synapse number and synaptic recruitment 
 J Neurosci Methods 
 195 
 185 
 193 
 21167201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scrofani 
 A 
 
 
 Cioni 
 M 
 
 
 Filetti 
 S 
 
 
 Lanaia 
 F 
 
 
 Pennisi 
 G 
 
 
 Bella 
 R 
 
 
 Grasso 
 A 
 
 
 1996 
 Changes in sleep spindle activity of subject with chronic somatosensitive and sensorial deficits. Preliminary results 
 Italian journal of neurological sciences 
 17 
 423 
 428 
 8978449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Srividya 
 R 
 
 
 Mallick 
 HN 
 
 
 Kumar 
 VM 
 
 
 2004 
 Sleep changes produced by destruction of medial septal neurons in rats 
 Neuroreport 
 15 
 1831 
 1835 
 15257157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 Deschênes 
 M 
 
 
 Domich 
 L 
 
 
 Mulle 
 C 
 
 
 1985 
 Abolition of spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus reticularis thalami 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 54 
 1473 
 1497 
 4087044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szymusiak 
 R 
 
 
 1995 
 Magnocellular nuclei of the basal forebrain: substrates of sleep and arousal regulation 
 Sleep 
 18 
 478 
 500 
 7481420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamminga 
 CA 
 
 
 Stan 
 AD 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2010 
 The hippocampal formation in schizophrenia 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 167 
 1178 
 1193 
 20810471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 Cannon 
 TD 
 
 
 Narr 
 KL 
 
 
 van Erp 
 T 
 
 
 Poutanen 
 VP 
 
 
 Huttunen 
 M 
 
 
 Lonnqvist 
 J 
 
 
 Standertskjold-Nordenstam 
 CG 
 
 
 Kaprio 
 J 
 
 
 Khaledy 
 M 
 
 
 Dail 
 R 
 
 
 Zoumalan 
 CI 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 2001 
 Genetic influences on brain structure 
 Nature neuroscience 
 4 
 1253 
 1258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tislerova 
 B 
 
 
 Brunovsky 
 M 
 
 
 Horacek 
 J 
 
 
 Novak 
 T 
 
 
 Kopecek 
 M 
 
 
 Mohr 
 P 
 
 
 Krajca 
 V 
 
 
 2008 
 LORETA functional imaging in antipsychotic-naive and olanzapine-, clozapine- and risperidone-treated patients with schizophrenia 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 58 
 1 
 10 
 18781085 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 Cirelli 
 C 
 
 
 2006 
 Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis 
 Sleep medicine reviews 
 10 
 49 
 62 
 16376591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tucker 
 AM 
 
 
 Dinges 
 DF 
 
 
 Van Dongen 
 HP 
 
 
 2007 
 Trait interindividual differences in the sleep physiology of healthy young adults 
 Journal of sleep research 
 16 
 170 
 180 
 17542947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van der Kooy 
 D 
 
 
 McGinty 
 JF 
 
 
 Koda 
 LY 
 
 
 Gerfen 
 CR 
 
 
 Bloom 
 FE 
 
 
 1982 
 Visceral cortex: a direct connection from prefrontal cortex to the solitary nucleus in rat 
 Neurosci Lett 
 33 
 123 
 127 
 6185887 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kammen 
 DP 
 
 
 van Kammen 
 WB 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Goetz 
 K 
 
 
 Neylan 
 T 
 
 
 1988 
 Decreased slow-wave sleep and enlarged lateral ventricles in schizophrenia 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 1 
 265 
 271 
 3251506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandewalle 
 G 
 
 
 Archer 
 SN 
 
 
 Wuillaume 
 C 
 
 
 Balteau 
 E 
 
 
 Degueldre 
 C 
 
 
 Luxen 
 A 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 Dijk 
 DJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging-assessed brain responses during an executive task depend on interaction of sleep homeostasis, circadian phase, and PER3 genotype 
 The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 29 
 7948 
 7956 
 19553435 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Veiga 
 H 
 
 
 Deslandes 
 A 
 
 
 Cagy 
 M 
 
 
 Fiszman 
 A 
 
 
 Piedade 
 RA 
 
 
 Ribeiro 
 P 
 
 
 2003 
 Neurocortical electrical activity tomography in chronic schizophrenics 
 Arq Neuropsiquiatr 
 61 
 712 
 717 
 14595470 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ventouras 
 EM 
 
 
 Alevizos 
 I 
 
 
 Ktonas 
 PY 
 
 
 Tsekou 
 H 
 
 
 Paparrigopoulos 
 T 
 
 
 Kalatzis 
 I 
 
 
 Soldatos 
 CR 
 
 
 Nikiforidis 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 Independent components of sleep spindles 
 Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 
 2007 
 4002 
 4005 
 18002877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viola 
 AU 
 
 
 Archer 
 SN 
 
 
 James 
 LM 
 
 
 Groeger 
 JA 
 
 
 Lo 
 JCY 
 
 
 Skene 
 DJ 
 
 
 von Schantz 
 M 
 
 
 Dijk 
 DJ 
 
 
 2007 
 PER3 polymorphism predicts sleep structure and waking performance 
 Current biology : CB 
 17 
 613 
 618 
 17346965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viola 
 AU 
 
 
 Chellappa 
 SL 
 
 
 Archer 
 SN 
 
 
 Pugin 
 F 
 
 
 Gotz 
 T 
 
 
 Dijk 
 DJ 
 
 
 Cajochen 
 C 
 
 
 2012 
 Interindividual differences in circadian rhythmicity and sleep homeostasis in older people: effect of a PER3 polymorphism 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 33 
 1010 
 e1017 
 1027 
 22169200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 2010 
 Transitive inference: distinct contributions of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 22 
 837 
 847 
 19320546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Werth 
 E 
 
 
 Achermann 
 P 
 
 
 Dijk 
 DJ 
 
 
 Borbély 
 AA 
 
 
 1997 
 Spindle frequency activity in the sleep EEG: individual differences and topographic distribution 
 Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
 103 
 535 
 542 
 9402884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiegand 
 M 
 
 
 Moller 
 AA 
 
 
 Schreiber 
 W 
 
 
 Lauer 
 C 
 
 
 Krieg 
 JC 
 
 
 1991 
 Brain morphology and sleep EEG in patients with Huntington’s disease 
 Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 
 240 
 148 
 152 
 1827599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolk 
 DA 
 
 
 Price 
 JC 
 
 
 Saxton 
 JA 
 
 
 Snitz 
 BE 
 
 
 James 
 JA 
 
 
 Lopez 
 OL 
 
 
 Aizenstein 
 HJ 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AD 
 
 
 Weissfeld 
 LA 
 
 
 Mathis 
 CA 
 
 
 Klunk 
 WE 
 
 
 De-Kosky 
 ST 
 
 
 2009 
 Amyloid imaging in mild cognitive impairment subtypes 
 Annals of neurology 
 65 
 557 
 568 
 19475670 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yaouhi 
 K 
 
 
 Bertran 
 F 
 
 
 Clochon 
 P 
 
 
 Mézenge 
 F 
 
 
 Denise 
 P 
 
 
 Foret 
 J 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 A combined neuropsychological and brain imaging study of obstructive sleep apnea 
 Journal of sleep research 
 18 
 36 
 48 
 19250174 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Grey matter volume (GM) associations with slower sleep spindles within  a priori  regions of interest.  A:  ( left ) topographic plot of frontal dominant slower spindle frequency, with representative sleep spindle at electrode derivation Cz.  B:  ( right ) associations between slower sleep spindle frequencies and GM in bilateral auditory cortex (Heschl’s Gyrus) and in the left and right anterior and posterior insula, respectively, followed by scatterplots relating grey matter and spindle frequency at the peak voxels of the left Heschl’s Gyrus and right anterior cingulate clusters, respectively. Left image at MNI [ x y z ]: [−39 −26 14], Right image at MNI: [38 21 2]. Statistical maps are displayed at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Grey matter volume (GM) associations with faster sleep spindles within  a priori  regions of interest.  A:  ( left ) topographic plot of posterior dominant faster sleep spindle frequency.  B:  ( right ) positive association between faster sleep spindle frequencies and GM in bilateral posterior hippocampus, followed by scatterplots relating grey matter and spindle frequency at the peak voxels of the left and right hippocampus clusters, respectively. Image at MNI [ x y z ]: [−25 −27 −8]. Statistical maps are displayed at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Grey matter volume (GM) associations with NREM slow wave density within  a priori  regions of interest.  A:  ( left ) topographic plot of EEG slow wave (SW) density, demonstrating centro-parietal surface distribution, followed by  B:  ( middle, right ) positive association between SW density and GM in the basal forebrain/hypothalamus (coronal), followed by a scatterplot relating grey matter and SW density at the peak voxel of basal forebrain/hypothalamic cluster. Image at MNI [ x y z ]: [−2 2 −8]. Statistical maps are displayed at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Grey matter volume (GM) associations with NREM slow wave amplitude within  a priori  regions of interest.  A:  ( left ) topographic plot of EEG slow wave peak amplitude, demonstrating canonical frontal dominant surface distribution, with the corresponding average SW oscillation at electrode derivation Fz plotted for each subject (bold group average),  B:  ( middle ) positive association between SW amplitude and GM in middle cingulate and mesial orbital frontal cortex, each with strongly convergent anatomical findings ( right ) from sLORETA electrical source analyses of the peak SW amplitude, followed by scatterplot relating grey matter and SW amplitude at the peak voxels of the cingulate and orbital frontal clusters, respectively. Arrows designate similarity between GM correlates and source-generators of slow waves. Top image at MNI [ x y z ]: [7 −9 32], bottom image at MNI [ x y z ]: [−1 34 −27]. Statistical maps are displayed at p < 0.005. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Grey Matter Volume Correlates of Sleep Spindle Frequency and Slow Waves ( A Priori  Regions) 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Cluster 
 Local Maxima 
 Peak  Z 
 P SVC-Cluster  Non-stationary 
 
 P SVC-Peak (FWE) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hemi 
 
 
 Label 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 Y 
 
 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A. Grey Matter Volume Negatively Correlating With Sleep Spindle Frequency 
 
 
 
 L 
 Posterior Insula 
 −40 
 −26 
 15 
 4.33 
 0.011 
 0.014 
 
 
 
 
 −36 
 −8 
 20 
 3.81 
 0.029 
 0.037 
 
 
 L 
 Heschl’s Transverse Gyrus 
 −39 
 −26 
 14 
 3.58 
 0.008 
 0.005 
 
 
 R 
 
 52 
 −19 
 8 
 3.72 
 0.020 
 0.016 
 
 
 
 
 54 
 −15 
 7 
 3.56 
 0.022 
 0.022 
 
 
 L 
 Anterior Insula 
 −35 
 −2 
 18 
 3.48 
 0.021 
 0.019 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 −5 
 14 
 3.62 
 0.050 
 0.047 
 
 
 R 
 
 38 
 21 
 2 
 3.43 
 0.033 
 0.021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B. Grey Matter Volume Positively Correlating Sleep Spindle Frequency 
 
 
 
 L 
 Posterior Hippocampus 
 −25 
 −27 
 −8 
 3.52 
 0.015 
 0.009 
 
 
 R 
 
 26 
 −31 
 −9 
 3.64 
 0.016 
 0.006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C. Grey Matter Volume Positively Correlating With Slow Wave Density 
 
 
 
 L 
 Basal Forebrain/Hypothalamus 
 −2 
 2 
 −8 
 3.46 
 0.008 
 0.008 
 
 
 R 
 
 8 
 3 
 −5 
 3.16 
 
 0.018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D. Grey Matter Volume Positively Correlating With Slow Wave Amplitude 
 
 
 
 R 
 Orbital Frontal Cortex 
 2 
 34 
 −27 
 4.53 
 0.020 
 0.001 
 
 
 L 
 
 −1 
 34 
 −27 
 3.87 
 0.018 
 0.008 
 
 
 R 
 Cingulate Cortex 
 7 
 −9 
 32 
 3.62 
 0.035 
 0.036 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −17 
 33 
 3.33 
 
 0.078 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Sleep EEG and brain structure independently demonstrate trait-like variability. 
 
 
 We test whether brain structure explains individual differences in sleep features. 
 
 
 Somatosensory cortex and hippocampus structure explained differences in spindles. 
 
 
 Medial prefrontal and basal forebrain structure predicted differences in slow waves. 
 
 
 Brain structure is a factor accounting for individual differences in sleep features. 
 
 
 
 
