
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9419065 
 21028 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 Human brain mapping 
 
 1065-9471 
 1097-0193 
 
 
 23818133 
 4557612 
 10.1002/hbm.22312 
 NIHMS583581 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Networks involved in Olfaction and their Dynamics using Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and unified Structural Equation Modeling (uSEM) 
 
 
 
 
 Karunanayaka 
 Prasanna 
 
 PhD 
 1 
 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 P. J. 
 
 PhD 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 J. 
 
 MD, PhD 
 1 
 
 
 
 Weitekamp 
 C. W. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Molitoris 
 Sarah 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Gates 
 Kathleen M. 
 
 PhD 
 4 
 
 
 
 Molenaar 
 Peter C.M. 
 
 PhD 
 4 
 
 
 
 Yang 
 Q. X. 
 
 PhD 
 1 
 5 
 
 
 1 Department of Radiology (Center for NMR Research), Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 
 2 Department of Neurology, Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 
 3 Department of Neural & Behavioral Sciences, Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 
 4 Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
 5 Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 
 
 Correspondence to: Prasanna Karunanayaka, Department of Radiology, Center for NMR Research, Penn State Hershey Medical Center, 500 University Drive, Mail Code H066, Hershey, PA 17033, Tel: (717) 531-0003 (Ext. 281204), Fax: (717) 531-8486,  pkarunanayaka@hmc.psu.org 
 
 
 7 
 8 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 7 
 2013 
 
 
 5 
 2014 
 
 
 02 
 9 
 2015 
 
 35 
 5 
 2055 
 2072 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The study of human olfaction is complicated by the myriad of processing demands in conscious perceptual and emotional experiences of odors. Combining functional magnetic resonance imaging with convergent multivariate network analyses, we examined the spatiotemporal behavior of olfactory-generated BOLD signal in healthy adults. The experimental fMRI paradigm was found to offset the limitations of olfactory habituation effects and permitted the identification of five functional networks. Analysis delineated separable neuronal circuits that were spatially centered in the primary olfactory cortex, striatum, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, rostral prefrontal cortex/anterior cingulate, and parietal-occipital junction. We hypothesize that these functional networks subserve primary perceptual, affective/motivational and higher-order olfactory-related cognitive processes. Results provided direct evidence for the existence of parallel networks with top-down modulation for olfactory processing and clearly distinguished brain activations that were sniffing-related vs. odor-related. A comprehensive neurocognitive model for olfaction is presented that may be applied to broader translational studies of olfactory function, aging and neurological disease. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 Olfaction 
 Independent Component Analysis (ICA) 
 Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Understanding the interplay between sensory stimulation and conscious perceptual and emotional experiences has been a key interest of recent neuroscience research ( Crick and Koch 2003 ). Efficient detection and identification of odors has played an important role in animal survival in complex, changing environments and has shaped adaptive behavior by means of stimulus-reinforcement processing. The vertebrate nervous system is remarkably optimized to recognize, categorize and discriminate complex odors by fine-tuning the olfactory system to generate stable percepts from an array of unstable odor inputs. 
 The olfactory network has been studied at various levels including olfactory receptor cell signal transduction, functionality of the olfactory bulb and the associated higher-order olfactory processing to name a few ( Firestein 2001 ;  Linster, Johnson et al. 2001 ;  Cleland, Morse et al. 2002 ;  Gottfried, O’Doherty et al. 2002 ;  Gottfried, O’Doherty et al. 2003 ;  Gottfried, Smith et al. 2004 ;  Zelano, Bensafi et al. 2005 ;  Cerf-Ducastel and Murphy 2006 ;  Wachowiak and Shipley 2006 ;  Plailly, Howard et al. 2008 ;  Zelano, Montag et al. 2009 ). The advent of fMRI methodologies has spurred more detailed and comprehensive investigation of olfactory processing, namely odor-related activations and functional connectivity in subcortical and cortical brain structures ( Cerf-Ducastel and Murphy 2006 ;  Gottfried, Winston et al. 2006 ;  Li, Howard et al. 2008 ;  Howard, Plailly et al. 2009 ). However, acquiring reliable and robust olfactory fMRI data is non-trivial and has had to overcome severe technical challenges such as magnetic susceptibility artifacts at the base of the brain and respiratory modulations on odor stimulation administration ( Yang, Dardzinski et al. 1997 ). Several studies have proposed novel MRI techniques capable of removing these artifacts. With much-improved olfactometers, reliable Blood Oxygenated Level Dependent (BOLD) activation in the primary olfactory cortex has been reported ( Wang, Eslinger et al. 2005 ;  Wang, Eslinger et al. 2010 ). Despite these technological advances, habituation effects of the olfactory network require special consideration when developing successful olfactory stimulation paradigms and data interpretation ( Wilson 1998 ;  Wilson 1998 ;  Kadohisa and Wilson 2006 ). 
 Habituation is a form of non-associative memory common to all sensory systems, generally identified by a decrease in neural responsiveness to repetitions of a stimulus. Such sensory desensitization is an innate mammalian quality with profound implications. One important feature of sensory habituation is to filter out less significant and novel events presumed to be subserved by higher-order cognitive processing ( Wilson 1998 ). However, in the case of olfaction, the most common form of habituation is the neural adaptation of the epithelium. The current olfactory fMRI paradigm employs short odor stimulations (6 sec accommodating one inhalation) with long intervals (30 sec for about five respiratory cycles) to circumvent adaptation at the level of the epithelium. Additionally, our fMRI paradigm is specifically designed to reduce certain forms of higher-order cortical habituation. However, the nature of our fMRI experimental setup does not provide any data to address whether this cortical habituation is completely dissociable from the adaptation of the epithelium. 
 The interplay among olfactory perception threshold, stimulus specificity, and habituation invites non-linear behavior into the BOLD signal. This deviation from the general assumption of linearity in fMRI studies significantly impacts the way olfactory fMRI data are acquired and analyzed. In this study, the presented fMRI paradigms and network analyses were designed to offset higher order cortical habituation effects and allow investigation of potential parallel processing networks that could address at least some aspects of olfactory nonlinearity and complexity ( Tabert, Steffener et al. 2007 ). These networks would naturally encompass several anatomical regions and have identifiable connectivity and functional characteristics. For example, the olfactory system is anatomically linked to the limbic system. Hence, olfactory-limbic activation and connectivity should be demonstrable ( Gates and Molenaar Under review ). 
 Additionally, it has been suggested that, at a behavioral level, most olfactory measures seem to test a common source of variance ( Doty, Smith et al. 1994 ). Although not well understood, this common source of variance raised the possibility of olfactory perception being multidimensional (e.g., odor memory, discrimination, detection, and identification). Thus, it has been suggested that many of the olfactory tests in use tap the same components of this multidimensional olfactory perception. For example, the act of odor detection may require some degree of ability to remember and discriminate it from other odors. One possible approach to delineate this perception is to use neural networks along with their interactions (i.e., top-down & bottom up). Specifically, to use them as a basis to understand the behaviorally observed common variance mentioned above. In this respect, the converging analyses presented in this paper provides a concrete framework to decipher how these olfactory networks may be mapped at different levels of perceptual and emotional processing of odor-related stimulation. 
 Olfactory deficits have been observed in several progressive neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD). Related neuropathological studies provide convincing evidence that early AD pathology involves olfaction-related structures (such as the anterior olfactory nucleus and the transentorhinal cortex) gradually spreading to more extensive temporal lobe regions, and ultimately encompassing multiple areas of the brain ( Braak and Braak 1996 ;  Braak and Braak 1998 ;  Braak, Braak et al. 1998 ). Similarly, strong evidence from psychophysical ( Ramaker, Marinus et al. 2002 ;  Litvan, Bhatia et al. 2003 ), electrophysiological ( Becker, Hummel et al. 1993 ;  Barz, Hummel et al. 1997 ;  Hawkes, Shephard et al. 1998 ) and fMRI ( Westermann, Wattendorf et al. 2008 ;  Hummel, Fliessbach et al. 2010 ) studies demonstrate that olfactory deficits occur in early idiopathic PD and precede the onset of motor symptoms by approximately four years ( Berendse and Ponsen 2006 ;  Haehner, Hummel et al. 2007 ). Decreased olfaction appears to be independent of medication, and usually does not respond to any changes in medication ( Doty, Deems et al. 1988 ;  Doty 2012 ;  Doty 2012 ). Thus, from both scientific and clinical perspectives, it is important to elucidate the networks subserving olfaction and decipher effective olfactory stimulation paradigms sensitive to the neuropathology of diseases such as PD and AD, where olfactory deficits manifest as early biomarkers ( Hummel, Fliessbach et al. 2010 ). 
 This report consists of two parts. First, we present an exploratory four odor-intensity paradigm that was designed to offset olfactory habituation effects on BOLD signal. This paradigm employs increasing concentrations of lavender, an odorant with minimal trigeminal effects that can potentially be applied across a broad range of human lifespan and neuropathological conditions. Secondly, the improved BOLD signal derived from this exploratory paradigm was expected to provide a more reliable fMRI dataset to investigate the characteristics of olfactory functional activity using converging analysis methods such as General Linear Modeling (GLM), Group Independent Component Analysis (ICA), and unified Structural Equation Modeling (uSEM). ICA was used to identify spatially coherent activation patterns (IC maps) and their associated temporal behavior to capture the dynamic properties of the olfactory BOLD response ( Calhoun, Adali et al. 2001 ). Additionally, ICA itself provided a framework to identify the associated cognitive functions of IC maps subserving olfaction ( Firestein 2001 ). Finally, we applied unified Structural Equation Modeling (uSEM), a statistical method capable of estimating causal influences among measured variables, to determine the causal structure among the networks revealed by ICA. A major advantage of ICA is its ability to combine with functional connectivity analysis methods [such as uSEM, Dynamical Causal Modeling (DCM), Granger causality, etc.] ( Friston, Harrison et al. 2003 ;  Goebel, Roebroeck et al. 2003 ;  Gates, Molenaar et al. 2011 ) with minimal modifications. The associated limitations regarding (non) directional hypothesis about causality based on these methods presented will be addressed in the discussion. Our overarching goal was to test the hypothesis that olfactory stimulation will recruit multiple, parallel anatomical networks with specific connectivity among primary olfactory structures as well as limbic and higher-order cortical structures ( Savic, Gulyas et al. 2000 ). 
 
 
 METHODS 
 We present data from twenty healthy adult subjects (mean age 26.3 ± 3.9 years; ten females) who successfully completed the olfactory fMRI experiment. The imaging paradigm consisted of sequentially presenting four different lavender odor concentrations (referred to as the four-strength paradigm). Additionally, we present data from ten participants from the same group (mean age 24.7 ± 1.8 years, 5 females) on a separate fresh air (i.e., no-odor) olfactory fMRI paradigm (referred to as the no-odor paradigm) to compare and interpret the findings of the four-strength paradigm in detail ( Figure 1 ). 
 
 Human Participants 
 The olfactory function of all participants was assessed  a priori  with The University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) ( Doty, Shaman et al. 1984 ). All participants scored within the normal range (average score 36.85 ± 1.4 out of a possible 40). The study was approved by the Penn State College of Medicine IRB, and all volunteers provided written informed consent prior to participation. 
 
 
 Odor Stimulus paradigm 
 The four lavender concentrations (Quest International Fragrance Co.) were prepared via dilutions in 1, 2-propanediol (Sigma) to generate weak (0.032%), medium (0.10%), strong (0.32%), and very strong (1.0%) odors that were previously determined from a psychophysical study of healthy adults ( Grunfeld, Wang et al. 2005 ). Lavender is an effective olfactory stimulant with very minimal or no propensity to stimulate the trigeminal system ( Allen 1936 ;  Patton 1960 ). It is generally perceived by North American individuals as being pleasant and familiar. 
 
 
 Psychophysical Odorant Concentration Determination 
 A review of the psychophysical literature on odor threshold tests indicated that a majority of healthy, non-anosmic participants would be able to detect a phenyl ethyl alcohol odorant of logarithm intensity −3.5 (i.e., 0.032%) ( Doty 2000 ). The selected odor concentrations for the current fMRI study were based on the findings of a psychophysical study of odor intensity and threshold using ten healthy young participants (mean age = 29.6 ± 14.4 years). Each participant was asked to rate odor intensity and pleasantness for four different concentrations of lavender (weak, medium, strong and very strong corresponding to 0.032%, 0.10%, 0.32%, and 1.00%, respectively) that was presented with an experimental setup using an olfactometer described in the next section. Participants rated the odorant intensities on a Likert-type scale from 0 to 4. A score of 0 indicated no smell at all, whereas a score of 4 indicated a very strong smell. The mean and standard deviations were as follows: weak (Mean = 1.58, SD = 0.32), medium (Mean = 1.92, SD = 0.44), strong (Mean = 2.71, SD = 0.43), and very strong (Mean = 3.43, SD = 0.41). ANOVA indicated that the intensity ratings for the four odor concentrations were significantly different [F (4,395) = 103, p < 4.85e-60] with post hoc tests confirming that each concentration was different from the other three. All participants reported detecting the odorant even at the weakest concentration (i.e., 0.032%). This pilot study confirmed the discriminant validity and supra-threshold properties of odorant concentrations used in this study. 
 
 
 Olfactory Delivery System 
 The olfactometer (ETT, Hershey, PA) consisted of a set of Teflon tubing that transported odorless air from an air pump, through an array of odorant chambers with solenoid valves, to both nostrils of the subject. The air was humidified before going into the odorant chambers. The odorant chambers were located next to the examination bed of the MRI scanner. The timing and switching of the odorants’ delivery were automatically synchronized with MRI pulse-timing program. During image acquisition, the clean air with or without an odorant was presented through tubing about 1 cm away from the subject’s nose. A constant airflow of 8 L / min was maintained such that no tactile or thermal cues were introduced. Additionally, as part of the olfactory data acquisition setup, the respiration patterns of all participants were monitored and recorded. 
 
 
 fMRI paradigm 
 Figure 1  graphically shows the four-strength olfactory fMRI paradigm. Odor presentation lasted for 6 seconds and was followed by 2 non-odor conditions: 12 seconds with a visual cue “Rest” and then 6 seconds with visual cue “Smell”. In addition, a separate set of data was collected using fresh air only (no-odor) while keeping all timing intervals visual stimuli the same as the four-strength odorant paradigm. It was made clear to participants that they were 1) not to sniff during the fMRI experiment and 2) only odorless air would be delivered during the “fresh air” condition. These comparison conditions were designed to offset observed olfactory-related habituation effects. 
 
 
 fMRI Study Protocol 
 MR images of the entire brain were acquired using EPI with an acceleration factor of 2 on a Siemens Tim Trio 3.0 T system with the following parameters: TR=2000 ms; TE=30ms; Flip Angle=90°; FOV = 220 × 220 × 120 mm 3 ; Acquisition Matrix = 80 × 80, # of slices = 30, slice thickness = 4 mm and number of repetitions = 234. Three trials of each odorant concentration (6s per stimulation) were presented to the subject’s nostrils sequentially as were the control conditions ( Figure 1 ). 
 
 
 Data Processing and Analysis 
 The fMRI data were preprocessed [realignment, co-registration, normalization to the Montreal Neurological Institute brain template ( Collins, Zijdenbos et al. 1998 ), and smoothing by a 8x8x8 mm 3  kernel] using SPM 5 software. The main contrast, that was analyzed and presented for the four-odor paradigm, considered different lavender concentrations as one stimulus and compares them to the “Rest” condition. Although the focus of this is paper is ICA and uSEM, a standard SPM analysis is performed mainly for the purpose of comparison. 
 We also investigated any variations in the measured hemodynamic response for different odor concentrations by convolving the odor-strength specific vectors of onset times with a finite Impulse Response Function (IRF) ( Goutte, Nielsen et al. 2000 ;  Ollinger, Shulman et al. 2001 ;  Lindquist, Meng Loh et al. 2009 ) with eight 2 sec time-bins. 
 
 
 Region-of-interest analysis 
 Based on the hypothesis that olfactory habituation can be successfully mitigated by temporally spacing and varying the odor concentrations, the neural response to odors, indexed via fMRI, was investigated to determine whether the BOLD response can be maintained at significant levels throughout the fMRI experiment. Based on a ROI (region of interest) approach, the fMRI activation within the primary olfactory cortex (POC) was parameterized using the beta values obtained in the above mentioned IRF method (with 2 second time-bins) for each subject. A neuroradiologist manually defined the ROI to encompass the full extent of the POC located within the rostral-medial surface of the temporal lobe and included the piriform cortex, amygdala, periamygdaloid cortex, anterior olfactory nucleus, ventral striatum, enthorinal cortex and nucleus accumbens ( Figure 2a ) ( Gottfried 2010 ;  Wang, Eslinger et al. 2010 ). The Beta values at each time-bin in the finite impulse response method were then averaged across participants, providing a representative time course of brain activity within the POC. Using this approach, both the overall and individual brain responses during odor presentation were investigated. Additionally, this analysis complements the proposed approaches in this paper, where anatomical regions along with their functional connectivity will be investigated as part of the ICA formalism. 
 
 
 ICA methods 
 A complete description of the group ICA methodology utilized in this paper is provided in detail elsewhere ( McKeown, Makeig et al. 1998 ;  Calhoun, Adali et al. 2001 ;  Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2006 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). The capacity of ICA in providing additional information to support statistical inferences has been discussed in several fMRI investigations ( Calhoun, Adali et al. 2001 ;  Schmithorst and Brown 2004 ;  Schmithorst and Holland 2006 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). 
 The ICA decomposition was performed using software written in IDL (interactive data language) and entails several preprocessing steps [mean centering and principal components (PCA)] at the individual (40 retained components) as well as the group level (50 retained components) ( Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2010 ). This decomposition step was repeated with a slightly higher and lower number of components (± 20% of the initial number of components). The purpose of this second step was to increase the reliability (or confidence) of IC maps. Twenty-five runs of the FastICA algorithm ( Hyvarinen 1999 ) were combined with hierarchical agglomerative clustering ( Himberg, Hyvarinen et al. 2004 ) to estimate and validate the independent component maps for this olfactory paradigm. Although ICA is capable of removing motion-related artifacts, motion corrected fMRI data (including the six movement-related parameters when deemed necessary) from SPM 5 was used for the ICA decomposition. 
 The task-relatedness of each independent component (IC) map was then investigated using the average associated IC time course by examining the spectral power at the task frequency (0.056 Hz for the four-strength paradigm). The task-related IC components would produce a sharp spectral peak at this frequency. A further selection criterion was used on this Fourier component by making sure that its absolute phase difference with the on–off task reference function is less than 60 degrees. A detail discussion of these methods can be found elsewhere ( Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2006 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). Finally, in line with methods proposed by Calhoun et al., a voxel wise random effects analysis (one-sample  t  test) was performed on selected individual ICs to generate group activation maps ( Calhoun, Adali et al. 2001 ). To summarize, the selection of IC maps is based on 3 criteria: 1) power spectral analysis at the task frequency, 2) phase and 3) relevance of the spatial maps to the theoretical model of olfaction. 
 The advantage of spatial ICA to investigate odor-related activation is its ability to identify functionally connected brain regions subserving complex cognitive functions without predefining the hemodynamic response function (HRF) or the design matrix  a priori  ( Bartels and Zeki 2004 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). This provides an additional advantage over GLM in cases where the HRF cannot be estimated precisely due to condition-dependent, brain region-dependent or subject-dependent variations. Further advantages of ICA have also been highlighted by Tie et al. using a word-generation fMRI task, by showing its ability to reduce the type II error as well as its capacity to generate more language-specific networks ( Tie, Whalen et al. 2008 ). Similarly, we expect that ICA would provide a concrete framework to identify a broader olfactory network that subserves odor-related stimulation. 
 
 
 Unified Structural Equation Modeling 
 Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) is a statistical method capable of estimating causal influences among measured or latent variables ( Bollen 1989 ;  Bollen and Long 1993 ;  Joreskog and Sorbom 1996 ). SEM is also capable of statistically testing hypothesized theoretical models, constructs defined based on a set of variables, and the interrelationships (both contemporaneous and lagged) of these constructs. In neuroimaging analyses, SEM generally deals with effective connectivity to capture the contemporaneous causal relationships (deals with directionality) in the model in terms of path coefficients ( McIntosh and Gonzales-Lima 1994 ;  McIntosh, Grady et al. 1994 ). This approach differs from a typical functional connectivity analysis which is only capable of determining the degree to which activity in two brain regions co-vary ( Friston, Buechel et al. 1997 ). The unified SEM (uSEM) has recently been used to estimate contemporaneous as well as lagged relationships simultaneously, effectively circumventing some of the drawbacks of conventional SEM methodology ( Kim, Zhu et al. 2007 ). An automatic search procedure has also been incorporated into uSEM, making it entirely data-driven, and offers a substantial degree of flexibility when compared to alternative approaches ( Gates, Molenaar et al. 2010 ). In this paper, we use the individual IC time courses as input to estimate uSEM(s) at the subject as well as the group level in order to examine the effective connectivity that subserves the olfactory network for this task. 
 The optimal unified SEM that best describes the underlying olfactory network across participants in this study was derived using the Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME) technique using freely available software programs ( Kim, Zhu et al. 2007 ;  Gates, Molenaar et al. 2010 ;  Gates, Molenaar et al. 2011 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2011 ;  Gates and Molenaar Under review ). GIMME arrives at individual-level estimates in a two-stage approach. First, shared information across individuals is utilized to arrive at a group model. The program begins by running a null (i.e., empty) model on each subject. Using Lagrange Multiplier Test equivalents, GIMME iteratively identifies the causal connections that, if estimated, would offer the greatest statistical improvement for at least 75% of the individuals in the sample. This procedure is repeated until no more connections met the criteria. Second, individual-level paths are further investigated. An automatic search procedure, again using equivalents to Lagrange Multiplier Tests, identified connections to open at the individual level, using the group-obtained connectivity map as a basis. This last semi-confirmatory step maintained the structure of the group map across participants while allowing for individual nuances. 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 GLM 
 A GLM analysis of the combined runs of the four-strength paradigm detected significant bilateral activation in the primary olfactory cortex, insula cortex hippocampus, and the thalamus ( Figure 2b ). Detailed descriptions of the activated areas are included in the  supplemental materials . 
 
 
 ROI 
 Impulse response function (IRF) analysis or time course plots of average primary olfactory cortex (POC) activity illustrated that sequential presentation of different odorant strengths along with a visual cue “smell” can generate brain responses (with a peak at the 2 time-bin, or 4 seconds post stimulus) that mimic the behavior of the standard canonical hemodynamic response function ( Figure 2c ). Similarly, fresh air with the same “smell” visual cue also generated detectable brain responses in the POC (with peaks at 2 and 3 time-bins, or 4 and 6 sec post stimulus), albeit with a significantly lower amplitude [paired t-test (2nd time-bin values), t= 4.002, df=19, p < 0.001]. These results provided direct evidence for a differential brain response in the POC to smelling odors vs. no-odor (sniffing-related), respectively, modulated by the fMRI stimulation condition. 
 We further investigated the brain response associated with each odor concentration separately. Time course plots of average POC activity for each stimulus revealed that different odorant strengths (along with the visual cue) elicited similar BOLD effect responses ( Figure 2d ). These results confirmed that the olfactory BOLD signal attenuation due to habituation effects associated with repeated olfactory exposure was successfully mitigated by the design of our experimental manipulation. 
 The IRF analysis provided direct support for the feasibility of using a canonical HRF to model associated brain responses subserving olfactory stimulation ( Friston, Josephs et al. 1998 ;  Henson, Price et al. 2002 ;  Lindquist, Meng Loh et al. 2009 ). Our results are in agreement with the findings of Tabert et al. ( Tabert, Steffener et al. 2007 ) that showed the feasibility of using a short phasic fit to model the odorant-induced response to prolonged stimulation in the POC. Our data also support the fact that this event-response can be effectively modeled with a “ON” stimulation period of approximately 6 s. Therefore, based on our analysis, we also can conclude that modeling olfactory habituation as an activation event is not only sensitive, but also specific to odorant-induced activation in a well-established network of higher-order olfactory-related brain areas. Such olfactory stimulation paradigms with sufficient resolution to distinguish between odor presentations inevitably increase the clinical applicability of the proposed olfactory fMRI paradigm. Based on a GLM analysis, bilateral activation was detected in the POC region for the no-odor paradigm though at a much lower threshold (p<0.01, uncorrected). This activity in POC was further investigated in terms of the HRF response (with peaks at 2 and 3 sec time-bins, or 4 and 6 sec post stimulus). This response had lower amplitude when compared to the same condition in the four-strength paradigm ( Figure 3 ). 
 
 
 ICA 
 ICA analyses identified 5 major networks [ Figure 4 , and hereafter referred to as IC (i) through (v)] associated with the four-strength paradigm, selected based on a post-hoc analysis of associated IC time courses of individual participants in the study. In general, these IC maps show activation in bilateral parietal-occipital association cortices [IC (i)]; bilateral striatum [IC (ii)]; bilateral POC [IC (iii)]; bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dPFC) [IC (iv)]; and bilateral polar and rostral PFC [IC (v)].  Table 1  summarizes the activated brain structures for each of the components included in  Figure 4 . We hypothesize that these IC maps represent the underlying brain sub-networks of olfaction for this task. 
 The corresponding average IC time courses for these networks are also shown in  Figure 4  (right side) and illustrate the progression from leading to lagging the task reference function for IC spatial maps based on the phase analysis described in methods (ICA methods) section. Additionally, ICs (i), (ii), (iii), and (v) were detected in all 25 runs of the ICA decomposition and IC (iv) was only detected in 17 runs of the total 25 runs, assuring a high degree of reliability for the selected IC maps for this task (see  Figure 4 ). Average IC time courses of the olfactory stimulation were correlated with the on–off task reference function, yielding correlation coefficients r ≥ 0.31 ( Table 2 , column 2). 
 In addition, a separate ICA analysis on the no-odor olfactory paradigm detected IC maps shown in  Figure 5 . These maps appeared to correspond to the IC (ii) and (iii) of the four-strength paradigm in  Figure 4 . To test this possibility, the functional ROIs were defined based on the IC maps shown in  Figure 4 (ii) and (iii)  for the four-strength paradigm and overlaid on  Figure 5  maps to directly compare the activations during the two paradigms. Although ICA decomposition detected similar IC maps during the no-odor paradigm, the activation with the no-odor paradigm seems to be significantly less and scattered when compared to that with the four-strength paradigm. This analysis provided initial evidence to support the hypothesis that similar networks may subserve odor-related and sniff-related processing during our olfactory fMRI paradigms. It has already been suggested that the sniff is part of the olfactory percept ( Mainland and Sobel 2006 ). Although, current data does not speak to that, new targeted experiments based on these methods can provide new insight into how sniff affects the olfactory percept. 
 
 
 Unified SEM 
 The optimal uSEM was delineated using the previously identified functional IC maps and the associated IC time courses ( Figure 6 ). The arrows in the figure represent the causal (contemporaneous) structure of the IC networks (i.e., how they interact). Contemporaneous relations have been found to recover neuronal relations from BOLD data better than lagged-based approaches ( Smith, Miller et al. 2011 ). Thus, emphasis was placed on contemporaneous paths in the text and figure.  Table 3  displays the average beta weights for the contemporaneous and lagged effects found at the group level as well as the percent of individuals for whom the paths were significant. The connectivity map, found to optimally describe the group ICs (i.e., couplings common to the 75% of individuals), revealed that ICs (iii) and (ii) were highly correlated (r= 0.74, df=232, p < 0.0001) and identified these as the initial or gateway networks that subserve primary olfactory-related processing. These are illustrated in the highlighted box in  Figure 6 . IC (iii) and (ii) shared significant POC activation, but were also identified as functionally distinct. This is because ICA identifies spatially independent maps (orthogonal to each other) by formalism which also allows the possibility of having common anatomical regions. IC (ii) appears to have a central role with contemporaneous effects on ICs (iv) and (i) which pertain to cortical association areas. Interestingly, IC (iv) also appears to have a integrative role, receiving contemporaneous effects from ICs (ii) and (i). Finally, IC (iv) is the only network influencing the network shown in IC (v). These analyses supported our hypothesis that ICs (iii) and (ii) (refer to  Figure 4 ) are directly related to primary olfactory sensory-perceptual processing along with downstream effects on systems that are associated with affective learning, memory, motivation/reward ( Carmichael, Clugnet et al. 1994 ;  Shipley, Murphy et al. 1996 ;  Johnson, Illig et al. 2000 ;  Wilson, Sullivan et al. 2003 ). Additionally, we also found highly task-related networks that subserve higher-order cognitive processing associated with olfaction in prefrontal, parietal and occipital cortices [ICs (i), (iv) and (v) in  Figure 4 ]. 
 To examine if habituation in our paradigm affected the connections detected in the maps, the time series were split in half and connectivity analysis conducted on the two reduced time series. As noted above, the first half included low and medium odor concentrations while the second half included strong and very strong odor concentrations. The model derived from the entire time course was used as the null (or base) model. Using this model the algorithm searched for additional paths which were common to individuals during the first half and the second half of the time course. Consistent with the above findings, no additional paths were found that explained the majority of individuals. Hence, the connections found to describe the processes across the whole time series were appropriately captured by the first and second halves. These stationarity in effects support the above conclusions that habituation effects were overcome by an experimental paradigm that expanded the number of odor concentration strengths, presented them in ascending order, and interleaved them with fresh air conditions. 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 To advance understanding of how the primary olfactory cortex and related structures mediate odor perception, this study addressed several methodological limitations in experimental odor presentation which enabled us to apply novel analytic approaches to olfactory brain activations. These analyses identified several parallel olfaction-related neural networks and their causal connections. The design of the four-strength olfactory paradigm with an ascending serial exposure and interleaved no-odor and rest conditions appeared to preserve the BOLD-related HRF response across multiple blocks of trials and offset typical habituation effects. In turn, this allowed detection of a broader array of reliable brain activation patterns that included primary olfactory cortex but also extended to other brain regions implicated in olfaction. These included ventral striatum regions (linked to motivation and affective processing), parietal-occipital junction (spatial attention and memory), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (higher cognitive functions), and rostral prefrontal cortex /anterior cingulate (goal-directed behaviors) ( Dalgleish 2004 ). 
 The IRF analysis was performed to establish the shape of the HRF during the four-strength paradigm. First, the results of the IRF analysis provided experimental support for using a canonical HRF to model associated brain responses of olfactory stimulation for this task ( Friston, Josephs et al. 1998 ;  Henson, Price et al. 2002 ;  Tabert, Steffener et al. 2007 ;  Lindquist, Meng Loh et al. 2009 ). Second, time course plots of POC activity ( Figure 2c ) clearly illustrated the advantage of sequentially increasing the strength of odorants to generate sustained brain response profiles (with peaks at 2 and 3 sec time-bins, or 4 and 6 sec post stimulus) during the entire stimulation paradigm. Furthermore, the same figure shows that sequentially increasing the strength of odorants will not adversely affect the usual brain response profiles in the olfactory network ( Sobel, Prabhakaran et al. 2000 ;  Poellinger, Thomas et al. 2001 ). Thus, our data provided direct evidence to show the feasibility of the technique to continuously stimulate the olfactory network (preserving the shape and the temporal extent of the HRF) and obviate the problematic olfactory-related habituation effects ( Poellinger, Thomas et al. 2001 ;  Gottfried, O’Doherty et al. 2002 ;  Cerf-Ducastel and Murphy 2004 ;  Cerf-Ducastel and Murphy 2004 ). Particularly of relevance to this experimental design is the amplitude of the responses due to repeated odor presentations. As mentioned in the introduction, since we employ short stimulation intervals, our olfactory fMRI paradigm can minimize any presentation-related (within odorant) habituating effects as well. This particular task design is also ideally suited to overcome olfactory threshold deficits usually observed in progressive neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD). Additionally, any potential variability in the HRF across participants (due to habituation) is further mitigated by the ICA technique utilized in this paper ( Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2006 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). 
 
 Sniff vs. Odor 
 An important finding of the IRF and GLM analyses was the detection of functional brain responses during the dual control conditions of no-odor with visual cue “smell” in the four-strength paradigm ( Figure 1 ). These data are consistent with other no-odor or “sniff-related” activity that has been observed at 1) the olfactory epithelium ( Grosmaitre, Santarelli et al. 2007 ); 2) the bulb ( Adrian 1942 ), and 3) the cortex ( Sobel, Prabhakaran et al. 1998 ;  Sobel, Prabhakaran et al. 1998 ;  Zelano and Sobel 2005 ). Although the brain BOLD response during the no-odor conditions in the four-strength paradigm retained the overall shape of the standard HRF, its amplitude was clearly lower when compared to the odor conditions ( Figure 2 ). The no-odor BOLD signals may represent in part a “carry-over” effect of the interleaved odor and no-odor exposures in our four-strength paradigm experiment. That is, the expectation or recent exposure to odor may activate olfactory-related brain areas to a detectable extent even though there is no discernible odor presented. This possibility was confirmed by the comparison of activations during the no-odor condition of the four-strength paradigm with the activations during the no-odor condition in the no-odor paradigm ( Figure 3 ). Here, the brain response to no-odor conditions in the four-strength paradigm produced significantly higher amplitude. Our analysis in  Figures 2  and  3  provide further evidence for a sniff-related activity pattern that is mediated in the associated olfactory system that can be considered a part of the olfactory percept ( Mainland and Sobel 2006 ). Therefore, because of these differences in network activations (and possibly network connectivity), we believe that our methods will be able to distinguish odor specific brain responses from no-odor responses (discussed below). However, in the case of four-strength paradigm, it may be the case that the olfactory percept is modulated by the recent presence of odor and/or anticipatory demands (as shown by the results of the ICA analysis for the four-strength paradigm). The exact manner by which sniff-related neural activity influences the eventual olfactory perception remains unclear. Future studies targeting the primary olfactory processing-related networks [IC (III) and (II)] will be able to address these issues in greater detail. 
 
 
 Parallel Olfactory Networks 
 Brain connectivity measures based on functional neuroimaging data are increasingly used to investigate the underlying neurocognition beyond which the traditional functional MRI have been able to reveal ( Friston, Harrison et al. 2003 ;  Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2006 ;  Kim, Zhu et al. 2007 ;  Rajapakse, Wang et al. 2008 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ;  Meunier, Lambiotte et al. 2010 ). ICA provides an ideal preliminary step by identifying areas (chronoarchitectonically) that exhibit task-related activity, but do not necessarily follow an  a priori  model (or a reference brain response function) ( Bartels and Zeki 2004 ). 
 A previous PET study by Savic et al. suggested that olfactory functions are organized in a parallel and hierarchical manner by investigating olfactory-related activation patterns during five different olfactory tasks ( Savic, Gulyas et al. 2000 ). Unlike the above mentioned study, our analysis provides strong evidence to support 1) the existence of parallel networks, and 2) the existence of spatially independent subnetworks with unique temporal behavior subserving olfactory-related functions. Because of ICA formalism, the activation pattern (or the activated brain regions taken together) in each IC network can be considered spatially independent from other IC networks. Additionally, ICA provides the necessary time domain information to construct an olfactory network that sub-serves the four-strength fMRI task. This laid the foundation to use standard statistical methodology to further explore any causal relationships among cognitive modules (or sub-networks) revealed by the ICA analysis ( McIntosh and Gonzales-Lima 1994 ;  Karunanayaka, Holland et al. 2007 ;  Kim, Zhu et al. 2007 ;  Gates, Molenaar et al. 2010 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2011 ). Thus, the theoretical framework guiding the current analysis focuses on investigating olfaction from a network perspective and lays the foundation for establishing parallel and hierarchical structures underlying networks subserving olfaction. 
 The olfactory model identification was guided by our knowledge about the olfactory neuroanatomy ( Eslinger, Damasio et al. 1982 ) and provided a possible starting point to connect task-related modules identified by the group ICA results. Subsequently, we examined this olfactory network structure objectively to identify inherent causal connections ( Schmithorst, Holland et al. 2006 ;  Karunanayaka, Schmithorst et al. 2010 ). The current analysis takes this approach further by incorporating uSEM to investigate and hypothesize a distributed olfactory network. This network is capable of readjusting the degree of engagement between model elements, thereby providing an efficient mechanism to handle the complexity and variability of odors that are encountered naturally in the environment ( Gottfried 2010 ). In the following sections, we provide detailed discussions on the combined ICA and uSEM analytical method by which we identified the parallel olfactory networks for this task. 
 
 IC Maps of Olfaction 
 The main objective of this paper was to use ICA to construct an olfactory network (with multiple sub-networks) characterized by their temporal signatures. Multiple activation time courses detected for the same or partly overlapping brain regions (specifically frontal and limbic areas) provided direct evidence of their participation in multiple cognitive aspects of the olfactory task. These highly task-related independent components that have been selected can be mapped to a specific aspect of the four-strength olfactory task certain minimal assumptions ( Duann, Jung et al. 2002 ;  Calhoun, Pekar et al. 2004 ). However, it should be noted that this method suffers from issues inherent in reverse inference. In the case of ICA (which is an almost complete data driven approach), the algorithm can turn out non-task-related ICs (e.g. Motion artifacts, heart rate, respiratory rate, and unrelated sensory-motor or neurocognitive behaviors). Therefore, one has to make sure the task-related ICs are in fact consistent with a neurocognitive model of the behavior (in this case olfaction) being studied. Additionally, some of the explanations given below are indeed speculative, which, we believe, would stimulate research interests for further validations and refinements. Nevertheless, ICA provided a natural extension to use a standard statistical method (using individual-subject IC time courses) to explore the causal relationships among identified IC maps of olfaction ( Karunanayaka, Holland et al. 2007 ;  Kim, Zhu et al. 2007 ;  Gates, Molenaar et al. 2010 ). 
 The IC (i) shown in  Figure 4  and  Table 1  encompasses brain structures (i.e. parahippocampal and inferior and middle temporal gyri) thought to be involved in visual imagery and odor-related processing (i.e., pleasantness). This is partly supported by the observed increase in activity in primary visual areas for an odor hedonic judgment task ( Royet, Hudry et al. 2001 ), suggesting that rating odor pleasantness (directly or indirectly) may involve visual imagery of the odor source. The fusiform gyrus is generally implicated in local feature processing ( Fink, Halligan et al. 1996 ;  Price 2000 ) along with the inferior temporal gyrus, is a portion of the “what” visual pathway, which has also been found to be activated when words and pictures are viewed ( Damasio, Grabowski et al. 1996 ;  Herbster, Mintun et al. 1997 ;  Moore and Price 1999 ). However, the visual task that the participants were asked to do could also partly explain activations in visual areas. Nevertheless, our ICA analysis also identified a network (not reported here) that encompassed relatively more primary visual area. Therefore, this issue needs further investigation and highlights the power of ICA in generating new hypotheses. 
 IC (ii) in  Figure 4  is hypothesized to subserve anticipatory demands of the four-strength paradigm. Because of the presence of POC in this network, it may also subserve sniff initiation, odor anticipation, intensity/pleasantness evaluation and odor memory demands ( Yeshurun and Sobel 2010 ). Several studies have shown that the primary olfactory cortex along with the orbitofrontal cortex, insula, hypothalamus, amygdala, perirhinal cortex, hippocampus and striatum link odor inputs to higher order associative brain networks that subserve affective learning and memory ( Carmichael, Clugnet et al. 1994 ;  Shipley, Murphy et al. 1996 ;  Wilson, Sullivan et al. 2003 ). This extended olfactory network, which encompasses a large portion of the limbic and paralimbic cortices, highlights the importance of smell-related stimuli in mediating physiological and behavioral responses to emotionally arousing events in many animals. 
 IC (iii) in  Figure 4  shows bilateral and symmetric activation in POC and amygdala. The presence of amygdala in this IC map implies that this network may subserve a combined evaluation of intensity and valence ( Winston, Gottfried et al. 2005 ). Entorhinal cortex and the parahippocampal gyrus have also been implicated in odor intensity and familiarity ( Yeshurun and Sobel 2010 ). Thus, we hypothesize that this IC is directly related to primary olfactory processing. However, it has been demonstrated that the human piriform cortex (part of POC) is also activated during higher-order cognitive tasks such as learning, memory and motivational processing ( Gottfried 2010 ). Thus, we hypothesize its function may go beyond merely relaying odor information, but rather subserve initial preprocessing of received odor information as well. 
 Finally, we hypothesize that IC (iv) and (v) subserve higher order cognitive processing related to olfaction. In general, several studies have shown that the piriform cortex is reciprocally and extensively connected with several higher-order cognitive areas (e.g. associative) of the cerebral cortex, including the prefrontal, amygdaloid, perirhinal and entorhinal cortices ( Carmichael, Clugnet et al. 1994 ;  Johnson, Illig et al. 2000 ;  Gottfried 2010 ). Inferior frontal gyrus [IC (iv)] has also been implicated in odor intensity, intensity-memory and odor familiarity ( Yeshurun and Sobel 2010 ). The notion that thalamocortical circuits (particularly those involving the right inferior frontal cortex) participate in odor awareness receives support from an earlier fMRI study in healthy participants smelling perithreshold concentrations of an odorous steroid compound ( Sobel, Prabhakaran et al. 1999 ;  Li, Lopez et al. 2010 ). Similarly, the anterior cingulate as a part of IC (v), has been implicated in pleasantness and intensity of trigeminal odorants ( Yeshurun and Sobel 2010 ). The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DL-PFC) may also serve integrative motor planning, organization, and response regulation as required by the task. Additionally, the results of a recent olfactory fMRI study showed differences in the left inferior frontal gyrus, between PD patients and healthy controls in the processing of odor intensity and valence, highlighting the contributions of prefrontal cortex in odor processing ( Hummel, Fliessbach et al. 2010 ). 
 The above ICA results not only support anatomical separation but also show a clear distinction in functional specialization for olfaction by separating out the anterior and posterior aspects of primary olfactory-related brain regions into two distinct independent components [ Figure 4 : IC (ii) and (iii)]. This approach is different from previous studies where olfactory-related functions were investigated using anatomically based ROIs (e.g. subregions of POC). Therefore, the proposed method can be complementary to ROI based methods where anatomical as well as their functional connectivity can be investigated in the same formalism. 
 It should be noted that ICA by itself is not capable of revealing the precise odor-related cognitive correlates of these components. Instead, ICA should be considered as a method capable of revealing highly task–related activation patterns (independent components) from fMRI data. As with GLM-based analyses, the function of regions must be inferred and should be constrained by  a priori  knowledge of the functional neuroanatomy of the olfactory network. Investigations have shown that different olfactory tasks selectively activate different brain areas ( Royet, Koenig et al. 1999 ;  Royet, Hudry et al. 2001 ;  Royet, Plailly et al. 2003 ;  Hummel, Fliessbach et al. 2010 ). Therefore, extended models of olfaction must always be qualified with reference to the olfactory task employed and to some extent the regions of interest examined. Although active cortical regions in the same IC map exhibit similar temporal behavior, the contribution of each cortical region may depend on the odor-related cognitive function the respective IC map (network) subserves. In other words, for a given IC map, the intra-component functional connectivity (between brain regions comprising the IC) is implicit. Additionally, ICA is expected to detect similar networks for comparable cognitive tasks, at least in certain common domains. In this case, information provided by other model-driven methods can supplement ICA findings and help overcome inherent problems in data-driven methods such as ICA. 
 As shown in  Figure 5 , similar IC networks were detected with the no-odor paradigm along with their time courses. Unlike the four-strength paradigm, the time courses exhibited considerable inter-subject variability as indicated by the thickness of the line. This result is also consistent with the IRF findings in  Figure 3 , where it shows significantly weak activation by the visual cue “smell” along with “fresh air” condition in the no-odor paradigm compared to the same condition (i.e. no-odor with visual cue “smell”) in the four-strength paradigm. We hypothesize that these networks correspond to the IC (ii) and (iii) in  Figure 4  for the four-strength paradigm. The contours of IC maps in  Figure 4 (ii) and (iii)  were overlaid on the corresponding IC maps of no-odor paradigm in  Figure 5  to compare the activation extent during the two paradigms. Although ICA decomposition detected similar IC maps for the no-odor paradigm, the area of activation appears to be significantly less and scattered when compared to the four-strength paradigm. Since the no-odor paradigm did not involve any odor presentations, it was not possible to identify comparable higher-order cognitive modules as shown in  Figure 4 . This additional analysis provided further evidence to support our hypothesis of different networks that primarily subserve odor-related and sniff-related aspects of our olfactory fMRI paradigms. 
 
 
 Unified SEM and the cognitive model 
 The above distinct and independent spatial components, separated out by ICA, naturally form the basis for the proposed hierarchical cognitive model in  Figure 6  for the four-strength paradigm. The cognitive model included two levels of olfactory processing: a primary sensory-perceptual level highlighting IC (iii) and (ii), and a secondary cortical association level highlighting IC (i), (iv) and (v). At the primary sensory-perceptual level, the identified networks showed a bidirectional causal relationship (with lagged effects) and typically subserve processes of detection, recognition, affective response and memory. These networks shared POC activation, but also diverged in the extent of associated limbic system involvement, with IC (iii) associated with more basal anterior medial temporal activity including the amygdala and hippocampus while IC (ii) was associated with more medial and dorsal activity including the ventral striatum, globus pallidus and caudate. At the secondary cortical association level, olfactory-related activations were detected in the occipital and parietal-occipital association cortices and prefrontal cortices. We propose that these networks process the semantic and conceptual aspects of olfaction as well as the implications of these environmental cues for decision-making and actions. The strong bidirectional causal interactions between parietal-occipital and prefrontal regions are consistent with the integrative processing typically associated with these interconnected regions. The most rostral prefrontal or frontal polar network (IC v) was causally related only to the dorsolateral prefrontal network, consistent with the highly processed information usually associated with this region. Overall, the results appeared to be consistent with a biologically feasible olfactory network. 
 In addition, the results of this investigation support a possible  regional weighting hypothesis  based on the distribution of activation (in terms of olfactory networks) as proposed in developmental neuroscience ( Rubia, Overmeyer et al. 2000 ;  Berl, Vaidya et al. 2006 ). The regionally weighted approach proposes that the same nodes of a network are involved in a task, but the degree of engagement of each node may systematically change with olfactory task demands. According to this formalism, differences in weights may account for normal variations, use of different strategies, or changes in the biological substrate for olfaction. Based on this model, it is possible that the adjustment of weights may account for the immediate and efficient use of the olfactory network. 
 In conventional fMRI methods, the emphasis is on olfactory-related activity of isolated brain regions oversimplifying the problem at hand. The olfactory task in the present investigation required participants to pay attention to the presented odors in addition to the visual cues. Participants must initially process the visual as well as the odor information, before making a decision whether to confirm the presence or the absence of odor during each trial. Several recent fMRI investigations have emphasized that there is an attention-dependent modulation of odor perception ( Sabri, Radnovich et al. 2005 ;  Zelano, Bensafi et al. 2005 ;  Plailly, Howard et al. 2008 ). Thus, the odor-related behaviors in this task would be expected to activate a broader network that invokes focused attention, odor-related processing, and decision-making responses ( Gottfried 2010 ). This is in addition to continuously sustaining attention during the entire fMRI stimulation paradigm. Although not required specifically in this task, it is feasible that other forms of cognitive processing naturally occurred as a result of the olfactory stimulation. For example, recent experiences with the odor, related memories, emotional reactions of pleasantness/unpleasantness and other associations may occur. Hence, multiple areas of brain activation are likely to underlie typical olfactory experiences and form the basis for the proposed cognitive model for this task. Modifying the task to bring out these other components of olfactory experience may result in a modified model of causal relationships among the ICs. Thus, our results suggest a more complex and parallel olfactory network, although its implications cannot be conclusively determined based on the current fMRI paradigm. A detailed inter/intra network connectivity analysis based on several olfactory paradigms may address some of the drawbacks in our method and will be a topic for future research. Newer, more sophisticated fMRI analysis techniques capable of handling bi-directional influences (e.g., graphical models) may help resolve unanswered questions regarding information flow in the olfactory network. In this regard, the insight provided by group ICA should help generate predictive models for subsequent imaging paradigms. In turn, the validity of these models can be re-evaluated with the methods proposed in this paper. 
 
 
 
 Limitations 
 ICA is a data-driven method capable of identifying spatially independent networks subserving underlying cognitive functions specific to the four-strength fMRI olfactory task. We inferred each network’s modularity and hierarchical order based on: 1) the scientific knowledge base; 2) a uSEM analysis. However, improvements can be made when establishing the functional modularity of each network by combining with additional correlation analysis with relevant neuropsychological data, if available. 
 Although lavender is considered to have minimal or no propensity to stimulate the trigeminal system, it is well known that some of the brain regions activated in this paradigm are also part of the trigeminal system. For example, the finding of activation in ACC can also be explained in terms of trigeminal stimulation, especially at high concentrations ( Savic 2002 ;  Savic, Gulyas et al. 2002 ;  Iannilli, Del Gratta et al. 2008 ;  Iannilli, Bitter et al. 2011 ). To partly address this issue, we investigated activation differences between the weak and the very strong odor concentrations using separate fMRI paradigms (data not shown). The results indicated that there are no trigeminal-related areas activated due to lavender concentration-related effects. However, this issue will be further investigated in the future using a longer version (more trials) of the four-strength paradigm. 
 As mentioned previously, the selection of IC maps was based on 3 criteria. If we relax these criteria further, ICA will select a map that contains cerebellum, typically involved in smelling and sniffing, agreeing with GLM results ( Sobel, Prabhakaran et al. 1998 ). This can be considered a drawback of the method presented in this paper. Therefore, since the model is derived from task-dependent data, it is also important to confirm and further refine the model based on other olfactory tasks. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The unique dynamic behavior of the olfactory network activity based on our four-strength paradigm is characterized with GLM, ICA and uSEM providing a detailed and coherent picture of the functional networks involved in the task and the interactions between them. ICA also detected additional brain regions that were not detected in the standard GLM analyses. One major finding of the network analysis is the identification of two causally-related networks (IC maps) presumed to be related to primary olfactory processing. Additionally, it also identified secondary level olfactory networks that include top-down type influences as part of the cognitive model proposed for this fMRI task. Thus, the approach presented and described in this report highlights the advantage of analyzing olfaction in terms of underlying network structure. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supp Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 The study was supported by a grant from the U.S. National Institute of Aging, R01-AG027771. 
 
 
 
 The authors do not report any conflict of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adrian 
 ED 
 
 
 1942 
 Olfactory reactions in the brain of the hedgehog 
 J Physiol 
 100 
 459 
 73 
 16991539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 W 
 
 
 1936 
 Studies on the level of anesthesia for the olfactory and trigeminal respiratory reflexes in dogs and rabbits 
 Am J Physiol 
 115 
 579 
 587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bartels 
 A 
 
 
 Zeki 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 The chronoarchitecture of the human brain--natural viewing conditions reveal a time-based anatomy of the brain 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 1 
 419 
 433 
 15110035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barz 
 S 
 
 
 Hummel 
 T 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Chemosensory event-related potentials in response to trigeminal and olfactory stimulation in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease 
 Neurology 
 49 
 5 
 1424 
 1431 
 9371933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Becker 
 E 
 
 
 Hummel 
 T 
 
 
 
 1993 
 Olfactory event-related potentials in psychosis-prone subjects 
 Int J Psychophysiol 
 15 
 1 
 51 
 58 
 8407434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berendse 
 HW 
 
 
 Ponsen 
 MM 
 
 
 2006 
 Detection of preclinical Parkinson’s disease along the olfactory trac(t) 
 J Neural Transm Suppl 
 70 
 321 
 325 
 17017547 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berl 
 MM 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional imaging of developmental and adaptive changes in neurocognition 
 Neuroimage 
 30 
 3 
 679 
 691 
 16332444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bollen 
 KA 
 
 
 1989 
 Structural Equations With Latent Variables 
 New York 
 John Wiley & Sons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bollen 
 KA 
 
 
 Long 
 JS 
 
 
 1993 
 Testing Structural Equation Models 
 Thousand Oaks, CA 
 Sage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 1996 
 Evolution of the neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 
 165 
 3 
 12 
 8740983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 1998 
 Evolution of neuronal changes in the course of Alzheimer’s disease 
 J Neural Transm Suppl 
 53 
 127 
 140 
 9700651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Evolution of Alzheimer’s disease related cortical lesions 
 J Neural Transm Suppl 
 54 
 97 
 106 
 9850918 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Adali 
 T 
 
 
 
 2001 
 A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 14 
 3 
 140 
 151 
 11559959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated driving: exploring alcohol-dose effects on brain activation using functional MRI 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 29 
 11 
 2097 
 2017 
 15316570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carmichael 
 ST 
 
 
 Clugnet 
 MC 
 
 
 
 1994 
 Central olfactory connections in the macaque monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 346 
 3 
 403 
 434 
 7527806 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerf-Ducastel 
 B 
 
 
 Murphy 
 C 
 
 
 2004 
 Improvement of fMRI data processing of olfactory responses with a perception-based template 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 2 
 603 
 610 
 15193588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerf-Ducastel 
 B 
 
 
 Murphy 
 C 
 
 
 2004 
 Validation of a stimulation protocol suited to the investigation of odor-taste interactions with fMRI 
 Physiol Behav 
 81 
 3 
 389 
 396 
 15135010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerf-Ducastel 
 B 
 
 
 Murphy 
 C 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural substrates of cross-modal olfactory recognition memory: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 1 
 386 
 396 
 16414279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cleland 
 TA 
 
 
 Morse 
 A 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Behavioral models of odor similarity 
 Behav Neurosci 
 116 
 2 
 222 
 231 
 11996308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 AP 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Design and construction of a realistic digital brain phantom 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 17 
 3 
 463 
 468 
 9735909 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crick 
 F 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 2003 
 A framework for consciousness 
 Nat Neurosci 
 6 
 2 
 119 
 126 
 12555104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dalgleish 
 T 
 
 
 2004 
 The emotional brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 5 
 7 
 583 
 589 
 15208700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Grabowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 
 1996 
 A neural basis for lexical retrieval 
 Nature 
 380 
 6574 
 499 
 505 
 8606767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 The Odor Threshold Test 
 Administration Manual 
 Haddon Heights NJ 
 Sensonics, Inc (OTT) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 2012 
 Olfaction in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders 
 Neurobiol Dis 
 46 
 3 
 527 
 552 
 22192366 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 2012 
 Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson disease 
 Nat Rev Neurol 
 8 
 6 
 329 
 339 
 22584158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 Deems 
 DA 
 
 
 
 1988 
 Olfactory dysfunction in parkinsonism: a general deficit unrelated to neurologic signs, disease stage, or disease duration 
 Neurology 
 38 
 8 
 1237 
 1244 
 3399075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 Shaman 
 P 
 
 
 
 1984 
 Development of the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test: a standardized microencapsulated test of olfactory function 
 Physiol Behav 
 32 
 489 
 502 
 6463130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doty 
 RL 
 
 
 Smith 
 R 
 
 
 
 1994 
 Tests of human olfactory function: principal components analysis suggests that most measure a common source of variance 
 Percept Psychophys 
 56 
 6 
 701 
 707 
 7816540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duann 
 JR 
 
 
 Jung 
 TP 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Single-trial variability in event-related BOLD signals 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 4 
 823 
 835 
 11906223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 
 1982 
 Olfactory dysfunction in man: anatomical and behavioral aspects 
 Brain Cogn 
 1 
 3 
 259 
 285 
 6765474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Halligan 
 PW 
 
 
 
 1996 
 Where in the brain does visual attention select the forest and the trees? 
 Nature 
 382 
 6592 
 626 
 628 
 8757132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Firestein 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 How the olfactory system makes sense of scents 
 Nature 
 413 
 6852 
 211 
 218 
 11557990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Harrison 
 L 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Dynamic causal modelling 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 4 
 1273 
 1302 
 12948688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Nonlinear event-related responses in fMRI 
 Magn Reson Med 
 39 
 1 
 41 
 52 
 9438436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates 
 KM 
 
 
 Molenaar 
 PC 
 
 
 (Under review) 
 Uncovering unbiased effective connectivity estimates using Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME) 
 Multivariate Behavioral Research 
 Under Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates 
 KM 
 
 
 Molenaar 
 PC 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Automatic search for fMRI connectivity mapping: an alternative to Granger causality testing using formal equivalences among SEM path modeling, VAR, and unified SEM 
 Neuroimage 
 50 
 3 
 1118 
 1125 
 20060050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates 
 KM 
 
 
 Molenaar 
 PC 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Extended unified SEM approach for modeling event-related fMRI data 
 Neuroimage 
 54 
 2 
 1151 
 1158 
 20804852 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Roebroeck 
 A 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Investigating directed cortical interactions in time-resolved fMRI data using vector autoregressive modeling and Granger causality mapping 
 Magn Reson Imaging 
 21 
 10 
 1251 
 1261 
 14725933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 2010 
 Central mechanisms of odour object perception 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 11 
 9 
 628 
 641 
 20700142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Appetitive and aversive olfactory learning in humans studied using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 J Neurosci 
 22 
 24 
 10829 
 10837 
 12486176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 J 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex 
 Science 
 301 
 5636 
 1104 
 1107 
 12934011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 Smith 
 AP 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Remembrance of odors past: human olfactory cortex in cross-modal recognition memory 
 Neuron 
 42 
 4 
 687 
 695 
 15157428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 Winston 
 JS 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociable codes of odor quality and odorant structure in human piriform cortex 
 Neuron 
 49 
 3 
 467 
 479 
 16446149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goutte 
 C 
 
 
 Nielsen 
 FA 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Modeling the haemodynamic response in fMRI using smooth FIR filters 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 19 
 12 
 1188 
 1201 
 11212367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grosmaitre 
 X 
 
 
 Santarelli 
 LC 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Dual functions of mammalian olfactory sensory neurons as odor detectors and mechanical sensors 
 Nat Neurosci 
 10 
 3 
 348 
 354 
 17310245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grunfeld 
 R 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 
 2005 
 The responsiveness of fMRI signal to odor concentration 
 Chem Senses. Sarasota, FL 
 30 
 A 237 
 238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haehner 
 A 
 
 
 Hummel 
 T 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Olfactory loss may be a first sign of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease 
 Mov Disord 
 22 
 6 
 839 
 842 
 17357143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hawkes 
 CH 
 
 
 Shephard 
 BC 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Olfactory disorder in motor neuron disease 
 Exp Neurol 
 150 
 2 
 248 
 253 
 9527894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Detecting latency differences in event-related BOLD responses: application to words versus nonwords and initial versus repeated face presentations 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 1 
 83 
 97 
 11771976 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herbster 
 AN 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Regional cerebral blood flow during word and nonword reading 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 5 
 2 
 84 
 92 
 10096413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Himberg 
 J 
 
 
 Hyvarinen 
 A 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Validating the independent components of neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 3 
 1214 
 1222 
 15219593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howard 
 JD 
 
 
 Plailly 
 J 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Odor quality coding and categorization in human posterior piriform cortex 
 Nat Neurosci 
 12 
 7 
 932 
 938 
 19483688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hummel 
 T 
 
 
 Fliessbach 
 K 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Olfactory FMRI in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
 Front Integr Neurosci 
 4 
 125 
 21120143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hyvarinen 
 A 
 
 
 1999 
 Fast and robust fixed-point algorithms for independent component analysis 
 IEEE Trans Neural Netw 
 10 
 3 
 626 
 634 
 18252563 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iannilli 
 E 
 
 
 Bitter 
 T 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Differences in anosmic and normosmic group in bimodal odorant perception: a functional- MRI study 
 Rhinology 
 49 
 4 
 458 
 463 
 21991572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iannilli 
 E 
 
 
 Del Gratta 
 C 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Trigeminal activation using chemical, electrical, and mechanical stimuli 
 Pain 
 139 
 2 
 376 
 388 
 18583050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 DM 
 
 
 Illig 
 KR 
 
 
 
 2000 
 New features of connectivity in piriform cortex visualized by intracellular injection of pyramidal cells suggest that “primary”. ” olfactory cortex functions like “association” cortex in other sensory systems 
 J Neurosci 
 20 
 18 
 6974 
 6982 
 10995842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joreskog 
 KG 
 
 
 Sorbom 
 D 
 
 
 1996 
 LISREL 8 
 User’s reference guide 
 Chicago 
 Scientific Software International 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kadohisa 
 M 
 
 
 Wilson 
 DA 
 
 
 2006 
 Olfactory cortical adaptation facilitates detection of odors against background 
 J Neurophysiol 
 95 
 3 
 1888 
 1896 
 16251260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karunanayaka 
 P 
 V 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 J 
 
 
 
 2010 
 A group independent component analysis of covert verb generation in children: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Neuroimage 
 51 
 1 
 472 
 487 
 20056150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karunanayaka 
 P 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 
 2011 
 A linear structural equation model for covert verb generation based on independent component analysis of FMRI data from children and adolescents 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 5 
 29 
 21660108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karunanayaka 
 PR 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Age-related connectivity changes in fMRI data from children listening to stories 
 Neuroimage 
 34 
 1 
 349 
 360 
 17064940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 J 
 
 
 Zhu 
 W 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Unified structural equation modeling approach for the analysis of multisubject, multivariate functional MRI data 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 2 
 85 
 93 
 16718669 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 W 
 
 
 Howard 
 JD 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Aversive learning enhances perceptual and cortical discrimination of indiscriminable odor cues 
 Science 
 319 
 5871 
 1842 
 1845 
 18369149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 W 
 
 
 Lopez 
 L 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Right orbitofrontal cortex mediates conscious olfactory perception 
 Psychol Sci 
 21 
 10 
 1454 
 1463 
 20817780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Meng Loh 
 J 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Modeling the hemodynamic response function in fMRI: efficiency, bias and mis-modeling 
 Neuroimage 
 45 
 1 Suppl 
 S187 
 198 
 19084070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linster 
 C 
 
 
 Johnson 
 BA 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Perceptual correlates of neural representations evoked by odorant enantiomers 
 J Neurosci 
 21 
 24 
 9837 
 9843 
 11739591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Litvan 
 I 
 
 
 Bhatia 
 KP 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Movement Disorders Society Scientific Issues Committee report: SIC Task Force appraisal of clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinsonian disorders 
 Mov Disord 
 18 
 5 
 467 
 486 
 12722160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mainland 
 J 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 2006 
 The sniff is part of the olfactory percept 
 Chem Senses 
 31 
 2 
 181 
 196 
 16339268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Gonzales-Lima 
 F 
 
 
 1994 
 Structural equation modelling and its appilacation to network analysis in functional brain imaging 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2 
 2 
 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 
 1994 
 Network analysis of cortical visual pathways mapped with PET 
 J Neurosci 
 14 
 2 
 655 
 666 
 8301356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKeown 
 MJ 
 
 
 Makeig 
 S 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into independent spatial components 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 6 
 3 
 160 
 188 
 9673671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meunier 
 D 
 
 
 Lambiotte 
 R 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Modular and hierarchically modular organization of brain networks 
 Front Neurosci 
 4 
 200 
 21151783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moore 
 CJ 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Three distinct ventral occipitotemporal regions for reading and object naming 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 2 
 181 
 192 
 10417250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Separating processes within a trial in event-related functional MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 1 
 210 
 217 
 11133323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patton 
 HD 
 
 
 1960 
 Taste, olfaction and visceral sensation 
 Medical Physiology and Biophysics 
 Philadelphia 
 Saunders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plailly 
 J 
 
 
 Howard 
 JD 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Attention to odor modulates thalamocortical connectivity in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 20 
 5257 
 5267 
 18480282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poellinger 
 A 
 
 
 Thomas 
 R 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Activation and habituation in olfaction--an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 4 
 547 
 560 
 11305885 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2000 
 The anatomy of language: contributions from functional neuroimaging 
 J Anat 
 197 
 Pt 3 
 335 
 359 
 11117622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rajapakse 
 JC 
 
 
 Wang 
 Y 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Probabilistic framework for brain connectivity from functional MR images 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 27 
 6 
 825 
 833 
 18541489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramaker 
 C 
 
 
 Marinus 
 J 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Systematic evaluation of rating scales for impairment and disability in Parkinson’s disease 
 Mov Disord 
 17 
 5 
 867 
 876 
 12360535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Royet 
 JP 
 
 
 Hudry 
 J 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Functional neuroanatomy of different olfactory judgments 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 3 
 506 
 519 
 11170816 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Royet 
 JP 
 
 
 Koenig 
 O 
 
 
 
 1999 
 Functional anatomy of perceptual and semantic processing for odors 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 11 
 1 
 94 
 109 
 9950717 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Royet 
 JP 
 
 
 Plailly 
 J 
 
 
 
 2003 
 fMRI of emotional responses to odors: influence of hedonic valence and judgment, handedness, and gender 
 Neuroimage 
 20 
 2 
 713 
 728 
 14568446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Overmeyer 
 S 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Functional frontalisation with age: mapping neurodevelopmental trajectories with fMRI 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 24 
 1 
 13 
 19 
 10654655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabri 
 M 
 
 
 Radnovich 
 AJ 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural correlates of olfactory change detection 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 3 
 969 
 974 
 15808997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Savic 
 I 
 
 
 2002 
 Imaging of brain activation by odorants in humans 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 12 
 4 
 455 
 461 
 12139995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Savic 
 I 
 
 
 Gulyas 
 B 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Odorant differentiated pattern of cerebral activation: comparison of acetone and vanillin 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 17 
 1 
 17 
 27 
 12203685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Savic 
 I 
 
 
 Gulyas 
 B 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Olfactory functions are mediated by parallel and hierarchical processing 
 Neuron 
 26 
 3 
 735 
 745 
 10896168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Brown 
 RD 
 
 
 2004 
 Empirical validation of the triple-code model of numerical processing for complex math operations using functional MRI and group Independent Component Analysis of the mental addition and subtraction of fractions 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 3 
 1414 
 1420 
 15219612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional MRI evidence for disparate developmental processes underlying intelligence in boys and girls 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 3 
 1366 
 1379 
 16540350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 
 2010 
 CCHIPS:Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Imaging Processing Software 
 Available at: http://www.irc.chmcc.org/chips.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 VJ 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Cognitive modules utilized for narrative comprehension in children: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Neuroimage 
 29 
 1 
 254 
 266 
 16109491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shipley 
 MT 
 
 
 Murphy 
 AZ 
 
 
 
 1996 
 Olfaction and brainstem circuits of reproductive behavior in the rat 
 Prog Brain Res 
 107 
 355 
 377 
 8782531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Network modelling methods for FMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 54 
 2 
 875 
 891 
 20817103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 Prabhakaran 
 V 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Sniffing and smelling: separate subsystems in the human olfactory cortex 
 Nature 
 392 
 6673 
 282 
 286 
 9521322 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 Prabhakaran 
 V 
 
 
 
 1999 
 Blind smell: brain activation induced by an undetected air-borne chemical 
 Brain 
 122 
 Pt 2 
 209 
 217 
 10071050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 Prabhakaran 
 V 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Odorant-induced and sniff-induced activation in the cerebellum of the human 
 J Neurosci 
 18 
 21 
 8990 
 9001 
 9787004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 Prabhakaran 
 V 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Time course of odorant-induced activation in the human primary olfactory cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 83 
 1 
 537 
 551 
 10634894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabert 
 MH 
 
 
 Steffener 
 J 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Validation and optimization of statistical approaches for modeling odorant-induced fMRI signal changes in olfactory-related brain areas 
 Neuroimage 
 34 
 4 
 1375 
 1390 
 17196831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tie 
 Y 
 
 
 Whalen 
 S 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Group independent component analysis of language fMRI from word generation tasks 
 Neuroimage 
 42 
 3 
 1214 
 1225 
 18621548 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wachowiak 
 M 
 
 
 Shipley 
 MT 
 
 
 2006 
 Coding and synaptic processing of sensory information in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb 
 Semin Cell Dev Biol 
 17 
 4 
 411 
 423 
 16765614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Olfactory deficit detected by fMRI in early Alzheimer’s disease 
 Brain Res 
 1357 
 184 
 194 
 20709038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging study of human olfaction and normal aging 
 J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 
 60 
 4 
 510 
 514 
 15933393 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Westermann 
 B 
 
 
 Wattendorf 
 E 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional imaging of the cerebral olfactory system in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 79 
 1 
 19 
 24 
 17519323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 DA 
 
 
 1998 
 Habituation of odor responses in the rat anterior piriform cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 79 
 3 
 1425 
 1440 
 9497422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 DA 
 
 
 1998 
 Synaptic correlates of odor habituation in the rat anterior piriform cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 80 
 2 
 998 
 1001 
 9705487 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 DA 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 RM 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Handbook of Olfaction and Gustation 
 Marcel Dekker 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winston 
 JS 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Integrated neural representations of odor intensity and affective valence in human amygdala 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 39 
 8903 
 8907 
 16192380 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yang 
 QX 
 
 
 Dardzinski 
 BJ 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Multi-gradient echo with susceptibility inhomogeneity compensation (MGESIC): demonstration of fMRI in the olfactory cortex at 3.0 T 
 Magn Reson Med 
 37 
 3 
 331 
 335 
 9055220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeshurun 
 Y 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 2010 
 An odor is not worth a thousand words: from multidimensional odors to unidimensional odor objects 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 61 
 219 
 241 
 C211 
 215 
 19958179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zelano 
 C 
 
 
 Bensafi 
 M 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Attentional modulation in human primary olfactory cortex 
 Nat Neurosci 
 8 
 1 
 114 
 120 
 15608635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zelano 
 C 
 
 
 Montag 
 J 
 
 
 
 2009 
 A specialized odor memory buffer in primary olfactory cortex 
 PLoS One 
 4 
 3 
 e4965 
 19305509 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zelano 
 C 
 
 
 Sobel 
 N 
 
 
 2005 
 Humans as an animal model for systems-level organization of olfaction 
 Neuron 
 48 
 3 
 431 
 454 
 16269361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 (a)  The four-strength paradigm used in the current study. The bars of different height represent different odor concentrations.  (b)  The synchronization of odor presentation with visual cues. Each visual cue is a condition in the four-strength paradigm. The no-odor paradigm referred to in the text followed the same pattern except delivering no odor during odor with visual cue “smell” conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 (a)  The ROI (3741 voxels) for primary olfactory cortex (POC) overlaid on an anatomical image.  (b)  Average olfactory activation at all four lavender concentrations (overall effect) in healthy subjects (n=20, one-sample  t-test , family-wise correction, p<0.05);  (c)  Average time course plots of POC activity for the odor and no-odor conditions. The odor condition represents the average activation (or HRF) during all four odor concentration presentations.  (d)  Time course plots of POC activity for different odor concentrations. All images are in neurological convention. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Comparison of time course plots of POC ( Figure 2a ) activity for the “Fresh Air”+ “Smell” ( Figure 1 ) condition: 1) in the four-strength (blue); 2) in the no-odor paradigm (red). During this condition, fresh air was delivered along with the visual cue “Smell” in both paradigms. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Five task-related ICA components found for the study group of 10 participants (two runs) performing the olfactory stimulation paradigm: (i) parietal-occipital junction; (iii) striatum; (ii) encompasses POC, amygdala, hippocampus; (iv) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (v) PFC and cingulate. We hypothesize that (iii) and (ii) directly subserve olfactory related functions. Presence of different cortical regions in the same ICA map implies that the regions are functionally connected. Associated (averaged) IC time courses for each independent component are shown in the right hand side. 
  = “Rest” + fresh air, 
  = “Smell” + fresh air, 
  = “Smell” + odor. Time courses exhibit a task-related behavior, even during the condition where no-odor was delivered with the “Smell” cue. All images are in neurological convention with respective maximum and minimum z values. Slice thickness is 2 mm. Threshold: t=5~8 and corrected p<0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 The functional ROI (outlined in white) defined based on IC maps shown in  Figure 4 (ii) and (iii)  overlaid on similar IC maps obtained for the no-odor paradigm. The correlation coefficients (r) of IC time courses with the on off task reference function yielded r = 0.4 (df=232) and r = 0.15 (df=232) respectively. The width of the time courses indicates the inter-subject variability. Threshold: t=5~8 and corrected p<0.05. 
  = “Rest” + fresh air, 
  = “Smell” + fresh air. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 The unified SEM for the olfactory network based on similar individual ICA maps as shown in  Figure 4 . We hypothesize that IC (ii) and (iii) in the dotted box subserve primary olfactory-related processing while IC (i), (iv) & (v) subserve higher-order cognitive processing associated with olfaction. The primary olfactory-related processing network encompass IC s (iii) (striatum) and (ii) (POC, amygdala, hippocampus). Only the contemporaneous connections are shown. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Activated structures and activation foci (maximum) for each IC component shown in  Figure 4  based on the MNI brain. The voxel size is 2 x 2 x 2 mm 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Component 
 Brain Region 
 MNI coordinates (X, Y, Z) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (i) 
 
 L. Parietal-occipital junction 
 −27, −83, 36 
 
 
 R. Parietal-occipital junction 
 29, −89, 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (ii) 
 
 L. Putamen/ Ventral striatum 
 −23, 15, −4 
 
 
 R. Putamen/ Ventral striatum 
 27, 1, −4 
 
 
 L. Globus pallidus 
 −21, 15, −8 
 
 
 R. Globus pallidus 
 29, −5, −10 
 
 
 L. Caudate 
 −19, 13, −8 
 
 
 R. Caudate 
 19, 7, −6 
 
 
 L. POC 
 −23, 13, −14 
 
 
 R. POC 
 29, 3, −14 
 
 
 L. Thalamus 
 −15, −27, −4 
 
 
 R. Thalamus 
 29, −11, −2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (iii) 
 
 L. POC 
 −21, −1, −20 
 
 
 R. POC 
 19, −3, −20 
 
 
 L. Amygdala 
 −21, −3, −22 
 
 
 R. Amygdala 
 19, −5, −26 
 
 
 L. Hippocampus 
 −23, −7, −20 
 
 
 R. Hippocampus 
 21, −15, −20 
 
 
 L. Entorhinal cortex 
 −19, −5, −22 
 
 
 R. Entorhinal cortex 
 19, −15, −22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (iv) 
 
 L. Inferior & Dorsolateral Prefrontal 
 −51, 21, 26 
 
 
 R. Inferior & Dorsolateral Prefrontal 
 53, 9, 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (v) 
 
 L. Rostral Prefrontal Cortex 
 −31, 61, 14 
 
 
 R. Rostral Prefrontal Cortex 
 27, 59, 20 
 
 
 L. Cingulate 
 −1, 37, 30 
 
 
 R. Cingulate 
 3, 31, 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Column two shows the correlation coefficients of the time courses ( Figure 4  right) of each component listed in  Table 1  with the task on-off reference function. 
 
 
 
 
 Component 
 Correlation with the task reference function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IC (i) 
 r= 0.64, df=232, p<0.0001 
 
 
 IC (ii) 
 r= 0.65, df=232, p<0.0001 
 
 
 IC (iii) 
 r= 0.32, df=232, p<0.0001 
 
 
 IC (iv) 
 r= 0.48, df=232, p<0.0001 
 
 
 IC (v) 
 r= 0.52, df=232, p<0.0001 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Average beta estimates across all individuals for connections obtained in the group-level search. “% significant” indicates the percent of individuals for whom the connection remained significant after accounting for individual-level effects (obtained in the second stage of the GIMME search). The final model for each individual met the criteria on two of the following four fit indices: root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), non-normed fit index (NNFI), comparative fit index (CFI), and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean β 
 % Significant 
 
 
 
 
 Contemporaneous 
 IC(iii) → IC(ii) 
 0.45 
 90% 
 
 
 IC(ii) → IC(iv) 
 0.41 
 90% 
 
 
 IC(ii) → IC(i) 
 0.18 
 80% 
 
 
 IC(iv) → IC(v) 
 0.42 
 90% 
 
 
 IC(iv) → IC(i) 
 0.18 
 55% 
 
 
 IC(i) → IC(iv) 
 0.17 
 80% 
 
 
 Autoregressive 
 IC(i) 
 0.62 
 95% 
 
 
 IC(ii) 
 0.5 
 95% 
 
 
 IC(iii) 
 0.16 
 65% 
 
 
 IC(iv) 
 0.56 
 100% 
 
 
 IC(v) 
 0.54 
 100% 
 
 
 Lagged 
 IC(iii) → IC(ii) 
 −0.17 
 75% 
 
 
 IC(ii) → IC(iii) 
 0.22 
 75% 
 
 
 IC(ii) → IC(v) 
 −0.11 
 60% 
 
 
 IC(v) → IC(iv) 
 −0.31 
 80% 
 
 
 IC(v) → IC(i) 
 −0.24 
 75% 
 
 
 
 
 
