
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9419065 
 21028 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 Human brain mapping 
 
 1065-9471 
 1097-0193 
 
 
 23813738 
 5580982 
 10.1002/hbm.22287 
 NIHMS469781 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural processing of race during imitation: self-similarity versus social status 
 
 
 
 
 Reynolds Losin 
 Elizabeth A. 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 6 
 
 
 
 Cross 
 Katy A. 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 Marco 
 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 Mirella 
 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 
 
 
 1 Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
 
 2 FPR-UCLA Center for Culture, Brain and Development, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
 
 3 Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
 
 4 Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
 
 5 Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Social Behavior, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
 
 6 Institute for Cognitive Science, University of Colorado at Boulder 
 
 Corresponding author: Elizabeth A. Reynolds Losin, Institute for Cognitive Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Muenzinger D154, 345 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309-0345, Lab Phone: 303-492-4299, Fax: 303-492-2967,  Elizabeth.Losin@colorado.edu 
 
 
 25 
 5 
 2017 
 
 
 29 
 6 
 2013 
 
 
 4 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2017 
 
 35 
 4 
 1723 
 1739 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 People preferentially imitate others who are similar to them or have high social status. Such imitative biases are thought to have evolved because they increase the efficiency of cultural acquisition. Here we focused on distinguishing between self-similarity and social status as two candidate mechanisms underlying neural responses to a person’s race during imitation. We used fMRI to measure neural responses when 20 African American (AA) and 20 European American (EA) young adults imitated AA, EA and Chinese American (CA) models and also passively observed their gestures and faces. We found that both AA and EA participants exhibited more activity in lateral fronto-parietal and visual regions when imitating AAs compared to EAs or CAs. These results suggest that racial self-similarity is not likely to modulate neural responses to race during imitation, in contrast with findings from previous neuroimaging studies of face perception and action observation. Furthermore, AA and EA participants associated AAs with lower social status than EAs or CAs, suggesting that the social status associated with different racial groups may instead modulate neural activity during imitation of individuals from those groups. Taken together, these findings suggest that neural responses to race during imitation are driven by socially-learned associations rather than self-similarity. This may reflect the adaptive role of imitation in social learning, where learning from higher-status models can be more beneficial. This study provides neural evidence consistent with evolutionary theories of cultural acquisition. 
 
 
 ethnicity 
 culture 
 socioeconomic status 
 fMRI 
 prefrontal cortex 
 visual cortex 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 People preferentially imitate others who they perceive to be similar to themselves or high in status. These imitative biases are thought to increase the efficiency of cultural learning ( Boyd and Richerson, 1987 ). A person’s race can indicate their self-similarity and social status ( Van den Berghe, 1987 ) and is known to influence whom people imitate. Preferences for own-race models ( Feinman, 1980 ;  Karunanayake and Nauta, 2004 ;  Kelly et al., 2005 ;  King and Multon, 1996 ;  Zirkel, 2002 ) and higher-status-race models ( Clark and Clark, 1947 ;  Liebert et al., 1972 ;  Neely et al., 1973 ;  Thelen, 1971 ) are well documented. Surprisingly, however, the vast majority of studies on the neural mechanisms of imitation have not considered the race of the person being imitated (the model) ( Caspers et al., 2010 ). Most prior studies on neural responses to race during face perception and action observation have drawn distinctions between ingroup and outgroup to frame the interpretation of their findings (for reviews see  Eberhardt, 2005 ) and  Ito and Bartholow, 2009 ), suggesting that the neural encoding of another person’s race may be based primarily on shared racial group membership. Here we investigated whether neural responses to the model’s race during imitation are also modulated by shared racial group membership (similarity hypothesis), or are additionally or instead modulated by the social status associated with different racial groups (status hypothesis), as suggested by status biases in imitative learning. Although additional factors may contribute to neural responses to a model’s race during imitation, here we focused on distinguishing between self-similarity and social status because these are the most theoretically prominent, and empirically well-documented imitative biases related to the model. Thus, the goal of the present study was to determine which of these hypotheses was better supported by neural responses to race during imitation. 
 Self-similarity (i.e., shared group membership), and social status are two important dimensions of intergroup relations. Self-similarity on a given dimension, such as race, can be used to determine who is part of one’s ingroup or outgroup, whereas social status is a hierarchical association with both ingroups and outgroups that results from group comparison ( Festinger, 1954 ). Although group membership and social status are often studied in isolation experimentally (e.g.,  Rubin, 2012 ), these characteristics of real-world social groups typically coexist and interact in ways that depend on the status of one’s own group ( Phinney, 1992 ;  Sellers et al., 1998 ). Thus, studying shared group membership and group social status together in individuals from both low- and high-status groups has the potential to provide valuable additional insight into the mechanisms of real-world intergroup processes. For example, ( Tajfel, 1974 ) discusses conditions under which intergroup behaviors prompted by shared group membership and a group’s social status may be in conflict and highlights that for individuals from low-status groups, in-group favoritism and the desire for higher status can be in conflict. Group membership and social status have also recently begun to be studied at the neural level, both independently and together. These studies have demonstrated that others’ group membership and social status are encoded by a number of neural systems (e.g.,  Van Bavel et al., 2008 ;  Chiao et al, 2009 ), and that this encoding can differ based on cultural norms about social status and intergroup relations ( Cheon et al., 2011 ). 
 As stated previously, the nature of intergroup processes can differ based on one’s own group membership. For example, African Americans have been found to identify more strongly with their racial group than do European Americans ( Phinney, 1992 ;  Sellers et al., 1998 ), perhaps be due to African American’s minority status or the lower social status associated with this group. This phenomenon has been investigated at the neural level in two recent studies ( Mathur et al., 2010 ;  Mathur et al., 2011 ) that also replicated this behavioral finding.  Mathur and colleagues (2010)  found that African Americans uniquely recruited the medial prefrontal cortex, a region that has been associated with self-referential thought, when observing ingroup vs. outgroup members in pain and, further, that activity within this MPFC region was predicted by the degree of identification with one’s racial ingroup ( Mathur et al., 2011 ). Together, these studies suggest that a complete understanding of the behavioral and neural processes underlying intergroup relations requires studying individuals from multiple groups that differ in social status. 
 Previously ( Losin et al., 2011 ), we used fMRI to measure neural activity while European American (EA) participants imitated EA, African American (AA) and Chinese American (CA) models. Participants exhibited more activity in lateral fronto-parietal and visual regions when imitating AA compared to EA models. Activity did not follow the same pattern, however, when participants imitated members of the other racial outgroup (CA) compared to their ingroup (EA). Therefore, it was unclear whether more activity during imitation of AAs was due to their membership in a racial outgroup, consistent with the similarity hypothesis, or the fact that AAs are typically perceived to be lower in social status than EAs or CAs ( Fiske et al., 1999 ;  Fiske et al., 2002 ), consistent with the status hypothesis. 
 To disentangle these two possibilities, here we collected data in a sample of AA participants performing the same tasks and directly compared the results to those previously observed in our sample of EA participants. This comparison allowed us to clearly distinguish between the similarity and status hypotheses. This is because although AAs are the racial group in our stimuli typically perceived to be the lowest in status by both EAs and AAs, the AA models were a racial ingroup to one group of participants (AAs) and a racial outgroup to the other (EAs). Furthermore, we compared race effects during imitation to those during face perception and action observation. This comparison allowed us to determine whether the  same  neural regions previously found to exhibit racial similarity effects when people passively view the faces and actions of others are instead modulated by race-associated status during imitation, or alternatively whether racial similarity and race-associated status are simply encoded by  different  neural regions. 
 
 
 METHODS 
 
 Participants 
 Participants were 20 (10 male) right-handed, 18–30 year old African Americans (AAs). We compare these participants to a prior sample of 20 (10 male) right-handed, 18–26 year old European American (EA) participants whose data were previously reported in ( Losin et al., 2011 ). The two racial groups were matched in age, handedness (Edinburgh Handedness Inventory, ( Oldfield, 1971 )) and socioeconomic status (participant’s self-reported jobs were converted to a numerical score using the nine job categories in the Barratt Simplified Measure of Social Status ( Barratt, 2005 ) and added to their years of education). See  Table 1  for group demographic means and between-group comparisons. Participants were recruited through free online bulletins (e.g., Craigslist), university (UCLA) e-mail lists, and local newspapers. Participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and reported using no medication or drugs (other than oral contraceptives), no heavy use of alcohol, and no prior or concurrent diagnosis of any neurological, psychiatric, or developmental disorder. The study was approved by the UCLA Institutional Review Board. Participants were compensated for their participation and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. 
 
 
 Hand Sign Imitation Paradigm 
 The same fMRI task used with EA participants in ( Losin et al., 2011 ) was also used with the AA participants in the present study. Stimuli in this task were waist-up color videos of 12 models (6 male), of 3 different ethnicities (EA, AA, and Chinese American (CA)). Group differences will be discussed in terms of ‘race’ because this is the construct most likely perceived by participants based on visual information alone. Furthermore, we took a number of steps to minimize the salience of individual actors in favor of racial category-level information, as the reported race-related imitative biases we intended to study are suggested to result from the social status stereotypically associated with a person’s racial group rather than individual-level status associations. These steps included, 1) having four models from each racial group (which we averaged across in our analyses), 2) matching models both within and between racial groups on attractiveness and how typical their appearance was perceived to be for their ethnic group (based on ratings from a separate group of subjects), 3) having actors wear the same clothing and standardizing other aspects of their appearance, e.g. no glasses, no piercings, no makeup, etc. 
 Models performed 16 bimanual, symmetrical hand signs derived from New Zealand Sign Language that were described as meaningless to both models and participants. Stimuli were presented in the following four conditions: 1)  imitate gesture , in which participants imitated the models performing the hand signs during the video presentation 2)  observe gesture , in which participants passively observed the models performing hand signs 3)  view portrait , in which participants passively viewed still portraits of each model, and 4)  baseline , in which participants fixated on a black cross in the center of a white screen ( Figure 1a ). Participants were cued to either imitate or passively observe the stimuli by a colored border (green for imitation, red for observation only). 
 Four stimuli of the same condition and portraying the same model were presented in a block ( Figure 1b ). An instruction screen that was either green with the word “imitate” or red with the word “observe” preceded all blocks. Stimulus blocks were organized into four balanced runs, such that each model, each hand sign, and each condition were seen an equal number of times in each run. Five 22.5-second baseline blocks were evenly spaced throughout each run. Over the course of the experiment, each participant saw 64 stimuli (16 blocks) portraying models from each of the three racial groups in each of the three conditions. The presentation order of these blocks was pseudorandomized within a run, ensuring that two models of the same gender, same race or making the same hand sign did not appear consecutively. A unique pseudorandomized stimulus order was created for each participant. Total task time was 55 minutes (13:45/run). Prior to scanning, each participant completed two training tasks: a hand sign familiarization task during which participants imitated each sign in slow motion and then at full speed, and a task structure familiarization during which participants performed one block of each task condition. 
 
 
 Self-report and Behavioral Measures 
 In order to assess whether participants from both racial groups perceived the stimuli and performed the imitation task in a similar way, we collected participants’ ratings of the attractiveness of the models and also assessed the accuracy of their imitation while in the scanner. Measures of model attractiveness were collected immediately following the scanning session. Participants viewed the still portraits of each stimuli model on a laptop in the order they first appeared in the scanner. They were asked to “rate how attractive each person is”. Ratings were made on a visual analogue scale depicted under each portrait that ranged from 1 “very unattractive” to 9 “very attractive”, with “average” as the scale mid-point. An average of the attractiveness ratings for the 4 models from each racial group for each participant was entered into a linear mixed effects model (lme) in R ( R Development Core Team, 2010 ) in which participant race and model race were fixed factors and participant was a random factor. 
 Task compliance and hand sign imitation accuracy was assessed during fMRI data acquisition by watching the participants’ hands through the control room window. During the gesture imitation blocks, hand sign imitation accuracy was assessed for 16/20 EA participants and 20/20 AA participants (for the remaining four EA participants the performance of imitation was verified, but not rated). Each sign was assigned a rating of 2 if the sign was imitated correctly, a rating of 1 if the sign was imitated but with errors, and a rating of 0 if the sign was not imitated. Imitation accuracy was compared between groups for the percentage of hand signs receiving each accuracy rating in each participant (averaged across four runs) using two-tailed independent-samples T-tests. 
 We also collected self-report measures on the two behavioral factors of interest: participant’s feelings of similarity to the models from each racial group and the social status they associated with each racial group represented in the stimuli. We collected these measures in order to verify whether both groups of participants felt more similar to own-race models ( Bandura, 1977 ;  Tarr and Gauthier, 2000 ;  Karunanayake and Nauta, 2004 ) but rated AAs as lower status than EAs and CAs regardless of their own race ( Dunham et al., 2006 ;  Wong et al., 1998 ), as predicted based on the literature. Participants’ feeling of similarity to the stimuli models were assessed using the same procedure used to assess their perception of model attractiveness. While viewing portraits of each model, each participant was asked to “rate how similar you feel each person is to you” on a scale from 1 “very dissimilar to me” to 9 “very similar to me”. 
 Social status is a multi-dimensional construct including both subjective and objective components ( Adler et al., 2000 ;  Henrich and Gil-White, 2001 ). We did not have an  a priori  hypothesis as to whether objective or subjective social status would most closely relate to racial modulation of neural activity during imitation. Therefore, we measured both the objective and subjective social status that participants associated with the different racial groups in the fMRI task. We used the Barratt Simplified Measure of Social Status (BSMSS) ( Barratt, 2005 ) the MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status (MSSSS) ( Adler et al., 2000 ), both of which we modified to apply to the different racial groups represented in the stimuli (rather than to the self). For both measures we used the terms white, black and Asian rather than European American, African American and Chinese American, as these broad racial categories were those most likely perceived by participants during the fMRI task based on visual information alone. 
 The BSMSS ( Barratt, 2005 ) is a version of the widely-used Hollingshead Four Factor Index of Social Status ( Hollingshead, 1975 ) with updated job categories. For this measure, participants were asked to choose which level of education and which type of job they most closely associated with the different United States racial groups represented in the stimuli. Participants were given seven choices for education ranging from 1 “less than 7 th  grade” to 7 “graduate degree” and nine groups of occupations ranging from 1, a group that included day laborers and house cleaners, to 9, a group that included physicians and attorneys. Participants’ choices on these two measures were multiplied by the factor weight of 3 for occupation and 5 for education and then summed to get a composite objective SES score that ranged from 8 to 66. The Hollingshead Four Factor Index of Social Status has been found to have substantial inter-rater reliability with a Cohen’s kappa value of 0.68. 
 In the MSSSS ( Adler et al., 2000 ), participants were shown a picture of a ladder with ten rungs and instructed to “think of the ladder as representing where different groups stand in the United States.” They were told that “at the top of the ladder are the groups that are the best off - those who have the most money, the most education and the most respected jobs” and that “at the bottom are the groups that are the worst off - who have the least money, least education, and the least respected jobs or no jobs.” They were asked to select the ladder with the red arrow pointing to the rung where they thought each racial group represented in the study (white, black and Asian) stands relative to other racial groups in the United States. The MSSSS has been found to predict outcomes such as psychosocial and health measures above and beyond objective measures of SES ( Cundiff et al., 2011 ). Thus, the MSSSS likely captures important aspects of social status not accounted for by the BSMSS. The MSSSS has also been found to have adequate test-retest reliability (Spearman’s rank correlation) ρ = 0.62 ( p  < 0.01) ( Operario et al., 2004 ). 
 Social status measures were collected from 15 EA and 14 AA participants through an online survey subsequent to the fMRI data collection. In order to test for the predicted patterns of racial self-similarity and status, we entered individual participant scores on these measures as the dependant measures in separate linear mixed effects models (command: lme) in R (R  Development Core Team, 2010 ). For these analyses, participant race and model race were fixed factors and participant was a random factor. We performed post-hoc pair-wise comparisons to assess any interactions using Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test. 
 Finally, we assessed the influence of participants’ reports of subjective and objective race-associated status (SSS and SES) and their similarity to the models on imitation accuracy. We did so by computing separate generalized linear mixed effects models (command: lmer) in R ( R Development Core Team, 2010 ), with imitation accuracy as the dependent measure, our measures of interest (SSS, SES or similarity) as fixed factors, and participant and model as crossed random factors. In order to allow a more intuitive interpretation of results, we reverse coded accuracy scores so that the numbers corresponded to the number of imitation errors ( 0 - no errors, 1 - one imitation error, and 2 - no imitation, or two errors). For statistical models focused on the influence of race-associated status on imitation accuracy, our dependent measure was the number of imitation errors summed over the four actors (16 hand signs each) from a given racial group (participants provided one status rating per racial group and thus we did not enter the actor’s race into the statistical model). For statistical models focused on the influence of the models’ perceived self-similarity on imitation accuracy, our dependent measure was the number of imitation errors summed over the 16 hand signs from each actor because participants provided a similarity rating for each actor (both similarity and the actor’s race were included into this statistical model). 
 
 
 MRI Data Acquisition 
 Data were collected using a 3 Tesla Siemens Trio whole-body MRI scanner at the UCLA Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center. The following scans were performed on each participant: 1) four functional echo-planar imaging (EPI) scans (3×3×4 mm voxels, TR: 2250 ms, TE: 28 ms, slices: 34, flip angle: 90 degrees, FoV read: 192 mm, echo spacing: 47 ms, bandwidth: 2442 Hz/Px, time: 13:45); 2) one co-planar high resolution T2-weighted structural scan (1.5×1.5×4mm voxels, TR: 5000ms, TE: 34ms, slices: 34, flip angle: 90 degrees, FOV Read: 192 mm, echo spacing: .89 ms, bandwidth: 1302 Hz/Px, time: 1:30); 3) one high resolution T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) structural scan (1×1×1 mm voxels, TR: 1900 ms, TE: 2.26 ms, Flip angle: 90 degrees, Tl: 900 ms, FoV Read: 250 mm, echo spacing 6.9 ms, bandwidth: 200 hz/px, time: 6:50). 
 
 
 MRI Data Analysis 
 Data analyses were performed using FSL version 4.1.6 (Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain software library,  www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl ) ( Smith et al., 2004 ), AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ) and the Automatic Registration Toolbox (ART, ( Ardekani et al., 1995 )). Functional data were preprocessed by skull-stripping (AFNI), realignment to the mean functional image (FSL’s MCFLIRT), temporal filtering with a high-pass filter cutoff of 100s (FSL), and spatial smoothing with a 6mm full width half maximum Gaussian kernel in three dimensions (FSL). 
 Although head motion was low (~ 0.7 mm maximum relative displacement) and did not differ between groups (See  Table 2  for group means and between-group comparison), several data quality control measures were implemented prior to statistical analysis. In addition to standard realignment for motion correction, we also removed the effects of volumes exhibiting an unusual amount of residual intensity change (i.e. artifacts due to sudden movements during volume acquisition). We did so by using a modified version of the fsl_motion_outliers script that calculated the root mean square error of each voxel’s time-series and created nuisance regressors for volumes where the volume-average root mean square error was greater than 0.2 SD (which approximated the threshold for visually identifying motion artifacts). We excluded any runs from which more than 25 volumes were removed (4 and 6 out of 80 runs for EA and AA participants, respectively). From the EA group, we also previously removed one male participant (all 4 runs) and the fourth (last) run from two other participants due to hardware failures during data collection. These quality control measures resulted in a total of 70 runs from 19 EA participants (10 female) and 74 runs from 20 AA participants being utilized in the present statistical analyses. Within these runs, less than 1.5 percent of 362 volumes per run were removed due to motion artifacts in each group and the groups did not differ in the number of volumes removed (See  Table 2  for group means and between-group comparisons). 
 Statistical analyses were performed at the single subject level using a general linear model (GLM) with FSL’s fMRI Expert Analysis Tool (FEAT). We examined neural activity related to the race of the model in the AA participants using the same statistical model previously applied to the EA participants ( Losin et al., 2011 ). The time courses of blocks containing each racial group of models (EA, AA, CA), in each condition (imitate gesture, observe gesture, view portrait), were convolved with a canonical double-gamma hemodynamic response function and included as regressors in the GLM. The five 22.5- second rest blocks were used as the implicit baseline. 
 In order to investigate race effects in each condition, all possible pairwise contrasts of model racial groups were estimated for each condition (e.g., imitate gesture EA > imitate gesture AA) and each racial group of models was also compared to the fixation baseline for each condition (e.g. imitate gesture EA > baseline). Additionally, in order to determine whether race effects during gesture imitation differed from those during the non-imitative conditions, interaction contrasts were estimated by subtracting each pairwise racial contrast for the observe gesture or view portrait condition from the same contrast for the imitate gesture condition (e.g., imitate gesture  AA > EA  > observe gesture  AA > EA ). 
 First level contrast estimates were computed for each run and contrast estimates for each subject were computed by averaging over the four runs, treating each run as a fixed effect. For group analysis, contrast estimates were registered to standard space (Montreal Neurological Institute, MNI) in three stages. The mean volume of each run of individual EPI data was registered to the in-plane high-resolution T2-weighted image (3-parameter affine) and, in turn, to the T1-weighted MPRAGE (7-parameter affine) using FSL’s FLIRT. Finally, registration of the MPRAGE to MNI space (FSL’s MNI Avg152, T1 2×2×2mm) was carried out with FLIRT (12-parameter affine) and refined using ART (non-linear transformation). Group level analyses were then performed to calculate a group mean for each contrast for each racial group of subjects and between-racial-group differences using using FSL’s FLAME stages 1 and 2. All analyses were performed across the whole-brain. Group images were thresholded at  Z  > 2.3 corrected for multiple comparisons using cluster-based Gaussian random field theory controlling familywise error across the whole-brain at p = 0.05. Peak activation coordinates were determined using an automated search for relative maxima with a minimum separation of 15 mm. Coordinates with the highest  Z  value within an individual anatomical region (determined using FSL Harvard-Oxford atlas) are reported in tables. 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Behavioral and Self-Report Measures 
 We first assessed whether any between-group differences existed in participants’ perceptions of actor attractiveness or imitation accuracy in order to rule out these possible confounds to interpretation of the race effects of interest. Our analysis revealed that participants’ assessments of actor attractiveness did not vary based on the race of the model or their own race, nor was there a significant interaction between these factors (all p > 0.05;  Table 2 ). These data suggest that both EA and AA participants viewed the models they observed and imitated in a similar way despite the participants’ own different racial group membership. Thus, it is highly unlikely that differences in perceived model attractiveness account for any observed race effects. We also found that imitation accuracy was high in both groups (> 94% of signs receiving the highest accuracy rating), and did not differ between groups (See  Table 2  for group means and between-group comparisons). Equivalent imitative performance indicates that participants in both groups were able to accurately perform the hand sign imitation task and that task performance is unlikely to confound the interpretation of any observed between-group differences. Because we were primarily interested in neural activity related to imitation of different models and because of the extremely low rate of imitation errors, we retained all data in the fMRI analyses. 
 We next investigated participants’ feelings of similarity to the different models and their assessment of the social status typically associated with the different racial groups represented in the stimuli. We did so in order to verify that participants’ self reports on these measures matched those previously reported in the literature on which our neural predictions for the similarity and status hypotheses were based. Specifically, based on prior literature ( Bandura, 1977 ;  Karunanayake and Nauta, 2004 ) we predicted that participants would report feeling more similar to the models from their own racial group. Consistent with this prediction, we found that participants’ feelings of similarity to the models did vary based on model race,  F (2, 74) = 12.53,  p  < 0.0001, and that the effects of model race varied based on the participant’s own race (subject race × model race interaction)  F (2, 74) = 39.77,  p  < 0.0001. Pairwise comparisons (Tukey’s HSD) revealed that, as predicted, this interaction resulted from participants feeling more similar to models from their own racial group than models from each of their two respective racial outgroups (EA and CA models for AA participants, and AA and CA models for EA participants) ( Figure 2a ). 
 We also made predictions about participants’ assessment of the social status associated with the different racial groups of the models represented in the stimuli (white, black and Asian) based on prior studies ( Dunham et al., 2006 ;  Fiske et al., 1999 ;  Fiske et al., 2002 ;  Freeman et al., 2011 ;  Penner and Saperstein, 2008 ;  Wong et al., 1998 ). We predicted that 1) participants would rate the status associated with each of these racial groups similarly, regardless of their own race ( Dunham et al., 2006 ;  Wong et al., 1998 ), and 2) participants would rate blacks as being associated with lower status than either whites ( Freeman et al., 2011 ;  Penner and Saperstein, 2008 ) or Asians ( Fiske et al., 1999 ;  Fiske et al., 2002 ) while the latter two groups would be rated as being similar in status ( Wong et al., 1998 ). Consistent with our first prediction, we found no main effect of participants’ race on their assessment of the subjective social status (SSS) or socioeconomic status (SES) associated with the different racial groups represented in the stimuli (all  p  > 0.8). Consistent with our second prediction, we found a significant effect of model race on perceived SSS  F (2, 54) = 80.84,  p  < 0.0001, and SES  F (2, 54) = 94.01,  p  < 0.0001 such that both groups of participants rated blacks as being associated with lower SSS and SES than either whites or Asians ( Figure 2b–c ). 
 Although status ratings for whites and Asians were closer to one another than to those for blacks, some significant differences between white and Asian status ratings were found. For the SSS measure, AA participants rated whites as being associated with higher social status than Asians while EA participants’ ratings of the status of whites and Asians were not significantly different. This difference resulted in participant race × racial group interaction that approached significance  F (2, 54) = 2.89,  p  = 0.06. For the SES measure, AA participants rated the SES of whites and Asians as equivalent while EA participants rated Asian SES as higher than white SES. This difference resulted in a participant race × racial group interaction for SES  F (2, 54) = 4.6,  p  = 0.02. Despite these interactions due to inconsistencies in the assessment of the relative status of whites compared to Asians, data from both status measures largely fit the predicted pattern of similar ratings of race-associated status regardless of the participant’s race and higher status ratings for whites and Asians than for blacks. Taken together, these data suggest that our participants self reports of racial similarity and race-associated status were consistent with those reported in the literature supporting our neural predictions based on racial self-similarity and status. 
 Finally, we investigated whether participants’ reports of subjective and objective race-associated status (SSS and SES) and their similarity to the models influenced imitation accuracy. Given evidence that people preferentially imitate those who they perceive to be similar to themselves (from their own group) or from high status groups ( Feinman, 1980 ;  Karunanayake and Nauta, 2004 ;  Kelly et al., 2005 ;  King and Multon, 1996 ;  Zirkel, 2002 ;  Clark and Clark, 1947 ;  Liebert et al., 1972 ;  Neely et al., 1973 ;  Thelen, 1971 ), we predicted that participants would make more errors when imitating those from racial groups they perceived to be lower in status, or those they perceived to be less similar to themselves due to less experience with imitation of these models in daily life. Furthermore, based on our prior imaging evidence of differential neural responses during imitation to actors from different racial outgroups, we predicted that social status would be more influential on imitation accuracy than self-similarity. Consistent with our prediction, we found a significant main effect of SSS on imitation accuracy,  b  = −.05 , t (1) = −2.18,  p  = .03 and a nonsignificant trend of SES,  b  = −.01 , t (1) = −1.43,  p  = .16, such that participants made more errors imitating actors from racial groups they associated with lower social status (no main effect of, or interaction with, the subject’s race, all  p  > .5). Again, consistent with our prediction, we found no effects of model self-similarity or interactions with subject race on imitation accuracy (all  p  > .2); only a main effect of model race was observed (model comparison  χ 2 (2) = 8.38,  p  = .02) such that participants made the most errors when imitating AA models (M = .98), fewer errors when imitating EA models (M = .76; AA vs. EA:  p  = .17), and the least errors when imitating CA models (M = .57; EA vs. CA:  p  = .03, AA vs. CA:  p  < .0001). These results are consistent with our hypothesis that participants had more difficulty imitating those from racial groups they perceive to be lower in social status, and that social status is more influential on imitation accuracy than self-similarity. 
 
 
 Effects of Model Race During Imitation in AA Participants 
 We first examined which neural systems were modulated by the model’s race during imitation in our AA participants. To do so we compared imitation of actors from the three different racial groups. Out of all possible pair-wise racial comparisons, significant differences were found during imitation of AA > EA, AA > CA and EA > CA models, the same three racial comparisons where differences were previously observed in our EA sample ( Losin et al., 2011 ). Also similar to what we previously found for the EA participants, we found increased activity during imitation of AA models compared to either EA or CA models in an extended bilateral network of regions previously shown to be important for imitation by a recent, large meta-analysis ( Caspers et al., 2010 ), including the inferior frontal gyrus and neighboring premotor cortex, the inferior and superior parietal lobules and visual regions including the fusiform gyrus and inferior and superior lateral occipital cortex ( Figure 2a–b , blue and green activity). In contrast, there was an absence of neural differences between imitation of EA and CA models in lateral fronto-parietal regions. Instead, differences were observed mainly in primary and secondary visual regions (V1–V3) and the fusiform gyrus, with more activity present during imitation of EA compared to CA models ( Figure 2c , blue and green activity). 
 
 
 Effects of Model Race During Imitation in AA vs. EA Participants 
 In order to discriminate between the similarity and status hypotheses, we next investigated whether the effects of the model’s race on neural activity during imitation varied based on the race of the imitator. We did so by directly comparing model race effects during imitation between the AA participants to those previously observed in the EA participants. The status hypothesis predicts that the effect of the model’s race will be similar regardless of the participants’ own race as assessments of race-associated status are typically invariant of the race of the assessor ( Dunham et al., 2006 ;  Wong et al., 1998 ), largely consistent with the status ratings of our own participants. In contrast, the similarity hypothesis predicts a model race × subject race interaction such that AA participants would exhibit more activity in response to imitating one or both of their racial outgroups (EA or CA), just as had been the case for the EA participants ( Losin et al., 2011 ). 
 In support of the status hypothesis, we found that the effect of the model’s race did not differ between AA and EA participants for two out of the three racial comparisons exhibiting these effects in each group (imitating AA vs CA models and imitating EA vs CA models). Furthermore, we found only a single cluster exhibiting differential responses between AA and EA participants for the third racial comparison, imitating AA vs EA models. This cluster was located in the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and extended into the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) ( Figure 3d ,  Table 4 ). Plotting average parameter estimates extracted from this cluster (for imitation of AA and EA models compared to baseline) revealed greater activity during imitation of EA models for AA participants, and AA models for EA participants. In order to gain further insight into neural responses to race within this region, we also extracted parameter estimates for imitation of CA models and compared them to those for the other two racial groups using 2-tailed paired T-tests ( Figure 3d ). Both groups of participants exhibited no difference between imitation of CA models and models form their own racial group and less activity during imitation of CA models and their other racial outgroup (EA models for AA participants and AA models for EA participants), suggesting effects of model race within the pre-SMA and ACC were not simply related to shared group membership. 
 We observed a substantial degree of overlap between the neural regions modulated by the race of the model during imitation in the AA and EA participants (green areas in  Figure 3a–c ), further strengthening support for the status hypothesis. For the imitate AA > EA and imitate AA > CA contrasts these regions included the fusiform gyrus and inferior and superior lateral occipital cortices, the inferior frontal gyrus and neighboring premotor cortex, and inferior and superior parietal lobules. For the imitate EA > CA contrast, these regions included visual regions V1–V2 and the fusiform gyrus. Taken together, these results revealed only a single between-group difference in model race effects during imitation and a high degree of overlap between AA and EA participants. Thus, the race of the model modulates neural activity during imitation largely independently of the imitator’s own race arguing against the similarity hypothesis in favor of the status hypothesis. 
 
 
 Effects of Model Race During Imitation vs. the Non-imitative Conditions 
 We next sought to determine whether the  same  neural regions exhibiting effects consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation were exhibiting previously reported racial similarity effects when people passively view the faces and actions of others. Alternatively, it was possible that race-associated status simply modulated activity within  different  neural regions during imitation than racial similarity did during passive face and action viewing. To address this question, we directly compared race effects across both groups during gesture imitation to those in the observe gesture and view portrait conditions (3-way participant race × model race × condition interactions). We confined our investigation to neural regions exhibiting effects consistent with the status hypothesis (i.e. those exhibiting overlapping race effects in the EA and AA participants during imitation) using a post-threshold mask (green regions in  Figure 3a–c ). 
 If the  same  neural regions exhibiting effects consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation were instead modulated by racial similarity during the non-imitative conditions, we predicted 3-way interactions in those regions. Specifically, we predicted that these 3-way interactions would result from the same region exhibiting more activity when 1) imitating AA compared to either EA or CA models and 2) when passively viewing the faces or actions of own-race compared to other-race models, as previously found. If race-associated status and racial similarity simply modulated neural activity in  different  neural regions during imitation and the non-imitative conditions, we also predicted 3-way interactions. In this case, however, we predicted interactions would result from those regions exhibiting status effects during imitation not being modulated by the race of the model during passive action and face viewing and vise versa. 
 In line with the first prediction, we found clusters of activity in the fusiform gyrus that exhibited significantly different responses to the race of the model during gesture imitation than during either gesture observation or portrait viewing for the AA vs EA contrast ( Figure 3a–b ). Parameter estimates revealed that both AA and EA participants exhibited more activity within the fusiform gyrus and lateral occipital cortex during imitation of AA vs EA models, consistent with the status hypothesis. However, during gesture observation and portrait viewing the same region exhibited more activity in response to own-race compared to other-race models ( Figure 3a–b , red and blue bars,  Table 4 ), consistent with prior studies on neural responses to race during these tasks ( Eberhardt, 2005 ;  Ito and Bartholow, 2009 ). 
 To further test the status hypothesis during imitation and the similarity hypothesis during the non-imitative conditions, we extracted parameters from the fusiform clusters exhibiting task-related differences to AA vs EA models for the third group of models, CAs. CA individuals are racial outgroup for both groups of participants and also a group considered to be higher in perceived status than AAs. Therefore, if racial similarity was driving the effects of model race on neural activity in the fusiform gyrus during passive action and face viewing, we expected to see less activity associated with CA individuals than participants’ own racial group within these conditions. If the race of the model was influencing fusiform activity during imitation instead based on race-associated status we expected to see less activity associated with imitation of CA than AA models for both groups of participants as CAs are considered to be higher in perceived status than AAs ( Fiske et al., 1999 ;  Fiske et al., 2002 ). Consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation, we found less activity during imitation of CA models relative to AA models in both groups of participants ( Figure 4a–b  green bars). Additionally, consistent with the similarity hypothesis during the non-imitative conditions, we found less activity during either observing the gestures or viewing the portraits of CA models than own-race models for both group of participants, though this difference was only a nonsignificant trend for EA vs CA models in EA participants during portrait viewing. We also found a similar level of activity in response to the CA models as the other racial outgroup for each groups of participants (EA models for AA participants and AA models for EA participants), in further support of the similarity hypotheses during passive face and action viewing ( Figure 3a–b  green bars). 
 Taken together, results from the 3-way interactions demonstrate that one of the neural regions exhibiting status effects during imitation, namely the fusiform gyrus, has activity consistent with the similarity hypothesis instead during the non-imitative conditions across both EA and AA participants and models from  three  racial groups. Thus, these data suggest that the fusiform gyrus is differentially modulated by the race of the model depending on the task. 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 Our results suggest that racial similarity does not drive racial modulation of neural activity during imitation. Furthermore, our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the social status associated with different racial groups influences neural responses to race during imitation due to previous status-biased imitation. In  Losin (2011) , we found that European American (EA) participants exhibited more activity in lateral fronto-parietal and visual regions when imitating African American (AA) compared to Chinese American (CA) or EA models. Because people preferentially imitate those from groups perceived to be high in status ( Boyd and Richerson, 1987 ), and AAs are typically perceived to have lower social status than either EAs or CAs ( Fiske et al., 1999 ;  Fiske et al., 2002 ), we hypothesized that imitation of models from racial groups perceived to be lower in social status may require greater recruitment of imitation-related neural regions as a result of less familiarity with imitating these individuals in daily life (the status hypothesis) ( Losin et al., 2011 ). This hypothesis was further supported by studies demonstrating that imitating unfamiliar actions is associated with greater neural activity in some of the same sensory-motor regions as were more active during imitation of AA models ( Buccino et al., 2004 ;  Vogt et al., 2007 ). Importantly, because AAs were also a racial outgroup for the EA participants, the alternative explanation of this effect relating to racial group membership (the similarity hypothesis) could not be ruled out. 
 In the present study, we found that the race of the person being imitated influenced neural activity in AAs in largely the same manner as it had in EAs. Both EAs and AAs exhibited more activity when imitating AA compared to EA or CA models in visual and lateral fronto-parietal regions. There was also a high degree of overlapping activity between AAs and EAs and only a single region exhibiting different responses between AAs and EAs when compared directly. Thus, our data suggest that self-similarity is not driving neural responses to race during imitation. Importantly, as predicted, both AA and EA participants also rated AAs as being associated with lower subjective social status and socioeconomic status than either EAs or CAs, and made more imitation errors when imitating those from racial groups they perceive to be lower in social status. Thus, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that imitation-related neural regions ( Caspers et al., 2010 ) are recruited to a greater degree when people imitate individuals from groups they perceive to be lower in social status. As stated previously, this hypothesis was based on findings that people tend to imitate those from lower status groups less frequently than those from high status groups ( Clark and Clark, 1947 ;  Liebert et al., 1972 ;  Neely et al., 1973 ;  Thelen, 1971 ) and that decreased familiarity has been associated with increased neural activity during imitation ( Buccino et al., 2004 ;  Vogt et al., 2007 ). Future studies are needed to test for a direct link between perceived social status and neural responses to race during imitation. 
 Our finding that the perceived social status associated with a the model’s racial group may influence neural activity, as well as accuracy during imitation, is consistent with cultural learning theories from evolutionary psychology, which posit that people preferentially imitate high status individuals, both in terms of prestige (similar to subjective social status) and success (similar to objective social status) ( Boyd and Richerson, 1987 ;  Boyd and Richerson, 1985 ;  Henrich and Gil-White, 2001 ;  Henrich and McElreath, 2003 ;  Laland, 2004 ). Such imitative biases are thought to have evolved because they automatically direct attention to the individuals likely to exhibit high quality behaviors, thus increasing the efficiency with which these behaviors are learned and ultimately increasing the fitness of the imitator. Thus, our study provides neural data consistent with predictions made by theories regarding the evolution of human cultural capacities. Our interpretation of the neural responses to race found in the present study in terms of race-associated status is also consistent with 1) studies demonstrating that individuals from lower status racial groups (mostly AAs) may preferentially imitate models from higher status racial groups (usually EAs), rather than their own ( Clark and Clark, 1947 ;  Liebert et al., 1972 ;  Neely et al., 1973 ;  Thelen, 1971 ), 2) evidence of a tight link between the perceptions of race and perceptions of social status ( Macrae and Bodenhausen, 2001 ;  Tajfel, 1982 ;  Penner and Saperstein, 2008 ;  Freeman et al., 2011 ), and 3) studies demonstrating that another persons’ social status (not related to race) modulates neural activity in the lateral frontal and parietal cortices and the fusiform gyrus ( Zink et al., 2008 ;  Ly et al., 2011 ;  Chiao et al., 2009 ). 
 Surprisingly, however, this is the first finding that cannot be easily accounted for in terms of self similarity in either the literature on neural mechanisms of action imitation/observation, or the literature on racial (face) perception. Although a few studies have investigated the effects of the race or ethnicity of the model during action observation, all of these studies have suggested that such effects were modulated by shared racial group membership (racial self-similarity) ( Désy and Théoret, 2007 ;  Liew et al., 2010 ;  Molnar-Szakacs et al., 2007 ). Similarly, among studies investigating the neural responses to faces of people from different racial groups, most studies drew distinctions between ingroup and outgroup to frame the interpretation of their findings ( Eberhardt, 2005 ;  Ito and Bartholow, 2009 ). One possible reason for the dearth of interpretations other than those related to racial self-similarity in these literatures is the infrequency with which such studies include participants from more than one racial group, or models from more than two racial groups, both of which can help disambiguate self-similarity effects from others ( Losin et al., 2010 ). An exception is a study by  Lieberman and colleagues (2005) , who found increased activity in the amygdala of both EA and AA participants in response to AA compared to EA faces, which they interpret as relating to negative associations with AAs. Though this interpretation has been debated ( Phelps and LeDoux, 2005 ), we propose that inclusion of two racial groups of participants in studies on race-related neural mechanisms will reveal more race effects related to status as we propose in the present study as well as other factors beside racial similarity. 
 The only neural region in our study that did not exhibit activity consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation was the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA). Here EA participants showed heightened activity when imitating AA models whereas AA participants showed increased activity when imitating EA models, suggesting that activity in this region may be modulated by group membership (i.e., both EA and AA participants displaying higher responses to outgroup members). However, data from the additional outgroup used in the present study (CA) revealed that this interpretation is not accurate as both EA and AA participants’ responses to CA models were similar to those observed for their respective ingroup. These findings generally caution against interpreting race effects in terms of ingroup vs. outgroup biases in the absence of appropriate control conditions (i.e., more than one outgroup) and suggest that neural responses to race within the pre-SMA are likely affected by the interaction of several factors (e.g., self-similarity, social status, and majority/minority status). These findings also highlight another important contribution of studies comparing participants with differential cultural experience: the presence of differential neural mechanisms in the absence of behavioral differences. Here, EA and AA participants exhibited differential pre-SMA activity in the absence of difference in imitation accuracy between AA and EA participants. Other such findings exist in the cultural neuroscience literature (e.g.,  Gutchess et al., 2006 ), suggesting that differential neural mechanisms may arise as the result of the habitual use of different cognitive strategies to produce the same behavioral outcome. 
 We also found that the fusiform gyrus and neighboring lateral occipital cortex are differentially modulated by another person’s race during imitation compared to passive viewing of the actions or faces of others. While these regions exhibited the pattern consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation, during passive viewing of faces and actions, the same regions were more responsive to racial ingroup than outgroup members, as previous studies reported ( Eberhardt, 2005 ;  Ito and Bartholow, 2009 ). Importantly, increased activity in response to ingroup relative to outgroup members was found across two racial outgroups of models in two racial groups of participants, providing more support than previous studies for increased activity in the fusiform gyrus in response to ingroup members when people passively observe other’s faces and actions. More broadly, this finding demonstrates that neural regions encoding a person’s race encode different racial associations based on the task performed, rather than exclusively encoding racial similarity, as suggested by previous studies on neural mechanisms of racial perception ( Eberhardt, 2005 ;  Ito and Bartholow, 2009 ). The exhibition of this contextual modulation by the fusiform gyrus suggests fusiform gyrus activity related to race is not exclusively related to this region’s sensitivity to familiarity and expertise ( Tarr and Gauthier, 2000 ). Instead, the present findings may relate to another known modulator of fusiform activity: attention (e.g.,  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). Increased attention to ingroup faces is another explanation (as opposed to familiarity) proposed for previously reported increased fusiform gyrus activity in response to racial ingroup members ( Golby et al., 2001 ;  Pizzagalli et al., 2002 ). This interpretation is supported by findings of better memory for ingroup faces ( Golby et al., 2001 ) and by findings of increased fusirom activity to faces from a novel mixed-race ingroup ( Van Bavel et al., 2008 ). By extension, these findings suggest that during imitation in the present study, increased attention may have been given to individuals from racial groups associated with higher social status, which could serve to increase memory for their actions. Effects of socially learned associations have previously been demonstrated within the fusiform gyrus ( Singer et al., 2004 ), even in relation to social status ( Chiao et al., 2009 ;  Zink et al., 2008 ), albeit less frequently. Prior to the present study, however, such socially learned associations had not been demonstrated in the fusiform gyrus in relation to race. 
 It should be noted that low-level visual features of the stimuli (e.g., contrast, spatial frequency, etc.) differed between models from different racial groups; however, we think these visual differences are unlikely to have impacted our main findings for two reasons. First and most importantly, low-level visual features of the stimuli (i.e., actors, lighting, background, etc.) were identical in the imitation condition as during the portrait viewing and gesture observation conditions, but the pattern of activity seen during the imitation condition was only seen during this condition. Second, increased activity in response to AA models was not only seen in early visual areas but also throughout frontoparietal regions associated with imitation, that is, regions not known to be modulated by low-level visual features of stimuli. 
 The present findings during imitation could also be related to any other association with race that both EA and AA participants may hold in reference to AAs. Nevertheless, given that social status and self-similarity are the two model characteristics known to bias imitation and our findings clearly rule our self-similarity and are consistent with social status, we believe that social status associations with different racial groups are the most likely explanation of our findings during imitation. 
 Finally, it is possible that different factors are driving increased activity in response to AAs in AA and EA individuals. A similar explanation was proposed by ( Phelps and LeDoux, 2005 ), who suggested that the heightened amygdala responses to AAs observed in  Lieberman (2005)  were driven by the motivational salience of AAs for the AA participants and negative associations with AAs for the EA participants. We think this type of explanation of our findings is unlikely for two reasons: 1) effects were seen in sensory-motor and association regions rather than exclusively in regions tied to motivational salience (e.g., amygdala and ventral striatum), and 2)  both  groups exhibited ingroup effects during action observation and portrait viewing making a two-factor account for the similar activity observed during imitation less likely. 
 In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that the race of the person being imitated modulates neural activity and imitation accuracy independent of the imitator’s own race. Furthermore, they suggest that social status, rather than racial similarity, is responsible for this racial modulation during imitation. In terms of the neural mechanisms underlying imitation, these findings suggest that complex socially-learned associations beyond mere similarity can be represented in lower- and higher-order sensory-motor systems. In terms of the neural responses to race, these findings suggest that the neural encoding of another person’s race is flexibly modulated by specific task demands, rather than being based primarily on shared racial group membership. Finally, in terms of cultural learning, our findings provide the first, albeit indirect, neural evidence supporting evolutionary theories of imitation biases as adaptive mechanisms of cultural acquisition. 
 
 
 
 We thank Kathleen Quach, Drew Morton and Kambria Nguyen and Zarrar Shehzad for their contributions to stimulus creation, data collection and analysis and Neil Losin, Katy Cross and Jeff Rudie for their helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript. For generous support the authors also wish to thank National Science Foundation Graduate Research fellowship and NIH T90 DA02276, which supported the first author while conducting the research. The project described was supported by a research grant from the FPR - UCLA Center for Culture Brain and Development, and grants made to the UCLA Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center including grant Numbers RR12169, RR13642 and RR00865 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), The Brain Mapping Medical Research Organization, Brain Mapping Support Foundation, Pierson-Lovelace Foundation, The Ahmanson Foundation, William M. and Linda R. Dietel Philanthropic Fund at the Northern Piedmont Community Foundation, Tamkin Foundation, Jennifer Jones-Simon Foundation, Capital Group Companies Charitable Foundation, Robson Family and Northstar Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adler 
 NE 
 
 
 Epel 
 ES 
 
 
 Castellazzo 
 G 
 
 
 Ickovics 
 JR 
 
 
 2000 
 Relationship of subjective and objective social status with psychological and physiological functioning: Preliminary data in healthy, White women 
 Health Psychology 
 19 
 586 
 11129362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ardekani 
 BA 
 
 
 Braun 
 M 
 
 
 Hutton 
 BF 
 
 
 Kanno 
 I 
 
 
 Iida 
 H 
 
 
 1995 
 A fully automatic multimodality image registration algorithm 
 Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 
 19 
 615 
 7622696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bandura 
 A 
 
 
 1977 
 Social learning theory 
 New Jersey 
 Prentice-Hall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barratt 
 W 
 
 
 2005 
 The Barratt simplified measure of social status (BSMSS): Measuring SES 
 Terre Haute 
 Department of Educational Leadership, Administration, and Foundations, Indiana State University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boyd 
 R 
 
 
 Richerson 
 PJ 
 
 
 1985 
 Culture and the evolutionary process 
 University of Chicago Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boyd 
 R 
 
 
 Richerson 
 PJ 
 
 
 1987 
 The evolution of ethnic markers 
 Cultural Anthropology 
 65 
 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Vogt 
 S 
 
 
 Ritzl 
 A 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Freund 
 HJ 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural circuits underlying imitation learning of hand actions: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuron 
 42 
 323 
 334 
 15091346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2010 
 ALE meta-analysis of action observation and imitation in the human brain 
 Neuroimage 
 50 
 1148 
 1167 
 20056149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cheon 
 BK 
 
 
 Im 
 D 
 
 
 Harada 
 T 
 
 
 Kim 
 JS 
 
 
 Mathur 
 VA 
 
 
 Scimeca 
 JM 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Park 
 HW 
 
 
 Chiao 
 JY 
 
 
 2011 
 Cultural influences on neural basis of intergroup empathy 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 642 
 650 
 21549201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiao 
 JY 
 
 
 Harada 
 T 
 
 
 Oby 
 ER 
 
 
 Li 
 Z 
 
 
 Parrish 
 T 
 
 
 Bridge 
 DJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural representations of social status hierarchy in human inferior parietal cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 354 
 363 
 18992759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 KB 
 
 
 Clark 
 MP 
 
 
 1947 
 Racial identification and preference in Negro children 
 Readings in social psychology 
 169 
 178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cousineau 
 D 
 
 
 2005 
 Confidence intervals in within-subject designs: A simpler solution to Loftus and Masson’s method 
 Tutorial in Quantitative Methods for Psychology 
 1 
 42 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cundiff 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 TW 
 
 
 Uchino 
 BN 
 
 
 Berg 
 CA 
 
 
 2011 
 Subjective social status: Construct validity and associations with psychosocial vulnerability and self-rated health 
 International Journal of Behavioral Medicine 
 1 
 11 
 21225385 
 
 
 
 
 R Development Core Team 
 2010 
 R: A language and environment for statistical computing 
 R Foundation for Statistical Computing 
 Vienna Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Désy 
 MC 
 
 
 Théoret 
 H 
 
 
 2007 
 Modulation of motor cortex excitability by physical similarity with an observed hand action 
 PLoS ONE 
 2 
 e971 
 17912350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dunham 
 Y 
 
 
 Baron 
 AS 
 
 
 Banaji 
 MR 
 
 
 2006 
 From American city to Japanese village: a cross-cultural investigation of implicit race attitudes 
 Child Dev 
 77 
 1268 
 1281 
 16999797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eberhardt 
 JL 
 
 
 2005 
 Imaging race 
 Am Psychol 
 60 
 181 
 190 
 15740450 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feinman 
 S 
 
 
 1980 
 Infant response to race, size, proximity, and movement of strangers 
 Infant Behavior and Development 
 3 
 187 
 204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Festinger 
 L 
 
 
 1954 
 A theory of social comparison processes 
 Human relations 
 7 
 117 
 140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiske 
 ST 
 
 
 Cuddy 
 AJC 
 
 
 Glick 
 P 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 A model of (often mixed) stereotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived status and competition 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 82 
 878 
 12051578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiske 
 ST 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Cuddy 
 AC 
 
 
 Glick 
 P 
 
 
 1999 
 (Dis) respecting versus (dis) liking: Status and interdependence predict ambivalent stereotypes of competence and warmth 
 Journal of Social Issues 
 55 
 473 
 489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freeman 
 JB 
 
 
 Penner 
 AM 
 
 
 Saperstein 
 A 
 
 
 Scheutz 
 M 
 
 
 Ambady 
 N 
 
 
 2011 
 Looking the part: social status cues shape race perception 
 PLoS ONE 
 6 
 e25107 
 21977227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Golby 
 AJ 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Chiao 
 JY 
 
 
 Eberhardt 
 JL 
 
 
 2001 
 Differential responses in the fusiform region to same-race and other-race faces 
 Nat Neurosci 
 4 
 845 
 11477432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gutchess 
 AH 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Boduroglu 
 A 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 2006 
 Cultural differences in neural function associated with object processing 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 6 
 102 
 109 
 17007231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henrich 
 J 
 
 
 Gil-White 
 FJ 
 
 
 2001 
 The evolution of prestige - Freely conferred deference as a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission 
 EVOL HUM BEHAV 
 22 
 165 
 196 
 11384884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henrich 
 J 
 
 
 McElreath 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 The Evolution of Cultural Evolution 
 Evolutionary Anthropology 
 12 
 123 
 135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hollingshead 
 AA 
 
 
 1975 
 Four factor index of social status 
 Unpublished Manuscript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ito 
 TA 
 
 
 Bartholow 
 BD 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural correlates of race 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 13 
 524 
 531 
 19896410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karunanayake 
 D 
 
 
 Nauta 
 MM 
 
 
 2004 
 The Relationship Between Race and Students’ Identified Career Role Models and Perceived Role Model Influence 
 The Career Development Quarterly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 DJ 
 
 
 Quinn 
 PC 
 
 
 Slater 
 AM 
 
 
 Lee 
 K 
 
 
 Gibson 
 A 
 
 
 Smith 
 M 
 
 
 Ge 
 L 
 
 
 Pascalis 
 O 
 
 
 2005 
 Three-month-olds, but not newborns, prefer own-race faces 
 Dev Sci 
 8 
 F31 
 F36 
 16246233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 King 
 MM 
 
 
 Multon 
 KD 
 
 
 1996 
 The effects of television role models on the career aspirations of African American junior high school students 
 Journal of Career Development 
 23 
 111 
 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laland 
 KN 
 
 
 2004 
 Social learning strategies 
 Learning & behavior 
 32 
 4 
 14 
 15161136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Hariri 
 A 
 
 
 Jarcho 
 JM 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 2005 
 An fMRI investigation of race-related amygdala activity in African-American and Caucasian-American individuals 
 Nat Neurosci 
 8 
 720 
 722 
 15880106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liebert 
 RM 
 
 
 Sobol 
 MP 
 
 
 Copemann 
 CD 
 
 
 1972 
 Effects of Vicarious Consequences and Race of Model upon Imitative Performance by Black Children 
 Dev Psychol 
 6 
 453 
  456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liew 
 SL 
 
 
 Han 
 S 
 
 
 Aziz-Zadeh 
 L 
 
 
 2010 
 Familiarity modulates mirror neuron and mentalizing regions during intention understanding 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loftus 
 GR 
 
 
 Masson 
 MEJ 
 
 
 1994 
 Using confidence intervals in within-subject designs 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 1 
 476 
 490 
 24203555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Losin 
 EA 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Cross 
 K 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Race modulates neural activity during imitation 
 Neuroimage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Losin 
 EAR 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Culture and neuroscience: additive or synergistic? 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ly 
 M 
 
 
 Haynes 
 MR 
 
 
 Barter 
 JW 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 Zink 
 CF 
 
 
 2011 
 Subjective socioeconomic status predicts human ventral striatal responses to social status information 
 Curr Biol 
 21 
 794 
 797 
 21530264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macrae 
 CN 
 
 
 Bodenhausen 
 GV 
 
 
 2001 
 Social cognition: Categorical person perception 
 British Journal of Psychology 
 92 
 239 
 255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathur 
 VA 
 
 
 Harada 
 T 
 
 
 Chiao 
 JY 
 
 
 2011 
 Racial identification modulates default network activity for same and other races 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathur 
 VA 
 
 
 Harada 
 T 
 
 
 Lipke 
 T 
 
 
 Chiao 
 JY 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural basis of extraordinary empathy and altruistic motivation 
 Neuroimage 
 51 
 1468 
 1475 
 20302945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molnar-Szakacs 
 I 
 
 
 Wu 
 AD 
 
 
 Robles 
 FJ 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Do you see what I mean? Corticospinal excitability during observation of culture-specific gestures 
 PLoS ONE 
 2 
 e626 
 17637842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morey 
 RD 
 
 
 2008 
 Confidence intervals from normalized data: A correction to Cousineau (2005) 
 reason 
 9 
 49 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neely 
 JJ 
 
 
 Hechel 
 RV 
 
 
 Leichtman 
 HM 
 
 
 1973 
 The effect of race of model and response consequences to the model on imitation in children 
 Journal of Social Psychology 
 89 
 225 
 231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 1971 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Operario 
 D 
 
 
 Adler 
 NE 
 
 
 Williams 
 DR 
 
 
 2004 
 Subjective social status: reliability and predictive utility for global health 
 Psychology & Health 
 19 
 237 
 246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Penner 
 AM 
 
 
 Saperstein 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 How social status shapes race 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 105 
 19628 
 19630 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 2005 
 Contributions of the amygdala to emotion processing: from animal models to human behavior 
 Neuron 
 48 
 175 
 187 
 16242399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phinney 
 JS 
 
 
 1992 
 The multigroup ethnic identity measure a new scale for use with diverse groups 
 Journal of adolescent research 
 7 
 156 
 176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 DA 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 D 
 
 
 Hendrick 
 AM 
 
 
 Regard 
 M 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Affective judgments of faces modulate early activity (~ 160 ms) within the fusiform gyri 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 663 
 677 
 12169251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin 
 M 
 
 
 2012 
 Group Status Is Related to Group Prototypicality in the Absence of Social Identity Concerns 
 The Journal of Social Psychology 
 152 
 386 
 389 
 22558832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sellers 
 RM 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Shelton 
 JN 
 
 
 Rowley 
 SAJ 
 
 
 Chavous 
 TM 
 
 
 1998 
 Multidimensional model of racial identity: A reconceptualization of African American racial identity 
 Personality and Social Psychology Review 
 2 
 18 
 39 
 15647149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Winston 
 JS 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2004 
 Brain responses to the acquired moral status of faces 
 Neuron 
 41 
 653 
 662 
 14980212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Drobnjak 
 I 
 
 
 Flitney 
 DE 
 
 
 Niazy 
 RK 
 
 
 Saunders 
 J 
 
 
 Vickers 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 Suppl 1 
 S208 
 S219 
 15501092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tajfel 
 H 
 
 
 1982 
 Social psychology of intergroup relations 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 33 
 1 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tarr 
 MJ 
 
 
 Gauthier 
 I 
 
 
 2000 
 FFA: a flexible fusiform area for subordinate-level visual processing automatized by expertise 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 764 
 770 
 10903568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tajfel 
 H 
 
 
 1974 
 Social identity and intergroup behaviour 
 Social Science Information 
 13 
 65 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thelen 
 MH 
 
 
 1971 
 The effect of subject race, model race, and vicarious praise on vicarious learning 
 Child Dev 
 42 
 972 
 977 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Bavel 
 JJ 
 
 
 Packer 
 DJ 
 
 
 Cunningham 
 WA 
 
 
 2008 
 The neural substrates of in-group bias: a functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation 
 Psychol Sci 
 19 
 1131 
 1139 
 19076485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van den Berghe 
 PLB 
 
 
 1987 
 Ethnicity and Other Bases of Sociality 
 The Ethnic Phenomenon 
 Elsevere 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vogt 
 S 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Wohlschläger 
 AM 
 
 
 Canessa 
 N 
 
 
 Shah 
 NJ 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Freund 
 HJ 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2007 
 Prefrontal involvement in imitation learning of hand actions: effects of practice and expertise 
 Neuroimage 
 37 
 1371 
 1383 
 17698372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Armony 
 JL 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Effects of attention and emotion on face processing in the human brain: an event-related fMRI study 
 NEURON-CAMBRIDGE 
 MA-30 
 829 
 841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 P 
 
 
 Lai 
 CF 
 
 
 Nagasawa 
 R 
 
 
 Lin 
 T 
 
 
 1998 
 Asian Americans as a model minority: Self-perceptions and perceptions by other racial groups 
 Sociological Perspectives 
 41 
 95 
 118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zink 
 CF 
 
 
 Tong 
 Y 
 
 
 Chen 
 Q 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Stein 
 JL 
 
 
 Meyer-Lindenberg 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Know your place: neural processing of social hierarchy in humans 
 Neuron 
 58 
 273 
 283 
 18439411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zirkel 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Is there a place for me? Role models and academic identity among white students and students of color 
 The Teachers College Record 
 104 
 357 
 376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Experimental stimuli and task design. (a) Example stimuli from 4 experimental conditions (green border = imitation, red border = observation). (b) Examples of block structure from the imitate gesture (first row) and view portrait (second row) conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Results from self-report measures of racial self-similarity and social status in both AA and EA participants. (a) Participants’ ratings of their feelings of similarity to stimuli models from the different racial groups (made while looking at model portraits) on a scale from 1 (very dissimilar to me) to 9 (very similar to me). (b) Participants’ ratings of the socioeconomic status associated with each of the racial groups represented in the stimuli using the MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status (MSSSS) ( Adler et al., 2000 ). (c) Participants’ ratings of the socioeconomic status associated with each of the racial groups represented in the stimuli obtained using a modified version of the Barratt Simplified Measure of Social Status (BSMSS) ( Barratt, 2005 ). Individual participant values for each measure were entered into a linear mixed effects model (lme) in R ( Development Core Team, 2010 ) in which subject race and model race or racial group were fixed factors and participant was a random factor. Upper significance bar indicates a participant-race × model race or racial group interaction. Lower significance markers are the result of  post hoc  pairwise comparisons made using Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test. Error bars are standard error. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Comparison between neural regions differentiating between imitation of models from three different racial groups: European American (EA), Chinese American (CA), and African American (AA), in AA and EA participants. Functional activity is thresholded at Z > 2.3 with whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons applied at the cluster level (p < .05), and overlaid on an average T1 weighted structural scan across both groups of participants (n = 39). Values under brains represent the MNI coordinate of the axial (z) or sagittal slice (x). L=left and R=right side of the brain. (a–c) Whole-brain racial comparisons yielding significant differences from all possible pairwise racial comparisons in AA participants (dark blue activity), EA participants (dark red activity) and their overlap (green activity). (d) Results from the only between-group comparison (i.e. participant race × model race interaction) that yielded a significant difference during imitation. Parameter estimates are averaged across the entire significant cluster from the found conditions contributing to the interaction compared to baseline (red bars= EA models and blue bars = AA models). For comparison, parameters are also extracted from the same region for imitation of the CA group compared to baseline (green bars). Error bars represent within subject standard error of the mean, calculated with Cousineau’s adaptation of Loftus & Masson’s method with Morey’s correction ( Cousineau, 2005 ;  Loftus and Masson, 1994 ;  Morey, 2008 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Regions exhibiting differential race effects (model race × participant race interactions) in the imitation condition compared to the non-imitative conditions (3-way interactions). Results are confined to those regions exhibiting effects consistent with the status hypothesis during imitation using a post-threshold mask of overlapping activity between EA and AA participants during imitation (green regions in Figure 4a–c). Bar graphs are of average parameter estimates from each condition contributing the interaction compared to baseline (red bars= EA models and blue bars = AA models). For comparison, parameters for the CA models (green bars) are also extracted from the same regions. Error bars represent within subject standard error of the mean, calculated with Cousineau’s adaptation of Loftus & Masson’s method with Morey’s correction ( Cousineau, 2005 ;  Loftus and Masson, 1994 ;  Morey, 2008 ). (a) Regions exhibiting differential race effects between gesture imitation and gesture observation. (b) Regions exhibiting differential race effects between gesture imitation and portrait viewing. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participant demographics by race 
 
 
 
 
 Measure 
 EA mean 
 SD 
 AA mean 
 SD 
 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age(yr) 
 23.06 
 2.14 
 23.10 
 2.98 
 0.96 
 
 
 Handedness (1 = right. −1 = left) 
 0.69 
 0.18 
 0.69 
 0.26 
 0.98 
 
 
 Socioeconomic status 
 22.11 
 2.85 
 20.53 
 2.93 
 0.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 Handedness scores are from the (Edinburgh Handedness Inventory, [ Oldfield, 1971 ]). Socioeconomic status scores were calculated by converting participants’ self-reported jobs to a numerical score using the nine job categories in the Barratt Simplified Measure of Social Status [ Barratt, 2005 ] and adding them to their self-reported years of education.  P  values are die result of two-tailed independent sample  t -tests between the AA and EA participants. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Participant task-related self-report and behavioral measures 
 
 
 
 
 Measure 
 EA mean 
 SD 
 AA mean 
 SD 
 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 
 Attractiveness EA models 
 5.58 
 1.01 
 5.21 
 1.09 
 0.93 
 
 
 Attractiveness AA models 
 5.5 
 0.92 
 6.06 
 1.42 
 0.67 
 
 
 Attractiveness CA models 
 5.59 
 1.01 
 5.58 
 1.56 
 1 
 
 
 Signs imitated correctly (%) 
 94.08 
 5.07 
 95.61 
 4.22 
 0.33 
 
 
 Signs imitated with errors (%) 
 5.81 
 5.13 
 4.14 
 4.19 
 0.29 
 
 
 Signs not imitated (%) 
 0.11 
 0.21 
 0.25 
 0.68 
 0.41 
 
 
 Mean relative displacement (mm) 
 0.08 
 0.04 
 0.07 
 0.04 
 0.59 
 
 
 Max, relative displacement (mm) 
 0.65 
 0.62 
 0.70 
 0.71 
 0.64 
 
 
 Motion excluded volumes 
 5.26 
 6.39 
 4.45 
 5.42 
 0.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 Model attractiveness scores are participant’s self-reported ratings of the attractiveness of each model (made while looking at a portrait of that model) averaged across the four models form each racial group. Attractiveness ratings were made on a scale from 1 (very unattractive) to 9 (very attractive). Imitation accuracy scores are the percentage of hand signs receiving each accuracy rating (sign imitated correctly = 2, sign imitated with error = 1, and sign not imitated = 0). Motion excluded volumes are the average number of volumes (out of 362) excluded per run.  P  values for attractiveness ratings reflect between-group comparisons performed using Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test after all attractiveness scores were entered into a linear mixed effects model (Ime) in R in which subject race and model race or racial group were fixed factors and participant was a random factor. All other  P  values come from two-tailed independent sample  t -tests between the AA and EA participants. 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE III 
 
 Anatomical regions differentiating between model races during imitation for AA participants 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical region 
 Side 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imitate AA models > imitate EA models 
 
 
   Superior frontal gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 2 
 
 54 
 
 
 40 
 
 
 4.03 
 
 
 
   Inferior frontal gyrus, po 
 
 R 
 
 
 58 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 3.74 
 
 
 
   Frontal pole 
 
 R 
 
 
 54 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 3.18 
 
 
 
   Postcentral gyrus 
 
 R 
 
 
 48 
 
 − 24 
 
 42 
 
 
 3.37 
 
 
 
   Supramarginal gyrus, ad 
 
 L 
 
 − 44 
 − 38 
 
 42 
 
 
 3.35 
 
 
 
   Temporal occipital fusiform 
 
 R 
 
 
 36 
 
 − 42 
 − 20 
 
 4.60 
 
 
 
  Temporal pole 
 L 
 −42 
 24 
 −28 
 3.45 
 
 
  Middle temporal gyrus, pd 
 
 R 
 
 
 68 
 
 − 8 
 − 16 
 
 3.43 
 
 
 
  Middle temporal gyrus, to 
 R 
 64 
 −50 
 −8 
 3.06 
 
 
   Lateral occipital cortex, sd 
 
 L 
 
 
 44 
 
 − 80 
 
 18 
 
 
 4.69 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 28 
 
 − 60 
 
 42 
 
 
 4.00 
 
 
 
  Lateral occipital cortex, id 
 L 
 −36 
 −66 
 −14 
 5.40 
 
 
 
 R 
 38 
 −74 
 −12 
 5.74 
 
 
  Occipital pole 
 L 
 −34 
 −94 
 0 
 4.53 
 
 
 
 R 
 14 
 −88 
 34 
 3.46 
 
 
  Intracalcarine cortex 
 R 
 14 
 −76 
 6 
 3.20 
 
 
  Amygdala 
 L 
 −20 
 −4 
 −20 
 3.80 
 
 
 
 R 
 20 
 −6 
 −14 
 4.69 
 
 
  Parahippocampal Gyrus, pd 
 L 
 −16 
 −34 
 −4 
 3.17 
 
 
  Thalamus 
 R 
 16 
 −28 
 10 
 2.89 
 
 
 Imitate AA models > imitate CA models 
 
 
   Inferior frontal gyrus, po 
 
 R 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 4.35 
 
 
 
   Frontal pole 
 
 L 
 
 − 2 
 
 64 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 3.76 
 
 
 
   Precentral gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 40 
 
 2 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 3.61 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 38 
 
 − 2 
 
 54 
 
 
 3.50 
 
 
 
  Frontal orbital cortex 
 
 L 
 
 − 28 
 
 36 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 2.90 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 32 
 32 
 −18 
 3.55 
 
 
   Paracingulate gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 4 
 
 12 
 
 
 50 
 
 
 3.34 
 
 
 
   Middle frontal gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 32 
 − 4 
 
 62 
 
 
 3.16 
 
 
 
   Superior frontal gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 18 
 
 38 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 3.12 
 
 
 
   Superior parietal lobule 
 
 L 
 
 − 34 
 − 54 
 
 56 
 
 
 4.34 
 
 
 
   Supramarginal gyrus, pd 
 R 
 44 
 −36 
 50 
 4.08 
 
 
   Postcentral gyrus 
 
 L 
 
 − 40 
 − 28 
 
 42 
 
 
 3.65 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 62 
 
 − 16 
 
 28 
 
 
 3.36 
 
 
 
  Angular gyrus 
 R 
 56 
 −50 
 24 
 3.28 
 
 
  Amygdala 
 L 
 −16 
 −8 
 −14 
 4.30 
 
 
 
 R 
 18 
 −6 
 −14 
 4.60 
 
 
  Inferior temporal gyrus, to 
 R 
 58 
 −54 
 −18 
 3.67 
 
 
  Middle temporal gyrus, ad 
 R 
 64 
 −6 
 −18 
 3.62 
 
 
  Temporal pole 
 L 
 −38 
 20 
 −24 
 3.34 
 
 
   Occipital fusiform gyrus 
 
 R 
 
 
 36 
 
 − 74 
 − 10 
 
 6.06 
 
 
 
  Temporal occipital fusiform 
 L 
 −34 
 −62 
 −16 
 5.83 
 
 
   Lateral occipital cortex, sd 
 
 L 
 
 − 28 
 − 74 
 
 24 
 
 
 5.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 32 
 
 − 78 
 
 20 
 
 
 5.17 
 
 
 
  Occipital pole 
 L 
 −32 
 −94 
 −4 
 4.38 
 
 
  Supracalcarine cortex 
 L 
 −4 
 −86 
 10 
 3.72 
 
 
  Lingual gyrus 
 R 
 18 
 −40 
 −4 
 3.43 
 
 
   Cerebellum 
 
 L 
 
 − 6 
 − 84 
 − 42 
 
 3.61 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 34 
 
 − 74 
 − 54 
 
 3.63 
 
 
 
   Cingulate gyrus, pd 
 
 L 
 
 − 4 
 − 48 
 
 32 
 
 
 4.00 
 
 
 
  Precuneus cortex 
 L 
 −2 
 −80 
 40 
 3.74 
 
 
 Imitate EA models > CA models 
 
 
  Superior frontal gyrus 
 L 
 −24 
 6 
 58 
 3.03 
 
 
 
 R 
 12 
 16 
 70 
 3.37 
 
 
  Paracingulate gyrus 
 
 0 
 46 
 26 
 3.25 
 
 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 L 
 −6 
 −48 
 68 
 3.44 
 
 
  Cingulate gyrus, pd 
 R 
 10 
 −38 
 42 
 3.19 
 
 
   Precuneus 
 
 R 
 
 
 18 
 
 − 68 
 
 42 
 
 
 2.51 
 
 
 
   Cuneal cortex 
 
 R 
 
 
 8 
 
 − 84 
 
 18 
 
 
 3.94 
 
 
 
  Occipital fusiform gyrus 
 L 
 −28 
 −78 
 16 
 3.55 
 
 
   Lateral occipital cortex, sd 
 
 L 
 
 − 22 
 − 70 
 
 52 
 
 
 3.52 
 
 
 
   Temporal occipital fusiform 
 
 L 
 
 − 32 
 − 54 
 − 16 
 
 3.24 
 
 
 
  Occipital fusiform gyrus 
 L 
 −18 
 −88 
 −14 
 3.09 
 
 
  Caudate 
 R 
 10 
 6 
 10 
 3.30 
 
 
   Cerebellum 
 
 
 0 
 
 − 62 
 − 16 
 
 3.77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolded regions are those where a corresponding local maximum in the EA group fell in the same anatomical region. Local maxima were the highest  Z  values within activated regions falling at least 15 mm apart. Anatomical regions for each maximum were assigned using the Harvard-Oxford Cortical and Subcortical probabilistic atlases. Only the first maximum within each anatomical region on each side of the brain is listed. Maxima are grouped by lobe in the following order: frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, subcortical, cerebellum. po = pars opercularis, ad = anterior division, sd = superior division, id = inferior division, to = tempor-ooccipital part. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Between-group differences in anatomical regions differentiating between model races during imitation (two-way interactions) and their differences with the non-imitative conditions (three-way interactions) 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Region 
 Side 
 
 X 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 AA participants vs. EA participants 
 
 
 Two-way interaction 
 
 
 Imitate AA Actors vs. Imitate EA Actors 
 
 
 Superior frontal gyrus 
 R 
 16 
 −8 
 60 
 3.62 
 
 
 Superior frontal gyrus 
 L 
 −24 
 6 
 62 
 3.22 
 
 
 Cingulate gyrus, ad 
 L 
 −2 
 6 
 40 
 3.32 
 
 
 Three-way interactions 
 
 
 Imitate AA actors vs. imitate EA actors 
 
 
 Gesture imitation > gesture observation 
 
 
 Temporal occipital fusiform 
 R 
 34 
 −50 
 −10 
 3.54 
 
 
 Lateral occipital cortex, id 
 R 
 52 
 −62 
 14 
 3.14 
 
 
 Occipital pole 
 R 
 30 
 −92 
 −4 
 3.11 
 
 
 Imitate AA actors vs. imitate EA actors 
 
 
 Gesture imitation > portrait viewing 
 
 
 Occipital fusiform gyrus 
 L 
 −28 
 −74 
 −10 
 3.75 
 
 
 
 R 
 28 
 −70 
 −4 
 3.25 
 
 
 Occipital pole 
 L 
 −28 
 −96 
 14 
 2.94 
 
 
 
 
 
 Local maxima were the highest  Z  values within activated regions falling at least 15 mm apart. Anatomical regions for each maximum were assigned using the Harvard-Oxford Cortical and Subcortical probabilistic atlases. Only the first maximum within each anatomical region on each side of the brain is listed. Maxima are grouped by lobe in the following order: frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, subcortical, cerebellum, id = inferior division. 
 
 
 
 
