
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9814574 
 31973 
 Dev Sci 
 Dev Sci 
 
 Developmental science 
 
 1363-755X 
 1467-7687 
 
 
 24033579 
 3775008 
 10.1111/desc.12056 
 NIHMS446797 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural responses to witnessing peer rejection after being socially excluded: fMRI as a window into adolescents’ emotional processing 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 Carrie L. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 Naomi I. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 Jennifer H. 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 Mirella 
 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University 
 2 Department of Psychology, University of University of California, Los Angeles 
 3 Department of Psychology, University of Oregon 
 4 Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los Angeles 
 5 Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of California, Los Angeles 
 6 Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles 
 7 FPR-UCLA Center for Culture, Brain and Development, University of California, Los Angeles 
 
 Corresponding author: Carrie L. Masten, Department of Psychology and Human Development, Peabody College, 230 Appleton Place, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203-5721, Phone: (651) 592-8716,  carrie.masten@gmail.com 
 
 
 11 
 3 
 2013 
 
 
 08 
 6 
 2013 
 
 
 9 
 2013 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2014 
 
 16 
 5 
 743 
 759 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 During adolescence, concerns about peer rejection and acceptance become increasingly common. Adolescents regularly experience peer rejection firsthand and witness these behaviors among their peers. In the current study, neuroimaging techniques were employed to conduct a preliminary investigation of the affective and cognitive processes involved in witnessing peer acceptance and rejection—specifically when these witnessed events occur in the immediate aftermath of a firsthand experience with rejection. During an fMRI scan, twenty-three adolescents underwent a simulated experience of firsthand peer rejection. Then, immediately following this experience they watched as another adolescent was ostensibly first accepted and then rejected. Findings indicated that in the immediate aftermath of being rejected by peers, adolescents displayed neural activity consistent with distress when they saw another peer being accepted, and neural activity consistent with emotion regulation and mentalizing (e.g., perspective-taking) processes when they saw another peer being rejected. Furthermore, individuals displaying a heightened sensitivity to firsthand rejection were more likely to show neural activity consistent with distress when observing a peer being accepted. Findings are discussed in terms of how witnessing others being accepted or rejected relates to adolescents’ interpretations of both firsthand and observed experiences with peers. Additionally, the potential impact that witnessed events might have on the broader perpetuation of bullying at this age is also considered. 
 
 
 peer rejection 
 peer acceptance 
 adolescence 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 bullying 
 
 
 
 National Center for Research Resources : NCRR 
 C06 RR012169-01 || RR 
 
 
 
 
 Adolescence is a time when the importance of peer relationships rapidly increases. When young adolescents make the transition to middle school, it is common to spend more time with peers, place greater value on peers’ approval, and be more concerned about peer acceptance ( Brown, 2004 ;  Brown & Larson, 2009 ). As the importance of peers increases, peer rejection and bullying become increasingly prevalent (e.g.,  Brown, 2004 ) and have negative effects on psychological adjustment ( Arseneault, Bowes, & Shakoor, 2010 ;  Brendgen & Vitaro, 2008 ;  Flanagan, Erath, & Bierman, 2008 ;  Isaacs, Hodges, & Salmivalli, 2008 ;  Kaltiala-Heino, Frojd, & Marttunen, 2010 ;  Rigby, 2000 ,  2003 ;  Trentacosta & Shaw, 2009 ). Moreover, adolescents are affected not only by personal experiences with rejection, but also by the larger environment in which rejection is common ( Janes & Olson, 2000 ;  Nishina & Juvonen, 2005 ). Indeed, the majority of adolescents witness peer rejection on a regular basis ( Rivers, Poteat, Noret, & Ashurst, 2009 ), and they observe peer rejection just as often as they experience this treatment firsthand ( Nishina & Juvonen, 2005 ). Thus, frequent experience with rejection is common for the majority of adolescents, regardless of their social status or the extent to which they experience peer rejection firsthand. 
 Witnessing the peer interactions of others is likely to impact adolescents in many ways that potentially influence how they respond to peer rejection and bullying. In some cases, comparing the rejection or acceptance of others to one’s firsthand experiences with peers might alter how adolescents interpret and respond to their firsthand experiences, as would be predicted by social comparison theory ( Festinger, 1954 ). In other words, witnessing others being rejected might prove beneficial insofar as it mitigates one’s own hurt feelings about a firsthand experience with peer rejection. For example, for an individual who frequently experiences rejection, witnessing others’ rejection might promote the belief that rejection is a common event and reduce feelings of injustice (i.e., ‘this happens to everyone, it isn’t just me’; see  Brannon & Brock, 2001 ;  Ditto & Jemmott, 1989 ). This, in turn, might instill the belief that one’s past experiences being rejected were not necessarily personal, which could help reduce self-blame. Conversely, seeing others getting accepted or included might enhance feelings of distress about one’s recent rejection, because it signals that one’s experience being rejected was indeed personal. Thus, affective responses to firsthand peer rejection might be moderated (i.e., either enhanced or reduced) by the experience of witnessing others being rejected or accepted by peers. 
 More broadly, if adolescents are frequently witnessing peer rejection and other forms of bullying on a regular basis, this might also impact their beliefs about, and tolerance of, bullying behaviors more generally. For example, if adolescents see others being harassed or victimized on a regular basis, some degree of habituation and/or desensitization might occur, as suggested by desensitization theory (see  Engelhardt, Bartholow, Kerr, & Bushman, 2011 ; Rule & Ferguson, 1986). So, to the extent that adolescents feel less distressed about their own firsthand experiences of peer rejection as a result of seeing the rejection of others, there may be some long-term comfort in knowing that these events are commonplace. In other words, if witnessing the ridicule of classmates is both frequent and in some cases comforting (i.e., to the degree that it mitigates the affective consequences of being rejected oneself), this may eventually lead to an implicit acceptance of bullying behaviors that contributes to the perpetuation of these behaviors over time. Thus, understanding how observed peer interactions impact affective processing among adolescents could also provide new insight about how bullying becomes mainstream and relatively acceptable at this particular age (see also  Dijkstra, Lindenberg, & Veenstra, 2008 ). 
 Despite the potential links between witnessing others’ peer interactions and adolescents’ responses to their own firsthand experiences, as well as broader implications for understanding bullying behaviors during adolescence more generally, there is a dearth of research on this topic. In addition, the mechanisms via which witnessing others’ experiences might moderate one’s own affective processes are poorly understood. Prior studies that have examined adolescents’ experiences witnessing peer rejection have typically relied on self-reports. Although these self-reports have often been collected in clever ways that minimize bias (i.e., daily reports of peer-related events and affect;  Nishina & Juvonen, 2005 ), additional techniques are warranted. 
 Here, our goal was to use fMRI to examine one particular way in which witnessing another person’s interactions with peers might relate to one’s own affective processing. Specifically, we examined adolescents’ affective responses (indexed by brain activity) while observing another adolescent being included (versus excluded) by peers, immediately following a firsthand experience of peer exclusion. fMRI is particularly useful in this case, because it permits the examination of neural activity underlying affective processes in the moment that social interactions are occurring. In other words, with fMRI we can gain insight into how affective responses might vary when an individual is witnessing a peer being accepted versus rejected, and examine how these affective responses relate to a particular individual’s sensitivity to rejection more broadly. Thus, neuroimaging is an ideal tool with which to expand our knowledge of how witnessing peer interactions impacts adolescents’ affective processes. 
 A handful of previous studies have used neuroimaging techniques to examine both firsthand ( Crowley, Wu., Molfese, & Mayes, 2010 ;  Masten et al., 2009 ,  Masten et al., 2011a ;  Masten et al., 2011b ;  Sebastian et al., 2010 ) and observed ( Masten, Eisenberger, Pfeifer, Colich, & Dapretto, 2013 ;  Masten, Eisenberger, Pfeifer, & Dapretto, 2010a ) experiences of peer rejection among adolescents. Thus, we have begun to identify some of the neural regions involved in the affective and cognitive processes involved in experiencing and witnessing peer rejection at this age. Although none of these previous studies examined neural activity involved in both firsthand and observed experiences of peer rejection within the same individuals, they provide a useful framework. 
 In our previous examination of firsthand peer rejection—in which we focused specifically on peer exclusion, we found that both the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC) and the anterior insula (AI) displayed heightened activity during peer exclusion compared to inclusion, particularly to the extent that adolescents reported being more distressed by the exclusion experience ( Masten et al., 2009 ). As a whole, this work is consistent with other research in adolescents linking insula activity to experiences of social exclusion ( Crowley, Wu., Molfese, & Mayes, 2010 ) and peer evaluation ( Guyer, McClure-Tone, Shiffrin, Pine & Nelson, 2009 ), and anterior cingulate activity (in both Brodmann Areas 24 and 32) to experiences of relational aggression ( Baird, Silver, & Veague, 2010 ). In addition, it is consistent with prior research in adults that has linked the AI to a wide array of affective processing, including distress responses to social exclusion in particular (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003;  DeWall et al., 2010 ;  Kross et al., 2007 ;  Masten, Telzer, & Eisenberger, 2011 ) and other types of aversive stimuli (e.g.,  Phan et al., 2004 ), as well as research which has linked the subACC with affective responses to rejection-related processes (e.g.,  Burklund et al., 2007 ) and atypical functioning in depressed populations (e.g.,  Chen et al., 2007 ;  Keedwell et al., 2008 ). 
 Our previous work also demonstrated that when adolescents felt less distressed during peer exclusion (versus inclusion) they displayed greater activity in the ventral striatum (VS) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC;  Masten et al., 2009 ;  Masten et al., 2011a ). These findings are consistent with previous research that has linked the VS to emotion regulatory processes in adults ( Wager et al., 2008 ) and adolescents ( Pfeifer et al., 2011 ) and the VLPFC to a variety of emotion regulation processes ( Hariri, Bookheimer, Mazziotta, 2000 ;  Lieberman, Jarcho, & Satpute, 2004 ;  Lieberman, et al., 2007 ;  Petrovic & Ingvar, 2002 ), including the regulation of distress resulting from social exclusion in adults (e.g., Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003) and experiences of relational aggression in adolescents ( Baird, Silver, & Veague, 2010 ). Finally, this previous work also examined the relationship between self-reported rejection sensitivity and neural responses to firsthand peer exclusion. Findings revealed that adolescents reporting higher levels of rejection sensitivity displayed greater levels of neural activity consistent with affective/distress processing (i.e., dACC) and mentalizing (i.e., precuneus;  Masten et al., 2009 ). 
 In terms of witnessing peer rejection, our prior work has indicated that adolescents display greater activity during observed peer exclusion (versus inclusion) in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), and the precuneus ( Masten et al., 2010a ). More generally, these three regions have been linked to a larger neural network involved in ‘mentalizing’—a term which broadly includes making judgments about the thoughts, intentions, and feelings of others—and there is growing evidence that the MPFC is particularly important for adolescents’ understanding of others’ perspectives, affect and social emotions (e.g.,  Burnett, Bird, Moll, Frith, & Blakemore, 2009 ;  Pfeifer et al., 2009 ;  Sebastian et al., 2012 ;  Wang, Lee, Sigman, & Dapretto, 2006 ). In addition to the DMPFC, MPFC and precuneus, this larger mentalizing network is commonly thought to include the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), the temporal parietal junction (TPJ), the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and the temporal poles, and these regions within the mentalizing network have been linked to a variety of cognitive abilities that let individuals understand others’ mental states and emotions ( Beer & Hughes, 2010 ;  Frith & Frith, 1999 ,  2003 ,  2006 ;  Hynes et al., 2006 ;  Mitchell, Banaji, & Macrae, 2005 ;  Saxe, 2006 ;  Sebastian et al., 2012 ;  Singer, 2006 ). Thus, in the case of peer rejection specifically, activity in this mentalizing network might reflect a variety of underlying cognitive processes—for example, efforts to understand why the rejection is occurring or how the victim is feeling, feelings of empathy for the victim, or reasoning about the perpetrators’ motives for rejecting the victim. 
 Finally, additional prior research examining empathic and vicarious experiences has also indicated that there is likely overlap between some of the brain regions linked to peer rejection and the brain regions that are involved in ‘mirroring’ others’ emotions (i.e., the more affective component of empathy in which observers share the emotional experiences of others). For example, the anterior insula is activated by both direct and observed experiences of disgust ( Wicker et al., 2003 ), and the dACC and anterior insula are activated by direct and observed physical pain in adults ( Botvinick et al., 2005 ;  Jackson, Bruney, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2005 ;  Morrison, Lloyd, Di Pellegrino, Giuseppe, & Roberts, 2004 ;  Singer et al., 2004 ;  Singer et al., 2006 ) and children ( Decety, Michalska, & Akitsuki, 2008 ). The insula is also activated among children when they both observe and make emotional face expressions ( Pfeifer, Iacoboni, Mazziotta, & Dapretto, 2008 ). These studies provide additional support for the notion that experiences of peer exclusion and experiences involving empathy and vicarious emotions share similar neural substrates and likely interact in interesting ways. 
 In the current study we aimed to examine the experience of witnessing peer inclusion and exclusion, immediately following an experience of firsthand exclusion, and we focused primarily on these regions known to be involved in firsthand and observed peer rejection from prior work. During an fMRI scan, we first simulated an experience of firsthand peer exclusion to elicit the affective responses associated with peer rejection (neural responses to firsthand exclusion for the current sample are published elsewhere;  Masten et al., 2009 ). Then, in the immediate aftermath of this firsthand exclusion, the participant observed a new adolescent ostensibly being included, and then excluded, by the same two players who had excluded the participant previously. Neural activity during this observed Cyberball was the focus of the current analyses. Specifically, we were interested in examining two primary research questions. First, what affective processes are involved in witnessing the acceptance versus rejection of another adolescent, immediately following a firsthand experience of peer rejection? Second, how do individual differences in rejection sensitivity relate to adolescents’ affective states when they are witnessing this peer acceptance versus rejection? Given that adolescents vary in terms of both their neural sensitivity to peer rejection, as well as their subjective sensitivity to peer rejection ( Downey & Feldman, 1996 ;  Masten et al., 2009 ), we examined how neural activity during observed peer acceptance versus rejection related to two different indices of rejection sensitivity: (a) neural sensitivity in response to the distress of firsthand peer rejection, and (b) self-reported rejection sensitivity. 
 First, we hypothesized that adolescents would display more neural activity consistent with distress (i.e., greater activity in the subACC and AI) when they watched another adolescent being included compared to when they saw him or her being excluded. In other words, we expected that adolescents might feel worse when they saw that it was ‘just them’ who had been excluded. In contrast, when the participant saw a new adolescent being excluded (compared to included) by the same two peers that excluded the participant previously, we expected participants to display more activity in regions previously linked with emotion regulation (e.g., VLPFC and VS), because then the rejection would likely be perceived as more ‘common’ and not personal. Of course, in many cases seeing a peer being excluded might induce distress in an adolescent witness—either due to empathy and vicarious distress felt for the victim, or because witnessing exclusion might remind the adolescent of their own prior rejection experiences. However, since adolescents in the current study observed a peer being included and then excluded immediately following a firsthand experience of exclusion, we expected their responses to these witnessed events to specifically relate to their interpretation of their own previous rejection (i.e., was it personal, or are they players just mean to everyone?), and not necessarily reflect their responses when they observe peers being rejected in other types of contexts. 
 Next, when watching someone else interacting with peers, we also expected to see neural activity in regions linked to mentalizing. However, it was less clear whether we would see more activity consistent with mentalizing while observing someone being included, or while observing someone being excluded. One possibility is that we would see more neural activity consistent with mentalizing during observed inclusion (versus exclusion), when adolescents are feeling worse about their own rejection and potentially trying harder to understand the perpetrators’ reasons for excluding them. However, an alternate possibility is that we would see more neural activity consistent with mentalizing during observed exclusion (versus inclusion), when adolescents are likely feeling comforted by the apparent impersonal nature of the exclusion and feeling relieved that they now understand why they were excluded (i.e., ‘they do this to everyone’). Finally, of course, a third possibility is that adolescents might display activity consistent with mentalizing similarly during both observed exclusion and inclusion. Thus, our goal was to use neuroimaging to gain insight into these possibilities. 
 Our last hypothesis was that among adolescents displaying heightened sensitivity to rejection (i.e., either more neural activity consistent with distress during firsthand rejection or higher self-reported rejection sensitivity), there would be greater neural activity in affective/distress regions while witnessing another person’s inclusion versus exclusion. In others words, since previous research has indicated that adolescents who are highly sensitive to rejection show more neural activity consistent with distress (e.g., dACC;  Masten et al., 2009 ), we expected that these adolescents would also feel more hurt when they saw someone else getting included right after they had just been excluded—likely because it would indicate that their firsthand rejection was indeed personal and thus more distressing. In addition, since previous work has also revealed more activity in mentalizing-related regions among adolescents who are highly sensitive to rejection during firsthand rejection (e.g., precuneus;  Masten et al., 2009 ), we also explored whether we would see similar neural activity consistent with mentalizing in these adolescents as they were observing a peer being included following a firsthand experience of rejection. 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants 
 Participants included an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse sample of 23 adolescents (14 females) from the greater Los Angeles area. All participants had attended at least one year of middle school and ranged in age from 12.4 to 13.6 years old ( M =13.0); boys and girls did not differ in terms of their mean age. This age range was chosen based on previous research characterizing the middle school transition as a time of heightened salience of peer relationships resulting from both concern about peer acceptance as well as increased prevalence of both firsthand and observed experiences of peer rejection (e.g.,  Brown, 2004 ). Participants came from a variety of ethnic backgrounds, including 52% Caucasian, 26% Latino, 9% African-American, 9% Asian, and 4% Native American. Ethnic distributions for boys and girls were similar; 78% of boys were Caucasian and 22% were Latino, while 50% of girls were Caucasian, 29% were half-Caucasian, and 21% were Latino, African-American or Asian. Participants were recruited through mass mailings, summer camps, and fliers distributed in the community. All participants and parents provided assent/consent to participate in the study, which was approved by UCLA’s Institutional Review Board. This sample is identical to that examined in  Masten et al. (2009) , and overlaps with the sample examined in  Masten et al. (2011b) . However, all analyses and findings described below are new and have not been reported previously. 
 
 
 The Cyberball Task 
 To simulate firsthand and observed peer rejection during an fMRI scan, we used the game “Cyberball” ( Figure 1A ). Cyberball is an animated experimental paradigm that simulates a real interactive experience of social exclusion ( Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000 ;  Williams et al., 2002 ). It has been used successfully in previous neuroimaging studies to simulate the experience of peer rejection among adolescents ( Masten et al., 2009 ,  Masten et al., 2011a ;  Masten et al., 2011b ;  Sebastian et al., 2010 ) and adults (e.g.,  DeWall, 2010 ; 2011; Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003;  Eisenberger et al., 2007 ;  Masten, Telzer, & Eisenberger, 2011 ;  Masten et al., 2010b ), as well as the experience of observing another person being rejected among adolescents ( Masten et al., 2010a ) and adults ( Masten, Morelli, & Eisenberger, 2011 ). We chose this simulated experience of social exclusion as a proxy for peer rejection based on research indicating that during early adolescence, isolating peers from social groups is one of the dominant methods used to reject peers ( Coie, Dodge, & Kupersmidt, 1990 ). 
 
 Firsthand Cyberball 
 Participants first played the Cyberball game with two players that they believed were real adolescent peers. Cyberball consists of a simple ball-tossing game, and participants were told that they would play this game via the Internet with two other adolescents in scanners at other institutions, to examine coordinated neural activity. These other ‘players’ were not real and were just part of the computer paradigm. On a screen displayed through fMRI compatible goggles, participants saw cartoon images representing these other players, and a cartoon image of their own ‘hand’ that they controlled using a button-box. Throughout the game the ball is thrown back and forth among the three players, with the participant choosing the recipient of their own throws, and the throws of the other two ‘players’ determined by the pre-set program. Participants completed two different rounds of firsthand Cyberball during two fMRI scans: one in which they were ‘included’ throughout the game, and one in which they were ‘excluded’ by the other players ( Figure 1B ). Throughout the inclusion round, the computerized players were equally likely to throw the ball to the participant or the other player. During the exclusion round, the players stopped throwing the ball to the participant after the participant had received a total of 10 throws, and the participant just watched the remainder of the game. Each round of Cyberball consisted of 60 ball tosses total, including all the participants’ tosses as well as the tosses of the two simulated players. Thus, the exclusion portion of the second round, following the participant’s first 10 throws, consisted of half the total number of ball tosses and lasted for approximately half of the round or about 60 seconds (depending on the time that it took each participant to throw the ball after having received it). 
 
 
 Witnessed Cyberball 
 After actually playing the game, participants  observed  a game of Cyberball during a third scan ( Figure 1B ), in which they believed they were watching a new adolescent player (who was their age and gender) playing with the same two peers who had previously excluded the participant in the preceding game. This ‘new player’ was first included, and then ultimately excluded, just as the participant was previously. The observed game of Cyberball was presented on a screen displayed through fMRI compatible goggles. Participants saw cartoon images representing the three players that they were observing. Although they believed they were watching a live interaction occurring via the Internet, they were actually watching a prerecorded video. Throughout the game, the participant watched as the ball was thrown back and forth among the three players (the ‘new player’ and the two players that excluded the participant previously). For the first half of the game (approximately 30 tosses), all three players received the ball an equal amount. Then, during the second half of the game, the new player was excluded by the other two players, and did not receive any more throws for the duration of the game. The exclusion of the new player very closely mirrored the exclusion of the participant in the preceding Cyberball game (i.e., exclusion occurred approximately half way through the game). 
 Throughout the playing and observation of the Cyberball games, extensive measures were taken to maintain the believability of the cover story and to ensure that participants believed that they were playing with and/or observing real adolescents (e.g., between runs, participants were asked to wait for a short time while one of the ‘players’ had their goggles adjusted). Upon exiting the scanner, participants completed questionnaires and were fully debriefed about the deception involved in the study. During this debriefing session, participants were probed to determine whether they had believed the manipulation. Three of the 23 participants expressed suspicions about whether the other players were real after being scanned, and two participants thought that there might have been computer glitches that caused certain players to be excluded. The remaining 18 participants believed the deception and did not indicate that they were suspicious prior to being debriefed. 
 
 
 
 Behavioral Measures 
 
 Manipulation check 
 A manipulation check was administered to ensure that participants were engaged throughout both the firsthand and observed games of Cyberball, and aware of their own exclusion, as well as that of the observed player. Following completion of Cyberball, participants were asked how often they (or the new player during the observed round) received the ball during the game. 
 
 
 Distress resulting from firsthand rejection 
 Following completion of the scan, adolescents completed the Need-Threat Scale (NTS;  Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000 ;  Williams et al., 2002 ) to measure distress associated with the firsthand exclusion. The NTS assesses 12 subjectively experienced consequences of being excluded during the game (e.g., “I felt rejected”, “I felt invisible”), on a scale ranging from 1=“not at all” to 5=“very much”. 
 
 
 Rejection sensitivity 
 In addition, earlier in the day that participants underwent the fMRI scan, they also completed the Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire for Children (RSQ;  Downey & Feldman, 1996 ), interspersed with other questionnaires unrelated to the current study. The RSQ assesses the importance of being socially accepted as well as anxiety and beliefs about the likelihood of being accepted, on a scale ranging from 1=“not at all anxious”/“expect to be accepted”, to 6=“very anxious”/ “expect to be rejected”. 
 
 
 
 fMRI Data Acquisition 
 Images were collected using a Siemens Allegra 3-Tesla MRI scanner. Adolescents were given extensive instructions to decrease motion, and head motion was restrained with foam padding and surgical tape. One of the subjects originally recruited for the study was excluded due to motion in excess of 1.5mm, resulting in the final sample of 23 participants described above. The Cyberball task was presented on a computer screen, which was projected through scanner-compatible goggles. 
 For each participant, an initial 2D spin-echo image (TR=4000ms, TE=40ms, matrix size 256 × 256, 4mm thick, 1mm gap) in the sagittal plane was acquired to enable prescription of slices obtained in structural and functional scans. In addition, a high-resolution structural scan (echo planar T2-weighted spin-echo, TR=4000ms, TE=54ms, matrix size 128×128, FOV=20cm, 36 slices, 1.56mm in-plane resolution, 3mm thick) coplanar with the functional scans was obtained for functional image registration during fMRI analysis preprocessing. The observed game of Cyberball was completed during one functional scan lasting 2 minutes, 48 seconds (echo planar T2*-weighted gradient-echo, TR=2000ms, TE=25ms, flip angle=90°, matrix size 64×64, 36 axial slices, FOV=20cm; 3-mm thick, skip 1mm). 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 All neuroimaging data was preprocessed and analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5; Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, Institute of Neurology, London, UK). Preprocessing for each individual’s images included image realignment to correct for head motion, normalization into a standard stereotactic space as defined by the Montreal Neurological Institute and the International Consortium for Brain Mapping, and spatial smoothing using an 8mm Gaussian kernel, full width at half maximum, to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Cyberball was modeled as a block design. The observed game of Cyberball was modeled as a run with each period of inclusion and exclusion modeled as a block within the run for a total of one observed inclusion block, and one observed exclusion block. A high pass filter was applied at twice the length of each condition block (120 seconds for observed exclusion, 240 seconds for observed inclusion), to reduce noise due to temporal drift. After modeling the Cyberball paradigm, linear contrasts were calculated for each planned condition comparison for each participant. These individual contrast images were then used in whole-brain, group-level, random-effects analyses across all participants. 
 
 Whole-brain, main effect analyses 
 To examine what neural regions were more active when participants were observing an adolescent being included (by the two peers who had previously excluded the participant), we performed a group-level test at each voxel across the entire brain volume that examined the direct comparison between observed inclusion and observed exclusion. In addition, we also examined the reverse contrast—observed exclusion compared to observed inclusion. 
 
 
 Whole-brain, regression analyses 
 Next, we sought to examine whether adolescents displaying heightened sensitivity to rejection (i.e., either more neural activity consistent with distress during firsthand rejection or higher self-reported rejection sensitivity), would display greater neural activity in affective/distress regions while witnessing another person’s inclusion versus exclusion. First, we examined whether participants’ neural sensitivity to distress during their preceding firsthand experience of exclusion related to differential activity during their subsequent observation of inclusion compared to exclusion. To do this, we extracted parameter estimates from the specific clusters within the subACC (−6 22 −12) and AI (−46 8 −4) that were previously found (via whole-brain regressions conducted in SPM5) to display significantly greater activity during firsthand exclusion to the extent that participants were more distressed by firsthand exclusion (see  Masten et al., 2009  for details of how these clusters were identified). Then, we conducted a whole-brain regression analysis examining how these parameter estimates related to subsequent brain activity during observed inclusion compared to observed exclusion. Finally, we conducted an additional whole-brain regression analysis examining correlations between participants’ self-reported rejection sensitivity (i.e., RSQ scores) and their neural activity during observed inclusion compared to observed exclusion. Reported correlational findings reflect the specific clusters of activation in which heightened sensitivity to rejection (i.e., either greater activity in clusters displaying heightened sensitivity to distress during the preceding firsthand experience of exclusion, or greater RSQ scores) significantly related to the difference in activity during observed inclusion compared to observed exclusion. 
 Thresholding for whole-brain analyses was determined according to recommendations set forth by  Lieberman and Cunningham (2009)  to minimize both Type I and Type II errors. For a priori defined regions previously found to be involved in our processes of interest, analyses were thresholded at  p <.005 for magnitude, with a minimum cluster size threshold of 10 voxels. This threshold is consistent with that employed in our previous examination of the current sample ( Masten et al., 2009 ), is typical of studies examining activity in a priori defined regions, and is comparable to a corrected threshold of  p <.05, (see  Lieberman & Cunningham, 2009  for a complete discussion of appropriate thresholding in these types of fMRI investigations). These a priori defined regions included those previously found to be involved in: (a) the distress of both peer rejection during adolescence (i.e., subACC, AI;  Masten et al., 2009 ;  Masten et al., 2011a ;  Masten et al., 2011b ) and socially threatening stimuli more generally (i.e., dorsal ACC, amygdala) (e.g.,  Davis & Whalen, 2001 ;  DeWall et al., 2010 ; Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003;  Masten, Telzer, & Eisenberger, 2011 ), (b) regions previously found to be involved in distress regulation specifically during social exclusion experiences among adolescents and adults (i.e., VLPFC, VS; rostral ACC;  Masten et al., 2009 ;  Masten et al., 2011a ;  Masten et al., 2011b 
 Petrovic & Ingvar, 2002 ;  Phelps, Delgado, Nearing, & LeDoux, 2004 ), and (c) regions underlying the mentalizing processes thought to be engaged when viewing others interacting with peers (i.e., DMPFC, MPFC, TPJ, PCC, precuneus, temporal poles;  Beer & Hughes, 2010 ;  Frith & Frith, 1999 ,  2003 ,  2006 ;  Hynes et al., 2006 ;  Masten et al., 2010a ;  Masten, Morelli, & Eisenberger, 2011 ;  Mitchell, Banaji, & Macrae, 2005 ;  Singer, 2006 ). All other brain regions were examined at the same threshold but with FDR-correction applied in SPM5, as recommended for exploratory whole-brain examination. All coordinates are reported in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) format. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 
 Manipulation check 
 During the Cyberball game when the participant experienced firsthand exclusion, they reported getting the ball an average of 27% of the time. When observing the game of Cyberball during which they saw another adolescent being excluded, participants similarly reported that the excluded adolescent received the ball an average of 27% of the time. Thus, participants noticed that exclusion occurred in both cases, and believed that they were excluded the same amount as the observed adolescent. Additionally, this similarity between the estimates of how much the ball was received in the firsthand and witnessed games also suggests that the participants remained engaged in the task (and were thus able to accurately estimate the number of ball tosses) even when they were no longer playing the game. 
 
 
 Descriptive information 
 In terms of participants’ distress following their experience of firsthand rejection, participants’ mean NTS score was 2.90 ( SD =.73) and ranged from 1.58 to 4.50 out of a possible 5; these scores did not differ by gender. Participants’ average scores for self-reported rejection sensitivity ( M =2.78,  SD =.58) ranged from 1.42 to 3.58 out of a possible 6. The mean for boys’ rejection sensitivity ( M =3.11) was slightly higher than for girls ( M =2.57;  F =5.71,  p <.05). Additional results for these subjective measures of distress and rejection sensitivity in this group of participants— including their relationships with brain activity during firsthand exclusion—have been reported previously (see  Masten et al., 2009 ). 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging Results 
 
 Neural activity during observed inclusion versus observed exclusion 
 First we performed a whole brain analysis to examine adolescents’ neural activity when they observed a new player being included in Cyberball (compared to observing this new player being excluded), by the same two individuals that had excluded the participant in the preceding game. This contrast revealed greater activity primarily in neural regions previously linked with the distress and pain of peer rejection. Specifically, there were significant clusters of activity in the right AI and the left AI (with some extension into the temporal lobe; see  Figure 2A ), the subACC, the dACC, and the amygdala (see  Table 1A ). Interestingly, participants also displayed differential activity in neural regions previously linked with distress regulation during peer rejection—including both the VLPFC and VS—when they were observing this new player being included vs. excluded (see details of all activations in  Table 1A ). 
 
 
 Neural activity during observed exclusion vs. observed inclusion 
 During the reverse contrast—neural activity while observing a new player being excluded (versus included) by the same two peers who had excluded the participant previously—we found evidence of heightened activity in regions previously linked with mentalizing and empathy, including the DMPFC, MPFC and precuneus (see  Figure 2B ). In addition, we found heightened activity in regions previously linked with distress regulation during peer rejection, including the rACC (see  Figure 2B ) and a region that included the VLPFC but which was primarily located in the middle frontal gyrus (MFG), with some extension into the inferior frontal gyrus (see details of all activations in Table 1B). In contrast, there was no differential activity in areas previously linked with distress or social pain while observing exclusion compared to inclusion. 
 
 
 Activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion associated with neural sensitivity to firsthand peer rejection 
 Next a whole-brain regression analysis was performed to identify how adolescents’ neural sensitivity to firsthand peer rejection—specifically, brain activity in the subACC and AI that was positively correlated with self-reported distress during a prior experience of peer rejection—related to their brain activity while subsequently observing a new adolescent being included (versus excluded). First, this analysis revealed that greater neural sensitivity to distress in the subACC during firsthand rejection was associated with more neural activity consistent with distress during subsequent observation of a peer being included (versus excluded). Specifically, there were significant clusters of activity in the right and left AI (see  Figure 3A ), the dACC (see  Figure 3B ), and the amygdala (see  Table 2A ). Similarly, greater neural sensitivity to distress displayed in the AI during firsthand rejection was also associated with greater activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the AI and dACC (see  Table 2B ). Additionally, distress-related activity in the AI during firsthand rejection also related to greater activity in regions previously linked with mentalizing, including the MPFC, right and left TPJ, precuneus and PCC, as well as regions involved in distress regulation, including the VLPFC and rACC (see details of all activations in  Table 2B ). Distress-related neural activity during firsthand rejection did not negatively correlate with any brain activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion. 
 
 
 Activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion associated with self-reported rejection sensitivity 
 Finally, we performed an additional whole-brain regression analysis to identify how adolescents’ self-reported rejection sensitivity related to their neural activity when observing a peer being included (versus excluded), following a firsthand experience of peer rejection. Participants who reported being more sensitive to rejection displayed greater neural activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the subACC—a region previously linked with the distress of peer rejection (see  Figure 4 ), as well as in the VLPFC and precuneus—regions commonly linked with distress regulation and mentalizing, respectively. Details of these and other significant activations are listed in  Table 2C . Self-reported rejection sensitivity did not negatively correlate with any regions during observed inclusion versus exclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study aimed to examine neural activity among adolescents watching another person being accepted or rejected by peers, immediately following a firsthand experience of peer rejection. As a whole, findings suggest that when adolescents witness others’ interactions with peers, their previous firsthand experiences with rejection are related to their responses to these witnessed events, and these observations may alter adolescents’ emotional processing as they are dealing with their own previous experiences being rejected. Here, we discuss the potential meaning of these findings for understanding how interactions that adolescents observe in their immediate social environment might influence their reactions to peer rejection more generally. In addition, we speculate about the implications of these findings for understanding how observing positive and negative peer interactions on a regular basis might contribute to the perpetuation of bullying behaviors at this age. Specifically, we focus our discussion on brain regions that were of particular interest in this investigation because of their prior links with peer-related processes, including both firsthand and witnessed peer-rejection in adolescents and adults. However, future research will undoubtedly provide additional, new insights about other regions identified in this study that may also be key neural substrates of adolescents’ experiences with their peers. 
 First, in terms of neural responses to observed peer inclusion (versus exclusion), we found that adolescents displayed greater activity in the subACC and bilateral AI—neural regions previously linked with the distress of peer rejection among adolescents ( Crowley et al., 2010 ;  Masten et al., 2009 ;  Masten et al., 2011a ;  Masten et al., 2011b ), as well as the dACC and amygdala—regions also linked with social exclusion and threat processing (e.g.,  Davis & Whalen, 2001 ;  DeWall et al., 2010 ; Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003;  Masten, Telzer, & Eisenberger, 2011 ). This is consistent with our hypothesis and supports the notion that adolescents may feel more hurt or distressed when they perceive their rejection experiences as personal or ‘just them’. In fact, after being rejected by others, seeing someone else being accepted might increase feelings of self-blame and enhance victims’ feelings of distress resulting from their rejection. Interestingly, participants also displayed differential activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in both the VLPFC and VS, regions linked to distress regulation in previous studies examining firsthand peer rejection (e.g.,  Masten et al., 2009 ). Although this was not expected, it is possible that activity in these regions reflects a greater effort to inhibit the negative emotions that might be elicited when adolescents infer that their own rejection was indeed personal, and thus more hurtful. 
 Next, we examined participants’ responses while they were watching another adolescent being excluded (compared to included) by the same two peers that had previously excluded the participant. We hypothesized that they would likely feel less distress and show more neural activity consistent with emotion regulation. Interestingly, in this case adolescents did show activity in frontal regions associated with distress regulation. However, this activity was in more medial regions (MFG, rACC) that were distinct from those found during observed inclusion versus exclusion (described above). Thus, greater activity in these medial regions could reflect a heightened ability to recruit regulatory resources, specifically in situations where an impersonal explanation for one’s rejection is available (i.e., ‘others are also being rejected, it is not just me’). Alternatively, observed inclusion (versus exclusion) and observed exclusion (versus inclusion) may also elicit different types of regulatory processes (e.g., inhibition versus attribution), which could explain why different frontal regions are activated by each of these experiences. Furthermore, activity in MFG and rACC during observed exclusion (versus inclusion) could also reflect other cognitive processes beyond emotion regulation. Future work will be useful in teasing apart the various inhibitory, attributional, and other cognitive processes that are occurring when adolescents are observing these different types of social interactions and regulating their resulting emotional responses. 
 Interestingly, in terms of neural activity consistent with mentalizing processes, we found that adolescents displayed greater activity in the DMPFC, MPFC and precuneus, specifically when they were watching someone being excluded compared to included. Thus, it is possible that seeing others being excluded (more so than seeing them being included) leads adolescents to think about the thoughts and feelings of the individuals that they are observing. Perhaps, when adolescents have just experienced firsthand peer rejection, seeing another person being treated the same way might give adolescents insight into the minds of the excluders (i.e., ‘they are mean, they do this to everyone’). Alternatively, heightened neural activity consistent with mentalizing during observed exclusion could also indicate that participants are understanding the perspective of the adolescent who is being excluded, or even feeling empathic towards the excluded player—a possibility consistent with prior work showing neural activity consistent with empathic processing during observed exclusion in adolescents ( Masten et al., 2010a ). Given the shared plights of the participant and the observed victim, the participant might feel similar to the victim and show more neural activity consistent with empathy and mentalizing as a result (see also  Cialdini, Brown, Lewis, Luce, & Neuberg, 1997 ;  Masten, Morelli, & Eisenberger, 2011 ;  Meyer et al., 2012 ). 
 Our next hypothesis was that, following a firsthand experience of being rejected, there would be more neural activity consistent with distress during witnessed peer acceptance versus rejection among adolescents with a heightened sensitivity to rejection. First, our results indicated that adolescents who displayed greater distress-related subACC and AI activity during firsthand peer exclusion also showed more neural activity consistent with distress (i.e., more dACC, AI and amygdala activity) when they subsequently witnessed another adolescent being included. Similarly, adolescents who reported being more sensitive to rejection displayed greater activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the subACC—a region specifically linked with the distress of firsthand peer rejection. Together, these findings build on our prior work linking rejection sensitivity with more neural activity consistent with distress (i.e., greater dACC activity) during firsthand peer exclusion ( Masten et al., 2009 ), and further suggest that adolescents who are more sensitive (as indexed by either their neural responses or by their self-report) to peer rejection may also feel more hurt when they see others being accepted by peers—particularly when they see this in the aftermath of a firsthand rejection experience. 
 Next, adolescents who displayed more neural activity consistent with distress during firsthand rejection, and adolescents who reported being more sensitive to peer rejection, also displayed differential activity within the mentalizing network while they witnessed another peer being included versus excluded—a finding that extends our prior work linking rejection sensitivity to heightened activity in the mentalizing network in the context of peer rejection ( Masten et al., 2009 ). It is possible that these adolescents were more likely to be thinking about the thoughts and intentions of the players that they were watching, and this mentalizing may have contributed to greater hurt feelings in these individuals. This possibility is supported by other data from our lab showing that individuals who report lower social status more broadly (i.e., who may perceive social interactions similarly to those who are highly sensitive to rejection), also display more neural activity consistent with mentalizing in social situations ( Muscatell et al., 2012 ). Of course, this suggestion goes beyond the current data, and future studies will be needed to directly investigate the cognitive reasoning that may accompany or exacerbate the distress that results from firsthand and witnessed peer interactions at this age. 
 As a whole, these data address one particular situation in which observing others being accepted or rejected might influence an adolescent’s affective processing—specifically in the moments immediately following a firsthand experience of peer rejection when the adolescent is likely still recovering and/or making sense of his or her own experience being rejected. However, on a larger scale, we believe that these data may also provide some insight into the processes via which bullying behaviors may come to be condoned and perpetuated more generally at this age. In other words, witnessing peer rejection and other forms of bullying on a regular basis may impact individuals’ affective and cognitive processing in a way that eventually alters their implicit beliefs about, and tolerance of, bullying behaviors more generally. Of course, witnessing peer rejection and bullying is known to be anxiety-provoking among adolescents ( Janes & Olson, 2000 ;  Nishina & Juvonen, 2005 ). However, the current data suggest that in certain situations witnessing others being accepted might also induce distress, and conversely, witnessing others being rejected might reduce distress. For example, when adolescents have recently experienced negative treatment by peers, their responses to witnessed peer rejection and their perception and interpretation of their own firsthand rejection are likely to be related. To this end, if adolescents witness peer rejection frequently and find it to have a mitigating effect with regard to their own negative affect, an implicit acceptance of bullying behaviors might grow over time and eventually contribute to the perpetuation of bullying behaviors at this age. Additional research on this topic will continue to increase our understanding of how witnessing peer interactions might contribute to the mainstream status of bullying at this particular age. 
 Findings in the current study should be considered in light of some limitations. First, this study did not directly assess adolescents’ specific beliefs or attributions about either their firsthand or witnessed experiences of peer exclusion and inclusion. Thus, our interpretations of these data in terms of adolescents’ perceptions about their interactions with their peers are speculative and will need to be examined in future work. Given that previous neuroimaging work has shown that manipulating individuals’ attributions for social exclusion significantly moderates distress-related neural responses to exclusion (e.g.,  Masten, Telzer, & Eisenberger, 2011 ), additional investigation specifically within the context of adolescent peer rejection is clearly warranted. In addition, for future studies should examine how social status might influence our observed patterns. For example, if information was collected regarding participants’ social status or their prior experience with peer rejection, this could provide insight into how firsthand and observed social interactions impact adolescents’ emotional processing in their real lives. 
 Next, in this study, we only examined one sequence in which firsthand and witnessed peer events might actually occur—firsthand exclusion, followed by observed inclusion and exclusion. Of course, it would likely be impossible to examine several different sequences using a within-subjects design, without altering the qualitative meaning of each event, as well as the ecological validity of the task. Nevertheless, it would be intriguing for future studies to investigate how firsthand and witnessed peer events impact each other when they are experienced as part of other sequences typical of adolescents’ daily lives (e.g., witnessed exclusion followed by firsthand exclusion). Examining patterns of mediation among adolescents’ subjective and neural responses to these various events as well as their sensitivity to rejection sensitivity would be a particularly fruitful direction for these investigations. 
 Related to this issue, since this study did not include counterbalancing or a true baseline condition (e.g., resting, or watching a ball without social context), we cannot conclude whether our observed differences in activity are due to increased or decreased engagement of specific regions, and we cannot rule out the possibility that order effects or habituation impacted our findings. Future studies could employ a between-subjects design to explore some of these issues; for example, comparing data similar to that included in the current analyses to a separate data set from a control group who witnessed two consecutive inclusion games would allow more conclusive interpretation of the findings. Nevertheless, in the current investigation we deliberately kept the Cyberball games very short to ensure participants’ continued engagement and minimize the risk of habituation. In addition, the significant main effects of observed exclusion verses observed inclusion (see Table 1B) provide evidence that there was not an  overall  decrease in activity at the end of the task (i.e., during observed exclusion) that could account for the areas of heightened activity during observed inclusion versus observed exclusion. 
 Also related to task design, since all participants experienced firsthand exclusion prior to observing a peer in this study, it was not possible to conclusively determine the effect that firsthand exclusion had on subsequent neural responses during the observation phases of the task. Thus, the insights generated by these data regarding how firsthand and observed peer interactions might interact and influence adolescents’ responses to these events will benefit from future studies with experimental designs permitting more conclusive identification of causal effects. Finally, neural activity displayed during observed inclusion may have included residual activity from the preceding experience of firsthand exclusion. However, since adolescents displayed a somewhat different and more extensive network of affective/pain-related activity during observed inclusion versus observed exclusion (i.e., AI, subACC, dACC, amygdala) than we previously observed during firsthand exclusion (i.e., AI, subACC;  Masten et al., 2009 ), our current finding of heightened neural activity consistent with distress during observed inclusion cannot be attributed to potential ‘left over’ activity from adolescents’ previous firsthand experiences. 
 In summary, the current study provides an important, preliminary step toward understanding the interplay between adolescents’ firsthand experiences with peers and the peer-related events that they witness in their daily social environment. Moreover, we have provided new evidence that individuals who are particularly sensitive to negative peer interactions may be most affected when they witness the acceptance and/or rejection of others. In particular, this investigation has permitted the formation of new insights about brain regions previously linked to peer rejection, and has also revealed additional regions, which—despite being beyond the scope of the current discussion—will undoubtedly provide useful groundwork for future examinations and eventually contribute to a more complete understanding of adolescent peer rejection. Ultimately, this line of work may contribute to our understanding of bullying behaviors in adolescence more generally, and increase knowledge of how individuals navigate the complex social interactions that characterize the adolescent period. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 The authors wish to thank Larissa Borofsky, Kristin McNealy and Natalie Colich. This work was supported by the Santa Fe Institute Consortium, as well as by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, an Elizabeth Munsterberg Koppitz Award and a Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award to C. Masten. For generous support the authors also wish to thank the Brain Mapping Medical Research Organization, Brain Mapping Support Foundation, Pierson-Lovelace Foundation, Ahmanson Foundation, Tamkin Foundation, Jennifer Jones-Simon Foundation, Capital Group Companies Charitable Foundation, Robson Family, William M. and Linda R. Dietel Philanthropic Fund at the Northern Piedmont Community Foundation, and Northstar Fund. This project was in part also supported by grants (RR12169, RR13642 and RR00865) from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH); its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of NCR or NIH. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Arseneault 
 L 
 
 
 Bowes 
 L 
 
 
 Shakoor 
 S 
 
 
 Bullying victimization in youths and mental health problems: ‘Much ado about nothing’? 
 Psychological Medicine 
 2010 
 40 
 717 
 729 
 19785920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baird 
 AA 
 
 
 Silver 
 SH 
 
 
 Veague 
 HB 
 
 
 Cognitive control reduces sensitivity to relational aggression among adolescent girls 
 Social Neuroscience 
 2010 
 5 
 519 
 532 
 20614370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beer 
 JS 
 
 
 Hughes 
 BL 
 
 
 Neural systems of social comparison and the “above-average” effect 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 49 
 2671 
 2679 
 19883771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 M 
 
 
 Jha 
 AP 
 
 
 Bylsma 
 LM 
 
 
 Fabian 
 SA 
 
 
 Solomon 
 PE 
 
 
 Prkachin 
 KM 
 
 
 Viewing facial expressions of pain engages cortical areas involved in the direct experience of pain 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 312 
 319 
 15734365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brannon 
 LA 
 
 
 Brock 
 TC 
 
 
 Scarcity claims elicit extreme responding to persuasive messages: Role of cognitive elaboration 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 
 2001 
 27 
 365 
 375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brendgen 
 M 
 
 
 Vitaro 
 F 
 
 
 Peer rejection and physical health problems in early adolescence 
 Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics 
 2008 
 29 
 183 
 190 
 18367992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 BB 
 
 
 
 
 Lerner 
 R 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Adolescents’ relationships with peers 
 Handbook of adolescent psychology 
 2004 
 Hoboken, NJ 
 John Wiley ' Sons, Inc 
 363 
 394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 BB 
 
 
 Larson 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Lerner 
 R 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Peer relationships in adolescence 
 Handbook of adolescent psychology 
 2009 
 Hoboken, NJ 
 John Wiley ' Sons, Inc 
 74 
 103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burklund 
 L 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 The face of rejection: Rejection sensitivity moderates dorsal anterior cingulate activity to disapproving facial expressions 
 Social Neuroscience 
 2007 
 2 
 238 
 253 
 18461157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burnett 
 S 
 
 
 Bird 
 G 
 
 
 Moll 
 J 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 S-J 
 
 
 Development during adolescence of the neural processing of social emotion 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2009 
 21 
 1736 
 1750 
 18823226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 CH 
 
 
 Ridler 
 K 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Williams 
 S 
 
 
 Fu 
 CH 
 
 
 Merlo-Pich 
 E 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Brain imaging correlates of depressive symptom severity and predictors of symptom improvement after antidepressant treatment 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2007 
 62 
 407 
 414 
 17217921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cialdini 
 RB 
 
 
 Brown 
 SL 
 
 
 Lewis 
 BP 
 
 
 Luce 
 C 
 
 
 Neuberg 
 SL 
 
 
 Reinterpreting the empathy-altruism relationship: When one into one equals oneness 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 1997 
 73 
 481 
 494 
 9294898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coie 
 JD 
 
 
 Dodge 
 KA 
 
 
 Kupersmidt 
 JB 
 
 
 
 
 Asher 
 SR 
 
 
 Coie 
 JD 
 
 
 Peer group behavior and social status 
 Peer rejection in childhood. Cambridge studies in social and emotional development 
 1990 
 New York, NY 
 Cambridge University Press 
 17 
 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crowley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Wu 
 J 
 
 
 Molfese 
 PJ 
 
 
 Mayes 
 C 
 
 
 Social exclusion in middle childhood: Rejection events, slow-wave neural activity, and ostracism distress 
 Social Neuroscience 
 2010 
 5 
 483 
 495 
 20628967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 The amygdala: Vigilance and emotion 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 2001 
 6 
 13 
 34 
 11244481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Decety 
 J 
 
 
 Michalska 
 KJ 
 
 
 Akitsuki 
 Y 
 
 
 Who caused the pain? An fMRI investigation of empathy and intentionality in children 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 2607 
 2614 
 18573266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeWall 
 CN 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 G 
 
 
 Webster 
 GD 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Baumeister 
 RF 
 
 
 Powell 
 C 
 
 
 Combs 
 D 
 
 
 Schurtz 
 DR 
 
 
 Stillman 
 TF 
 
 
 Tice 
 DM 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Acetaminophen reduces social pain: Behavioral and neural evidence 
 Psychological Science 
 2010 
 21 
 931 
 937 
 20548058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dijkstra 
 JK 
 
 
 Lindenberg 
 S 
 
 
 Veenstra 
 R 
 
 
 Beyond the class norm: Bullying behavior of popular adolescents and its relation to peer acceptance and rejection 
 Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 
 2008 
 36 
 1289 
 1299 
 18607717 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ditto 
 PH 
 
 
 Jemmott 
 JB 
 
 
 From rarity to evaluative extremity: Effects of prevalence information on evaluations of positive and negative characteristics 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 1989 
 57 
 16 
 26 
 2754601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downey 
 G 
 
 
 Feldman 
 SI 
 
 
 Implications of rejection sensitivity for intimate relationships 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 1996 
 70 
 1327 
 1343 
 8667172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Gable 
 SL 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 fMRI responses relate to differences in real-world social experience 
 Emotion 
 2007 
 7 
 745 
 754 
 18039043 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SE 
 
 
 Gable 
 SL 
 
 
 Hilmert 
 CJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Neural pathways link social support to attenuated neuroendocrine stress responses 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 35 
 1601 
 1612 
 17395493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engelhardt 
 CR 
 
 
 Bartholow 
 BD 
 
 
 Kerr 
 GT 
 
 
 Bushman 
 BJ 
 
 
 This is your brain on violent video games: Neural desensitization to violence predicts increased aggression following violent video game exposure 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 
 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Festinger 
 L 
 
 
 A theory of social comparison processes 
 Human Relations 
 1954 
 7 
 117 
 140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flanagan 
 KS 
 
 
 Erath 
 SA 
 
 
 Bierman 
 KL 
 
 
 Unique associations between peer relations and social anxiety in early adolescence 
 Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 
 2008 
 37 
 759 
 769 
 18991127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Interacting minds - A biological basis 
 Science 
 1999 
 286 
 1692 
 1695 
 10576727 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 The neural basis of mentalizing 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 50 
 531 
 534 
 16701204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Biological Sciences 
 2003 
 358 
 459 
 473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 McClure-Tone 
 EB 
 
 
 Shiffrin 
 ND 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Probing the neural correlates of anticipated peer evaluation in adolescence 
 Child Development 
 2009 
 80 
 1000 
 1015 
 19630890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Modulating emotional responses: Effects of a neocortical network on the limbic system 
 Neuroreport 
 2000 
 11 
 43 
 48 
 10683827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hynes 
 CA 
 
 
 Baird 
 AA 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Differential role of the orbital frontal lobe in emotional versus cognitive perspective-taking 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 374 
 383 
 16112148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Isaacs 
 J 
 
 
 Hodges 
 EVE 
 
 
 Salmivalli 
 C 
 
 
 Long-term consequences of victimization by peers: A follow-up from adolescence to young adulthood 
 European Journal of Developmental Science 
 2008 
 2 
 387 
 397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackson 
 PL 
 
 
 Bruney 
 E 
 
 
 Meltzoff 
 AN 
 
 
 Decety 
 J 
 
 
 How do we perceive the pain of others? A window into the neural processes involved in empathy 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 24 
 771 
 779 
 15652312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janes 
 LM 
 
 
 Olson 
 JM 
 
 
 Jeer pressures: The behavioral effects of observing ridicule of others 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 
 2000 
 26 
 474 
 485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaltiala-Heino 
 R 
 
 
 Frojd 
 S 
 
 
 Marttunen 
 M 
 
 
 Involvement in bullying and depression in a 2-year follow-up in middle adolescence 
 European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 2010 
 19 
 45 
 55 
 19588185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keedwell 
 P 
 
 
 Drapier 
 R 
 
 
 Surguladze 
 S 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Phillips 
 M 
 
 
 Neural markers of symptomatic improvement during antidepressant therapy in severe depression: subgenual cingulate and visual cortical responses to sad, but not happy, facial stimuli are correlated with changes in symptom score 
 Journal of Psychopharmacology 
 2008 
 23 
 775 
 788 
 18635699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kross 
 KW 
 
 
 Heimdal 
 JH 
 
 
 Olsnes 
 C 
 
 
 Olofson 
 J 
 
 
 Aarstad 
 HJ 
 
 
 Neural dynamics of rejection sensitivity 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 945 
 956 
 17536965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Cunningham 
 WA 
 
 
 Type I and Type II error concerns in fMRI research: Re-balancing the scale 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 2009 
 4 
 423 
 428 
 20035017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Jarcho 
 JM 
 
 
 Satpute 
 AB 
 
 
 Evidence-based and intuition-based self-knowledge: An fMRI study 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 2004 
 87 
 421 
 435 
 15491269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Crockett 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Way 
 BM 
 
 
 Putting feelings into words: Affect labeling disrupts amygdala activity to affective stimuli 
 Psychological Science 
 2007 
 18 
 421 
 428 
 17576282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Colich 
 NL 
 
 
 Rudie 
 JD 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of responses to peer rejection in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011a 
 1 
 260 
 270 
 22318914 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Borofsky 
 LA 
 
 
 McNealy 
 K 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Subgenual anterior cingulate responses to peer rejection: A marker of adolescents’ risk for depression 
 Development and Psychopathology 
 2011b 
 23 
 283 
 292 
 21262054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Borofsky 
 LA 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 McNealy 
 K 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 J 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Neural correlates of social exclusion during adolescence: Understanding the distress of peer rejection 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 2009 
 4 
 143 
 157 
 19470528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Colich 
 NL 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Associations among pubertal development, empathic ability, and neural responses while witnessing peer rejection in adolescence 
 Child Development 
 2013 
 (in press) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 J 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Witnessing peer rejection during adolescence: Neural correlates of empathy for experiences of social exclusion 
 Social Neuroscience 
 2010a 
 5 
 496 
 507 
 20602283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Morelli 
 SA 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of empathy for ‘social pain’ and subsequent prosocial behavior 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 55 
 381 
 388 
 21122817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of attributing negative social treatment to racial discrimination 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 1042 
 1051 
 20521861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Time spent with friends in adolescence relates to less neural sensitivity to later peer rejection 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 2010b 
 7 
 106 
 114 
 21183457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 ML 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Ma 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 C 
 
 
 Shi 
 Z 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Han 
 S 
 
 
 Interpersonal closeness modulates empathic neural responses to social pain 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Banaji 
 MR 
 
 
 Macrae 
 CN 
 
 
 The link between social cognition and self-referential thought in the medial prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2005 
 17 
 1306 
 1315 
 16197685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morrison 
 I 
 
 
 Lloyd 
 D 
 
 
 Di Pellegrino 
 
 
 Giuseppe 
 
 
 Roberts 
 N 
 
 
 Vicarious responses to pain in anterior cingulated cortex: Is empathy a multisensory issue? 
 Cognitive, Affective, ' Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2004 
 4 
 270 
 278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muscatell 
 KA 
 
 
 Morelli 
 SA 
 
 
 Falk 
 EB 
 
 
 Way 
 BM 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Social status modulates neural activity in the mentalizing network 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 1771 
 1777 
 22289808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nishina 
 A 
 
 
 Juvonen 
 J 
 
 
 Daily reports of witnessing and experiencing peer harassment in middle school 
 Child Development 
 2005 
 76 
 435 
 450 
 15784092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrovic 
 P 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 Imaging cognitive modulation of pain processing 
 Pain 
 2002 
 95 
 1 
 5 
 11790461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Mirroring others’ emotions relates to empathy and social abilities during childhood 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 39 
 2076 
 2085 
 18082427 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Borofsky 
 LA 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Neural correlates of direct and reflected self-appraisals in adolescents and adults: When social perspective-taking informs self-perception 
 Child Development 
 2009 
 80 
 1016 
 1038 
 19630891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Moore 
 WE 
 
 
 Oswald 
 TM 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Entering adolescence: Resistance to peer influence, risky behavior, and neural changes in emotion reactivity 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 69 
 1029 
 1036 
 21382560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: A meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 16 
 331 
 348 
 12030820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nearing 
 KI 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Extinction learning in humans: Role of the amygdala and vmPFC 
 Neuron 
 2004 
 43 
 897 
 905 
 15363399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rigby 
 K 
 
 
 Effects of peer victimization in schools and perceived social support on adolescent well-being 
 Journal of Adolescence 
 2000 
 23 
 57 
 60 
 10700372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rigby 
 K 
 
 
 Consequences of bullying in schools 
 Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 
 2003 
 48 
 583 
 590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rivers 
 I 
 
 
 Poteat 
 PV 
 
 
 Noret 
 N 
 
 
 Ashurst 
 N 
 
 
 Observing bullying at school: The mental health implications of witness status 
 School Psychology Quarterly 
 2009 
 24 
 211 
 223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rule 
 BG 
 
 
 Ferguson 
 TJ 
 
 
 The effects of media violence on attitudes, emotions, and cognitions 
 Journal of Social Issues 
 2011 
 42 
 29 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Why and how to study Theory of Mind with fMRI 
 Brain Research 
 2006 
 1079 
 57 
 65 
 16480695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sebastian 
 CL 
 
 
 Roiser 
 JP 
 
 
 Tan 
 GCY 
 
 
 Viding 
 E 
 
 
 Wood 
 NW 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 S-J 
 
 
 Effects of age and MAOA genotype on the neural processing of social rejection 
 Genes, Brain, and Behavior 
 2010 
 9 
 628 
 637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sebastian 
 CL 
 
 
 Fontaine 
 NM 
 
 
 Bird 
 G 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 S-J 
 
 
 De Brito 
 SA 
 
 
 McCrory 
 EJ 
 
 
 Viding 
 E 
 
 
 Neural processing associated with cognitive and affective Theory of Mind in adolescents and adults 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 2012 
 7 
 53 
 63 
 21467048 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 The neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: Review of literature and implications for future research 
 Neuroscience ' Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2006 
 30 
 855 
 863 
 16904182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Kaube 
 H 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Empathy for pain involves the affective but not sensory components of pain, 
 Science 
 2004 
 303 
 1157 
 1162 
 14976305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Empathic neural responses are modulated by the perceived fairness of others 
 Nature 
 2006 
 439 
 466 
 469 
 16421576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trentacosta 
 CJ 
 
 
 Shaw 
 DS 
 
 
 Emotional self-regulation, peer rejection, and antisocial behavior: Developmental associations from early childhood to early adolescence 
 Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 
 2009 
 30 
 356 
 365 
 20161105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Davidson 
 ML 
 
 
 Hughes 
 BL 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Prefrontal-subcortical pathways mediating successful emotion regulation 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 59 
 1037 
 1050 
 18817740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 AT 
 
 
 Lee 
 SS 
 
 
 Sigman 
 M 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Neural basis of irony comprehension in children with autism: the role of prosody and context 
 Brain 
 2006 
 129 
 932 
 943 
 16481375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wicker 
 B 
 
 
 Keysers 
 C 
 
 
 Plailly 
 J 
 
 
 Royet 
 JP 
 
 
 Gallese 
 V 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Both of us disgusted in My insula: The common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust 
 Neuron 
 2003 
 40 
 655 
 664 
 14642287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 Cheung 
 CK 
 
 
 Choi 
 W 
 
 
 Cyberostracism: Effects of being ignored over the Internet 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 2000 
 79 
 748 
 11079239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 Govan 
 CL 
 
 
 Croker 
 V 
 
 
 Tynan 
 D 
 
 
 Cruickshank 
 M 
 
 
 Lam 
 A 
 
 
 Investigations into differences between social- and cyberostracism 
 Group Dynamics: Theory Research, and Practice. Special Issue: Groups and Internet 
 2002 
 6 
 65 
 771 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Panel A depicts a still shot of the animated Cyberball game that was viewed by participants. During firsthand inclusion and exclusion in the first two rounds, participants controlled the “hand” at the bottom of the screen. During witnessed inclusion and exclusion in round three, participants were told that a new player was controlling the hand and playing with the same two people that the participant had played with previously. Panel B depicts the order of the task events. Each round of Cyberball occurred during a separate functional scan. Data collected during Round 3 (“Witnessed Inclusion, followed by Exclusion”) was examined in all neuroimaging analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Panel A depicts activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the left anterior insula (−46 0 −8) with extension into the temporal lobe, and right anterior insula (48 0 −6). Panel B depicts activity during observed exclusion versus inclusion in the precuneus (10 −68 56), dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC; 6 56 22, 10 66 30), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC; 10 72 14), and rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC; 16 40 −2). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the left anterior insula (LAI; Panel A) and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC; Panel B) that is positively related to distress-related activity displayed in the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC) during firsthand exclusion versus inclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Activity during observed inclusion versus exclusion in the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC) that is positively related to participants’ self-reported rejection sensitivity. Note: if the apparent outlier (which is not a true statistical outlier) in this figure it removed, this relationship remains significant. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1. 
 
 Regions activated during observed inclusion vs. observed exclusion (A), and during observed exclusion vs. observed inclusion (B). 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Region 
 BA 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Observed Inclusion>Observed Exclusion 
 
 
 
 AI 
 
 L 
 −46 
 0 
 −8 
 6.04 
 641 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 48 
 0 
 −6 
 4.57 
 1393 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 40 
 14 
 −18 
 4.10 
 1393 
 <.0005 
 
 
 sub/rACC 
 24 
 
 0 
 36 
 −2 
 3.60 
 16 
 <.001 
 
 
 dACC 
 32 
 L 
 −6 
 8 
 46 
 5.75 
 1334 
 <.0001 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 
 L 
 −12 
 −6 
 −18 
 4.64 
 47 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 32 
 −10 
 −26 
 4.17 
 99 
 <.0005 
 
 
 VLPFC 
 46 
 L 
 −54 
 34 
 12 
 4.03 
 20 
 <.0005 
 
 
 Cerebellum * 
 
 L 
 −4 
 −40 
 −6 
 19.51 
 1543 
 <.0001 
 
 
 Caudate * 
 
 
 0 
 10 
 12 
 11.76 
 674 
 <.0001 
 
 
 Uncus * 
 28 
 L 
 −18 
 −16 
 −32 
 6.07 
 76 
 <.0001 
 
 
 Postcent. Gyrus * 
 3 
 R 
 22 
 −32 
 86 
 5.81 
 111 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 3 
 L 
 −30 
 −30 
 80 
 5.18 
 20 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 43 
 R 
 68 
 −18 
 16 
 5.68 
 187 
 <.0001 
 
 
 STG * 
 38 
 L 
 −34 
 8 
 −24 
 5.66 
 41 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 22/42 
 L 
 −66 
 −32 
 14 
 4.56 
 10 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 41/42 
 L 
 −54 
 −26 
 12 
 4.32 
 11 
 <.0005 
 
 
 Precent. Gyrus * 
 4 
 R 
 34 
 −20 
 78 
 4.83 
 30 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 4 
 L 
 −18 
 −28 
 82 
 4.76 
 23 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 6 
 R 
 18 
 −8 
 82 
 4.80 
 13 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 (B) Observed Exclusion>Observed Inclusion 
 
 
 
 DMPFC 
 9 
 R 
 6  
 56 
 22 
 3.79 
 314 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 9 
 R 
 10 
 66 
 30 
 4.18 
 33 
 <.0005 
 
 
 MPFC 
 10 
 R 
 10 
 72 
 14 
 4.35 
 47 
 <.0005 
 
 
 
 10 
 L 
 −4 
 56 
 16 
 3.60 
 314 
 <.001 
 
 
 precuneus 
 7 
 R 
 10 
 −68 
 56 
 4.15 
 751 
 <.0005 
 
 
 rACC 
 32/24 
 R 
 16 
 40 
 −2 
 3.67 
 689 
 <.001 
 
 
 MFG/VLPFC 
 10/47 
 R 
 32 
 62 
 −8 
 4.93 
 689 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 10/47 
 L 
 −38 
 56 
 −6 
 4.27 
 432 
 <.0005 
 
 
 Occ. Lobe * 
 19 
 L 
 −48 
 −78 
 2 
 8.78 
 68 
 <.0001 
 
 
 ITG/Occ. Lobe * 
 37/19 
 R 
 50 
 −66 
 −2 
 7.92 
 178 
 <.0001 
 
 
 IPL * 
 40 
 R 
 52 
 −56 
 48 
 6.54 
 12 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Regions marked with a star (*) are those that were not the primary focus of this investigation but that were still significant at p < .005, 10 voxels (FDR-corrected). All other regions (e.g., regions previously linked with distress, emotion regulation and mentalizing) are listed at p < .005, 10 voxels. BA refers to putative Brodmann’s Area; L and R refer to left and right hemispheres; x, y, and z refer to MNI coordinates;  t  refers to the t-score at those coordinates (local maxima);  k  refers to the number of voxels in each cluster. The following abbreviations are used for the names of specific regions: anterior insula (AI), subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC), rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), postcentral (Postcent.), superior temporal gyrus (STG), precentral (Precent.), dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), occipital (Occ.), inferior temporal gyrus (ITG), and inferior parietal lobule (IPL). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2. 
 
 Regions activated during observed inclusion vs. observed exclusion that correlated significantly with: (A) distress-related activity in the subACC and AI during firsthand exclusion vs. inclusion and (B) self-reported rejection sensitivity. 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Region 
 BA 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 t 
 
 
 r 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Positive associations with distress-related subACC activity during firsthand exclusion 
 
 
 
 AI 
 
 L 
 −40 
 12 
 10 
 3.62 
 .62 
 251 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 54 
 −2 
 0 
 3.23 
 .58 
 15 
 <.005 
 
 
 dACC 
 24 
 L 
 −4 
 20 
 18 
 3.71 
 .63 
 411 
 <.001 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 
 L 
 −30 
 4 
 −22 
 4.76 
 .72 
 42 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 Positive associations with distress-related AI activity during firsthand exclusion 
 
 
 
 AI 
 
 L 
 −46 
 4 
 6 
 3.64 
 .62 
 59 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 42 
 20 
 8 
 3.67 
 .63 
 87 
 <.001 
 
 
 dACC 
 24/32 
 R 
 4 
 24 
 24 
 3.77 
 .64 
 899 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 32 
 L 
 −12 
 26 
 24 
 4.03 
 .66 
 899 
 <.0005 
 
 
 d/rACC 
 32 
 L 
 −4 
 40 
 20 
 4.33 
 .69 
 899 
 <.0005 
 
 
 MPFC/rACC 
 32 
 R 
 12 
 40 
 6 
 3.67 
 .63 
 93 
 <.001 
 
 
 MPFC/ALPFC 
 10 
 R 
 26 
 60 
 6 
 3.88 
 .65 
 400 
 <.0005 
 
 
 precuneus 
 7 
 R 
 8 
 −62 
 58 
 4.65 
 .71 
 1652 
 <.0001 
 
 
 PCC 
 31 
 R 
 6 
 −48 
 38 
 3.69 
 .63 
 1652 
 <.001 
 
 
 TPJ 
 40 
 L 
 −44 
 −32 
 22 
 5.88 
 .79 
 287 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 40 
 R 
 44 
 −32 
 24 
 7.01 
 .84 
 450 
 <.0001 
 
 
 VLPFC 
 45/46 
 R 
 42 
 36 
 4 
 3.67 
 .63 
 52 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 44/46 
 L 
 −38 
 44 
 2 
 3.37 
 .59 
 45 
 <.005 
 
 
 (B) Positive associations with self-reported rejection sensitivity 
 
 
 
 subACC 
 25/11 
 L 
 −12 
 32 
 −14 
 3.34 
 .59 
 14 
 <.005 
 
 
 VLPFC 
 46/10  
 R 
 40 
 58 
 14 
 3.88 
 .65 
 29 
 <.0005 
 
 
 precuneus 
 7 
 
 0 
 −56 
 52 
 2.95 
 .54 
 40 
 <.005 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . All regions are listed at p < .005, 10 voxels. BA refers to putative Brodmann’s Area; L and R refer to left and right hemispheres; x, y, and z refer to MNI coordinates;  t  refers to the t-score at those coordinates (local maxima);  r  refers to the correlation coefficient representing the strength of the association between each regressor and activity in the specified region;  k  refers to the number of voxels in each cluster. There were no regions in which activity during observed inclusion versus observed exclusion was negatively associated with any of these regressors. The following abbreviations are used for the names of specific regions: anterior insula (AI), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), anterolateral prefrontal cortex (ALPFC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), temporal parietal junction (TPJ), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subACC). 
 
 
 
 
