
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 24185018 
 4007373 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.046 
 NIHMS562234 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Estimates of Segregation and Overlap of Functional Connectivity Networks in the Human Cerebral Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BT Thomas 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Krienen 
 Fenna M 
 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Chee 
 Michael WL 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 Randy L 
 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 1 Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore 
 2 Department of Psychology, Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge 
 3 Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 
 4 Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 
 
 Address correspondence to: BT Thomas Yeo Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School 8 College Road, Level 6 Singapore 169857 
 
 
 25 
 3 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 11 
 2013 
 
 
 3 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 5 
 2015 
 
 88 
 212 
 227 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex has recently been explored using techniques for parcellating the cortex into distinct functionally coupled networks. The divergent and convergent nature of cortico-cortical anatomic connections suggests the need to consider the possibility of regions belonging to multiple networks and hierarchies among networks. Here we applied the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model and spatial independent component analysis (ICA) to solve for functionally coupled cerebral networks without assuming that cortical regions belong to a single network. Data analyzed included 1,000 subjects from the Brain Genomics Superstruct Project (GSP) and 12 high quality individual subjects from the Human Connectome Project (HCP). The organization of the cerebral cortex was similar regardless of whether a winner-take-all approach or the more relaxed constraints of LDA (or ICA) were imposed. This suggests that large-scale networks may function as partially isolated modules. Several notable interactions among networks were uncovered by the LDA analysis. Many association regions belong to at least two networks, while somatomotor and early visual cortices are especially isolated. As examples of interaction, the precuneus, lateral temporal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex participate in multiple paralimbic networks that together comprise subsystems of the default network. In addition, regions at or near the frontal eye field and human lateral intraparietal area homologue participate in multiple hierarchically organized networks. These observations were replicated in both datasets and could be detected (and replicated) in individual subjects from the HCP. 
 
 
 Intrinsic Connectivity 
 MRI 
 Human Connectome Project 
 Default Network 
 Dorsal Attention 
 Resting-state fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Distributed neocortical brain areas form large-scale networks that exhibit complex patterns of divergent and convergent connectivity (e.g.,  Pandya and Kuypers, 1969 ;  Jones and Powell, 1970 ;  Mesulam 1981 ;  Ungerleider and Desimone, 1986 ;  Goldman-Rakic, 1988 ;  Felleman and Van Essen, 1991 ). A major challenge in systems neuroscience is to make sense of these connectivity patterns to infer functional organization. In the visual system, connectivity patterns suggest a separation of processing into largely parallel, but interacting, hierarchical pathways ( Ungerleider and Desimone, 1986 ;  Felleman and Van Essen, 1991 ). In contrast, the association cortex comprises networks of widely distributed and densely interconnected areas without rigid hierarchical organization ( Goldman-Rakic, 1988 ;  Selemon and Goldman-Rakic, 1988 ; but see  Badre and D'Esposito, 2009 ). 
 Resting-state functional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) provides a powerful, albeit indirect, approach to make inferences about human cortical organization ( Biswal et al., 1995 ). Despite its limitations ( Buckner et al., 2013 ), we and others have used functional connectivity to estimate cortical network patterns (e.g.,  Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  Margulies et al., 2007 ;  He et al., 2009 ;  Smith et al., 2009 ;  van den Heuvel et al., 2009 ;  Bellec et al., 2010 ;  Power et al., 2011 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ). 
 The majority of functional connectivity studies have focused on dissociating functionally distinct networks or modules ( Greicius et al., 2003 ;  Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Salvador et al., 2005 ;  Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  De Luca et al., 2006 ;  Fox et al., 2006 ;  Dosenbach et al., 2007 ;  Margulies et al., 2007 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ;  Calhoun et al., 2008 ;  Smith et al., 2009 ;  van den Heuvel et al., 2009 ;  Doucet et al., 2011 ;  Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ;  Varoquaux et al., 2011 ;  Craddock et al., 2012 ). Fewer studies have examined the relationships among different functional networks ( Sepulcre et al., 2012a ; Sporns et al., 2013). For example,  Fox et al. (2005)  and  Fransson (2005)  have investigated the antagonistic relationship between the default and task-positive networks. Others ( Meunier et al., 2009 ;  Doucet et al., 2011 ;  Lee et al., 2012 ) have investigated the (spatial) hierarchical relationship across functional networks. 
 We previously employed a mixture model that relied on a winner-takes-all assumption to map network topography in the human cerebral cortex ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). Each brain region was assigned to a single, best-fit network allowing us to derive connectivity maps that emphasize the interdigitation of parallel, distributed association networks. The key features of this parallel organization are that (1) each association network consists of strongly coupled brain regions spanning frontal, parietal, temporal, and cingulate cortices, and (2) the components of multiple networks are spatially adjacent ( Yeo et al., 2011 ; also see  Vincent et al., 2008 ,  Power et al., 2011 ). 
 However, it is unlikely that the brain is simply parcellated into a discrete number of nonoverlapping networks ( Mesulam 1998 ). Interactions across networks, as well as the existence of ‘convergence zones’ of regions that participate in multiple networks, are likely important features of brain organization ( Pandya and Kuypers, 1969 ;  Jones and Powell, 1970 ;  Mesulam 1998 ;  Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Bullmore and Sporns, 2009 ;  Spreng et al., 2010 ;  Fornito et al., 2012 ;  Sepulcre et al., 2012b ;  Power et al., 2013 ). Relevant to this point, we have observed variability in the goodness of fit of certain regions to their winner-takes-all network ( Figures 8  and 10 of  Yeo et al., 2011 ), consistent with the notion that certain brain regions might participate in multiple networks ( Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Sporns et al., 2007 ;  Andrews-Hanna et al. 2010 ;  Leech et al., 2011 ;  Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ). 
 Here, we address the possibility of multiple network membership by applying latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA;  Blei et al., 2003 ) and spatial Independent Component Analysis (ICA;  Calhoun et al., 2001 ; Beckman et al., 2004) to examine the topography of overlapping networks. This is an important consideration because network topography may change substantially from our original estimates ( Yeo et al., 2011 ) if constraints are relaxed to permit overlapping networks. Conversely, unbiased estimation of network topography may broadly confirm previous estimates and allow us to investigate the interactions and overlaps among networks. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Overview 
 We applied the LDA model to resting-state data from 1,000 healthy young adults from the Brain Genomics Superstruct Project (GSP), as well as to 12 high quality, high-resolution individual subject datasets from the Human Connectome Project (HCP;  Van Essen et al., 2013 ). The large sample size in GSP and the multiple sessions of individual HCP subjects permitted us to quantify patterns of cortico-cortical coupling that reveal insights into interactions within and across functional networks. Analyses proceeded in four stages. First, we applied the mixture model ( Yeo et al., 2011 ) and LDA model ( Blei et al., 2003 ) to both the GSP and HCP group datasets, in order to examine how cortical network organization changes as regions are permitted to participate in multiple networks ( Figure 1 ). For this analysis, the GSP and HCP datasets were used to provide independent replication samples. Next, we further analyzed several cortical regions participating in multiple sub-networks ( Figures 2  to  4 ). We then exploited the high quality, multi-session HCP data to determine if network organization can be estimated and replicated in individual subjects ( Figures 5  and  6 ). This increased the confidence that the discovered network organization was not merely a consequence of averaging across subjects. Additional control analyses confirmed similar network organization regardless of whether global signal regression was performed during preprocessing ( Supplemental Figure 7 ) and across degenerate (i.e., not highest likelihood) network estimates ( Figures 7  and  8 ). 
 
 
 Datasets 
 The GSP subjects were between ages 18-35 (mean age = 21.3; 42.7% male). Participants underwent one or two runs of eyes open rest (EOR). Analyses of the GSP data have been published previously (e.g.,  Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ). The HCP subjects were between ages 26-35 (mean age estimate = 30.9; 16.7% male). HCP only provides aggregated data concerning age, hence mean age can only be estimated. HCP participants underwent two runs of passive fixation (FIX) in each of two separate sessions, for a total of four runs (~24 h interval between sessions). 
 
 
 GSP MRI Data Acquisition and Preprocessing 
 Data were acquired on 3T Tim Trio scanners (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a 12-channel phased-array head coil. Functional data consisted of gradient-echo echo-planar images (EPI) sensitive to blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast. Parameters for the resting data were: repetition time (TR) = 3,000 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, flip angle (FA) = 85°, 3 × 3 × 3 mm voxels, field of view (FOV) = 216, and 47 axial slices collected with interleaved acquisition. Slices were oriented along the anterior commissure-posterior commissure plane. Functional runs lasted 6.2 min (124 time points). Structural data included a multiecho T1-weighted magnetization-prepared gradient-echo (MP-RAGE) image ( van der Kouwe et al., 2008 ). 
 fMRI processing steps included 1) discarding the first four frames of each run, 2) correcting for slice acquisition-dependent time shifts in each volume with SPM2 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), and 3) correcting for head motion using rigid body translation and rotation parameters (FSL;  Jenkinson et al., 2002 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ). This was followed by standard functional connectivity preprocessing ( Fox et al., 2005 ;  Vincent et al., 2006 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2010 ). Linear trends over each run were removed and a low-pass temporal filter retained frequencies below 0.08 Hz. Spurious variance was removed using linear regression with terms for head motion, whole brain signal, ventricle signal, white matter signal and their derivatives. 
 Individual participants’ T1 scans were reconstructed into surface representations using FreeSurfer ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu ;  Fischl 2012 ). Functional data were registered to structural images using FreeSurfer's FsFast package ( Greve and Fischl, 2009 ;  http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/FsFast ). The structural preprocessing and structural-functional data alignment steps were described in  Yeo et al. (2011) . Functional data were projected onto the FreeSurfer surface space (2 mm mesh), smoothed on the surface using a 6 mm full-width half-maximum kernel, and were then downsampled to a 4 mm mesh. 
 
 
 HCP MRI Data Acquisition and Preprocessing 
 HCP data were part of the HCP initial October 2012 public data release ( http://www.humanconnectome.org/data ). Data were acquired on a 3T Skyra scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a standard 32-channel head coil. The scanner has a customized SC72 gradient insert and a customized body transmitter coil with 56 cm bore size. The HCP Skyra has the standard set of Siemens shim coils (up to 2nd order). Functional data consisted of gradient-echo EPI sensitive to BOLD contrast. Parameters for the resting data were: TR = 720 ms, TE = 33.1 ms, FA = 52°, 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxels, FOV = 208 × 180 mm, and 72 oblique axial slices alternated between phase encoding in a right to left direction in one run and phase encoding in a left to right direction in the other run ( Feinberg et al., 2010 ;  Moeller et al., 2010 ;  Setsompop et al., 2012 ;  Xu et al., 2012 ). Each functional run lasted 14.55 min (1200 time points). Structural data included a T1-weighted MP-RAGE image. Parameters for the structural scan were as follows: TR = 2400 ms, TI = 1000 ms, TE=2.14 ms, FA = 8°, 0.7 × 0.7 × 0.7 mm voxels and FOV = 224 × 224 mm. More details of the acquisition strategy can be found in  Van Essen et al. (2012) . 
 We utilized the fMRI preprocessed data released by the HCP ( Glasser et al., 2013 ). fMRI processing steps included 1) gradient distortion correction ( Jovicich et al., 2006 ), 2) motion correction, 3) distortion correction, 4) registration to the T1 scan ( Greve and Fischl, 2009 ), 5) spline resampling to FSL MNI152 2mm space using FSL FNIRT ( Jenkinson et al., 2002 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ), and 6) intensity normalization to mean of 10000 and bias field correction. This was followed by standard functional connectivity preprocessing as in the GSP dataset. The preprocessed fcMRI data were projected from FSL MNI152 space onto the FreeSurfer surface space (1mm mesh), smoothed using a 6-mm full-width half-maximum kernel and downsampled to a 4mm mesh. The nonlinear mapping between FSL MNI152 volumetric space and FreeSurfer surface space is detailed in  Buckner et al. (2011) . 
 
 
 Clustering 
 The method of clustering cerebral cortical data has been previously described ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). Briefly, for each subject, the Pearson's product moment correlation was computed between each surface vertex (N = 18715) and 1175 uniformly distributed cortical regions of interest (ROIs). The “connectivity profile” of each surface vertex was its functional coupling to these ROIs. Each participant's 1175 × 18715 matrix of correlations was binarized to retain the top 10% of correlations before summing across subjects to obtain an overall group estimate P. Therefore, the  i th row and  j th column of the matrix P was the number of subjects whose correlations between the  i th vertex and  j th ROI are within the top 10% of correlations (within each individual subject). In other words, each matrix component took on integer values from 0 to 1000 in the GSP dataset. The connectivity profiles were clustered using a mixture of von Mises-Fisher distributions ( Lashkari et al., 2010 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ). We repeated the clustering algorithm 1000 times with different random initializations and selected the estimate with best model likelihood. For more details, we refer readers to  Lashkari et al. (2010)  and  Yeo et al. (2011) . Because our previous analyses ( Yeo et al., 2011 ) identified solutions with 7 and 17 network clusters to be particularly stable, we adopted these for the present study. 
 
 
 Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) 
 LDA was first introduced in the text mining literature ( Blei et al., 2003 ). The application of LDA to estimate overlapping modules (networks) in graphs has been previously proposed ( Zhang et al., 2007 ). Here, we employed LDA to estimate cortical networks from resting-state fMRI data. 
 Like spatial independent component analysis (ICA;  Beckmann and Smith, 2004 ), LDA permits a brain region to belong to multiple networks. Both ICA ( Beckmann and Smith, 2004 ) and LDA ( Hoffman et al. 2010 ) seek to factorize a matrix M into a product of two matrices W and H. Because there are an infinite number of ways to factorize a matrix, additional constraints are required. 
 In the case of spatial ICA applied to fMRI, the spatial weights of the estimated networks (components) are constrained to be independent ( Beckman et al., 2005 ;  Calhoun et al., 2001 ), but can take on negative values. LDA is closely related to non-negative matrix factorization ( Hoffman et al. 2010 ). When applied to resting-state fMRI data in this paper, LDA constrains the spatial weights of the estimated networks to be non-negative (in addition to other constraints). We refer interested readers to  Blei et al. (2003)  for the probabilistic (and more well-known) interpretation of LDA. 
 In this work, we used LDA to factorize the 1175 × 18715 matrix P (see the previous “Clustering” section) into the product of two matrices W (1175 × K) by H (K × 18715), where K is the number of networks. The k-th row of the matrix H sums to one over all 18715 vertices of the cerebral cortex. We can interpret the k-th row as the probability that the k-th functional connectivity network includes a particular surface vertex Pr(vertex | k-th network). 
 To compare the clustering and LDA results, we consider 7 and 17 networks in this paper. The LDA model is estimated with 100 random initializations. The estimate with the best likelihood bound is selected. The LDA code is publicly available 1 . 
 
 
 Spatial Independent Component Analysis (Spatial ICA) 
 We applied spatial ICA (FSL melodic 3.10;  Beckmann and Smith, 2004 ) to the surface projected fcMRI-preprocessed data. We estimated 20 ICA components because of precedence (e.g.,  Smith et al. 2009 ) and because “20” is close to the number of networks (“17”) we sought in the clustering and LDA models. We also experimented with 17 independent components, as well as applying ICA directly to raw volumetric fMRI data before projecting the spatial components to the surface. The results were similar across these different experiments and so for conciseness, we will focus on the 20 ICA components estimated from surface-projected fcMRI-preprocessed data. 
 
 
 Matching Networks between Datasets and Methods 
 Since the ordering of the networks (or components) estimated using different methods and datasets is arbitrary, we used the Hungarian matching algorithm ( Kuhn 1955 ) to find the correspondences between networks estimated with different methods and datasets. Essentially, the networks were relabeled so as to maximize the spatial agreement between corresponding networks. 
 In particular, HCP clustering estimates were reordered to match the GSP clustering estimates by maximizing the number of vertices belonging to corresponding networks across the datasets. Similarly, the HCP LDA estimates were reordered to match the GSP LDA estimates by maximizing the correlation between Pr(vertex | network) of corresponding networks across datasets 2 .  
 To match clustering estimates with LDA estimates, we thresholded the LDA estimates to obtain winner-takes-all parcellations. The clustering estimates were then reordered to match the winner-takes-all LDA estimates by maximizing the number of vertices belonging to corresponding (winner-takes-all) networks across methods. 
 Finally, we found 17 of the 20 ICA components that best correspond to the 17 LDA estimates by maximizing the correlation between Pr(vertex | LDA network) and the un-thresholded, un-normalised Z-score ICA maps of corresponding networks across methods. 
 
 
 Visualization 
 Clustering, LDA and ICA estimates were transformed from FreeSurfer surface space ( Dale et al. 1999 ;  Fischl et al. 1999a ;  1999b ) to the PALS-B12 surface space for visualization using Caret ( Van Essen, 2005 ). Network colors match  Yeo et al. (2011) . Lines representing clustering boundaries were smoothed to remove high spatial frequency jaggedness resulting from mapping the data to PALS space. 
 
 
 Comparison of Network Estimates in GSP and HCP Datasets 
 The 7-network clustering and LDA analyses of the GSP and HCP datasets are shown in  Figure 1 . Since each LDA network comprises a probability distribution over vertices Pr(vertex | network), we can visualize each distribution as a map over the cortex. Because LDA is a Bayesian model, there is no obvious threshold for displaying the probability maps. Given that there are 18715 vertices and the probability distribution sums to one over all the vertices, any probability larger than 1/18715 is above expectation. Here, we chose a relatively stringent threshold of 1e-4 (roughly two times 1/18715). The LDA estimates in  Figure 1  were overlaid on the boundaries of the respective 7-network clustering estimates in the GSP and HCP datasets. The boundaries allowed the comparison between the clustering and LDA estimates. 
 The 17-network clustering and LDA analyses of the GSP and HCP datasets are shown in  Figures 3  and  4 . Because of the small number of subjects in the HCP dataset, we will focus our interpretation on the similarities between the HCP and GSP estimates. 
 Supplemental Figures 1 and 2  juxtapose 7 of the 17 corresponding LDA networks and ICA components in the GSP and HCP datasets respectively. To foreshadow the results, ICA and LDA provide very similar network estimates, except for negative spatial weights in the ICA estimates. Both ICA and LDA decompose a signal into a linear combination of component signals ( Lee and Seung, 1999 ). For LDA, only additive combinations are allowed. This is in contrast with ICA, which may allow component signals to cancel each other out via subtractions ( Lee and Seung, 1999 ). Therefore, the non-negativity constraints in LDA are compatible with the intuitive notions of combining parts to form a whole ( Lee and Seung, 1999 ). It may be the case that the negative spatial weights in ICA are functionally meaningful, but assessment is difficult since ground-truth network estimates are not available. Consequently, we chose to focus on the LDA results 3 . 
 
 
 Robustness to Number of Networks 
 As discussed in our previous paper ( Yeo et al. 2011 ), the focus on 7-network and 17-network solutions should not be taken to imply that meaningful properties are absent in alternative parcellation schemes. By focusing on both a relatively coarse solution (7 networks) and a fine-resolution solution (17 networks), we hoped to capture broad aspects of the solution space that were consistent within these relative extremes. However, we observed stable results for other network parcellations as well (e.g. 10 &12 networks, see  Figure 6  of  Yeo et al. 2011 ). To ensure our present results are robust to the choice of 7 and 17 networks, we estimated 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 18 and 30 networks by applying clustering and LDA to the GSP dataset ( Supplemental Figure 3 ). 
 
 
 Quantifying Overlap Between Networks 
 To assess the overlap between networks, we computed Pr(network | vertex) for each vertex by applying Bayes’ rule to Pr(vertex | network) and assuming each network is equally likely, i.e., Pr(network) = 1/K. Since Pr(network | vertex) sums to 1 over the estimated K networks, any probability larger than 1/K is above expectation. For each vertex, we consider the number of networks with Pr(network | vertex) above 1/K as a rough measure of the number of networks the vertex is participating in.  Figure 2A  shows the map of the number of networks each vertex participates in. For this analysis we focus on the most stable solution – 7-network LDA results for the GSP dataset. 
 To quantify the distribution of multiple-network participation across the cerebral cortex, we computed the fraction of vertices participating in more than one LDA network for each network of the 7-network clustering estimates ( Figure 2B ). Vertices within 10mm of clustering boundaries were excluded from this analysis because they might reflect uncertainties in the network estimates. We also computed the fraction of vertices participating in more than one LDA network for each winner-takes-all LDA network ( Supplemental Figure 4 ). Vertices within 10mm of the winner-takes-all LDA boundaries were excluded from this analysis. 
 To ensure the above analysis was robust to the choice of threshold for Pr(network | vertex), we repeated the analysis using a more liberal threshold of 0.75/K and a more conservative threshold of 1.25/K ( Supplemental Figure 5 ). We also repeated the analysis with 6-network and 8-network LDA estimates to ensure our results were robust to the choice of number of networks ( Supplemental Figure 6 ). 
 As the results will show, the default and dorsal attention networks have the greatest proportion of regions participating in multiple networks. Therefore, we identified brain regions that (1) were at least 10mm away from both 7-network clustering and winner-takes-all LDA boundaries, (2) participated in multiple networks from the 7-network estimate and either (3a) participated in multiple networks (from the 17-network LDA estimate) that overlapped significantly with the default network or (3b) participated in multiple networks (from the 17-network LDA estimate) that overlapped significantly with the dorsal attention network. We explored the participation of these regions in multiple networks from the 17-network LDA estimates ( Figures 3  and  4 ). 
 
 
 LDA Estimates in Individual Subjects 
 To ensure the network organization we discovered was not an artifact of intersubject averaging, we applied the 7-network LDA model to individual sessions of each HCP subject. This also allowed us to evaluate the test-retest reliability of the LDA estimates. The LDA estimates of both sessions of subjects with the best ( Figure 5 ) and median ( Figure 6 ) test-retest reliability are juxtaposed. 
 
 
 Global Signal Regression 
 The regression of global signal during fcMRI preprocessing can introduce negative correlations between brain regions ( Fox et al. 2009 ;  Murphy et al. 2009 ). To ensure the network organization we discovered was robust to variations in fcMRI preprocessing, we randomly selected a subset of 100 subjects from the GSP dataset and processed them without global signal regression. We referred to this data as the non-GSR dataset. We then estimated 7 and 17 networks from this non-GSR dataset using both von Mises-Fisher clustering and LDA ( Supplemental Figure 7 ). 
 
 
 Degenerate High-Likelihood Clustering and LDA Estimates 
 While we have focused on network estimates with the highest likelihood, there might be degenerate or alternate network estimates with high likelihood values that are topologically distinct from the best estimates ( Good et al., 2010 ). Given that these degenerate estimates have likelihood values close to the best estimate, slight variations of the original models might result in these alternate network estimates becoming the best solutions. Consequently, we employed two different approaches to explore whether the network organization of the degenerate solutions agrees with that of the best estimate (c.f.  Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ). 
 First, we assessed whether degenerate estimates exhibited parallel large-scale networks in association cortex by exploring the solution space of the von Mises-Fisher mixture model obtained from 1000 different random initializations. We computed the overlap agreement between each of the 1000 estimates and the best estimate in the GSP dataset ( Figure 7A ). In addition, we computed an “exhaustive” set of 7-network clustering estimates that are representative of the 1000 random initializations ( Figure 7B ). We determined this “exhaustive” set as follows. We first initialized the “exhaustive” set to consist only of the best clustering estimate (i.e., estimate with the highest likelihood). We then iterated the following procedure until convergence. At each iteration, among all clustering estimates with less than 80% overlap with the current “exhaustive” set of clustering estimates, we added the clustering estimate with the highest likelihood to the “exhaustive” set. The procedure therefore allowed us to select a subset of clustering solutions that were the most different from each other and spanned the solution space of the mixture model. The 80% overlap threshold was chosen because we found (empirically) that estimates with more than 80% overlap were extremely similar (visually). 
 Second, to assess whether degenerate estimates exhibited the property that many association regions participated in multiple networks, we computed the number of networks each vertex participates in, averaged across the 100 random initializations of the 7-network and 17-network LDA ( Figure 8 ). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Clustering Estimates of GSP and HCP datasets 
 The 7-network clustering estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets were similar (top row of  Figure 1 ), with 78% of vertices identically labeled within the entire cerebral cortex. Five of the networks were highly similar across the two datasets, with overlaps between the somatomotor (blue) and visual (purple) networks at more than 90%. Notable differences included portions of the default (red) network in the GSP dataset classified as part of the limbic (cream) network in the HCP dataset. This may relate to differences in signal-to-noise around regions of high susceptibility (which severely influences estimates of the limbic network). The overlap of the 17-network clustering estimates (not shown) between the GSP and HCP datasets was 69%. 
 
 
 LDA Estimates of GSP and HCP datasets 
 The 7-network LDA estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets were similar (rows 2-8 of  Figure 1 ). The mean of the Pearson correlations of the seven pairs of LDA network estimates was 0.93. The worst pair of networks was correlated at 0.91. The mean pairwise correlation of the 17-network LDA estimates was 0.82. Details of several example networks are discussed below. 
 
 
 ICA Estimates of GSP and HCP datasets 
 The LDA and ICA estimates were similar in the GSP ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) and HCP ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) datasets. The means of the Pearson correlations between 17 corresponding pairs of networks were 0.72 in the GSP dataset and 0.62 in the HCP dataset. Given the similarities between ICA and LDA (except for the negative spatial weights in the ICA estimates), we will focus on the LDA estimates. 
 
 
 Broad Properties of Clustering and LDA Estimates of Cortical Organization are Similar 
 A critical question is the degree to which the winner-takes-all and LDA approaches converge on the same basic network organization. The agreement between the 7-network clustering and LDA estimates can be visually appreciated by looking at the correspondences between the LDA estimates and clustering boundaries (rows 2-8 in  Figure 1 ). 
 The overlap between the 7-network clustering estimates and the winner-takes-all LDA estimates in the GSP dataset was 82%, while the overlap in the HCP dataset was 88%. The overlap between the 17-network clustering estimates and the winner-takes-all LDA estimates in the GSP dataset was 70%, while the overlap in the HCP dataset was 63%. 
 
 
 Robustness to Number of Networks 
 The focus on 7- and 17-network estimates should not be taken to imply that meaningful properties are absent in alternative parcellation schemes. We found similar agreement between the clustering and LDA estimates for 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 18 and 30 networks in the GSP dataset; the overlap agreement between the clustering estimates and the winner-takes-all LDA estimates were 98%, 71%, 85%, 77%, 84%, 74%, 64% and 55% respectively.  Supplemental Figure 3  shows the clustering estimates for the different number of networks. 
 The qualitative visualization and quantitative estimates suggest that the broad topographic organization of cortical networks ( Yeo et al. 2011 ) is not an artifact of the requirement that each cortical region must belong to a single network. Nonetheless, differences do emerge from the two approaches, and these are the topic of the remaining results. 
 
 
 Association Cortex Shows More Pervasive Network Participation Than Visual and Somatomotor Cortices 
 As a first step in visualizing properties of cortical organization revealed by LDA, we plotted the number of networks each cortical region participates in for the 7-network LDA estimates in the GSP dataset ( Figure 2A ). This number was obtained by counting for each vertex the number of networks whose Pr(network | vertex) exceeded 1/7. What is immediately apparent is that many cortical association regions participate in at least two functional connectivity networks. 
 To quantify the distribution of multiple-network participation across the cerebral cortex, the fraction of vertices participating in multiple LDA networks for each network of the 7-network clustering estimates is shown in  Figure 2B . Vertices within 10mm of clustering boundaries were excluded because they might reflect uncertainties in the network estimations. The dotted line indicates that 44% of the vertices (at least 10mm away from clustering boundaries) participate in multiple networks. 
 Many cortical association regions participated in at least two functional connectivity networks ( Figure 2B ). This was in contrast with large portions of early sensory and late motor cortices that participated in a single network. In particular, the dorsal attention network, the ventral attention network, the frontoparietal control network and the default network had above average numbers of cortical vertices participating in multiple networks. In contrast, the visual network, the somatomotor network and the limbic network had below average number of cortical vertices participating in multiple networks. 
 We obtained consistent results when we computed the fraction of vertices participating in multiple LDA networks for each winner-takes-all LDA network ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) or when we repeated the analyses with different thresholds ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) or different number of networks ( Supplemental Figure 6 ). 
 Across analyses ( Figure 2B  and  Supplemental Figures 4 to 6 ), the default and dorsal attention networks had the largest proportions of brain vertices participating in multiple networks. To explore this phenomenon further, we identified brain regions in the left hemisphere that (1) were at least 10mm away from both clustering and winner-takes-all LDA boundaries, (2) participated in multiple networks from the 7-network estimate and (3) participated in multiple networks (from the 17-network LDA estimate) that overlapped significantly with the default network (from the 7-network estimate). Four regions were identified (black asterisks in  Figure 2A ): precuneus (PCUN), lateral temporal cortex (LTC), posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC). Their MNI coordinates are reported in  Table 1 . It is worth pointing out that the PCUN region was surrounded by a band of regions participating in only one network, suggesting that its participation in multiple networks was not due to spatial blurring across network boundaries. 
 We also selected brain regions in the left hemisphere that (1) were at least 10mm away from both clustering and winner-takes-all LDA boundaries, (2) participated in multiple networks from the 7-network estimate and (3) participated in multiple networks (from the 17-network LDA estimate) that overlapped significantly with the dorsal attention network (from the 7-network estimate). Two regions were identified (green asterisks in  Figure 2A ) and they are putative homologues of macaque areas LIP (lateral intraparietal) and FEF (frontal eye fields) based on a meta-analysis of fMRI literature ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). Coordinates of these two regions are reported in  Table 1 . 
 We now explore the participation of the default regions in multiple paralimbic networks and the dorsal attention regions in multiple hierarchically organized networks in the 17-network LDA estimates. 
 
 
 Overlapping Components of Multiple Paralimbic Networks 
 The 17-network clustering estimates in the GSP and HCP datasets are juxtaposed in  Figure 3A .  Figure 3B  shows four paralimbic networks from the 17-network LDA estimates. The networks overlapped significantly with brain regions typically associated with the default network. The asterisks ( Figure 3B ) correspond to the default regions defined in  Table 1 . An asterisk is colored black if Pr(vertex | network) > 1e-4 at that brain location. Therefore both the PCUN and PPC regions preferentially participated in paralimbic networks 1, 2 and 4; the MPFC region preferentially participated in paralimbic networks 1, 3 and 4; the LTC region preferentially participated in all four paralimbic networks. 
 
 
 FEF and LIP are Involved in Multiple Hierarchically Organized Networks 
 The 17-network clustering estimates in the GSP and HCP datasets are juxtaposed in  Figure 4A .  Figure 4B  shows four networks from the 17-network LDA estimates that overlap significantly with brain regions typically associated with the dorsal attention network. These networks are likely the homologue of the well-studied hierarchical visuomotor pathway in macaques ( Maunsell and Van Essen, 1983 ). The asterisks ( Figure 4B ) correspond to the dorsal attention regions defined in  Table 1 . An asterisk is colored black if Pr(vertex | network) > 1e-4. Therefore the LIP-homologue region preferentially participated in all four networks, while the putative FEF region preferentially participated in networks 2, 3 and 4. The visual hierarchy from early visual cortex to superior parietal cortex and frontal eye fields was noted in  Yeo et al. (2011)  via a series of seed-based functional connectivity analyses. As this example illustrates, LDA detected overlap among functional networks comprising early retinotopic visual areas and other components of this sensory-motor processing stream that were lost when making a winner-take-all assumption. 
 
 
 Cortical Network Structure can be Detected in Individual Subjects 
 Many research goals require analysis of imaging data at the individual subject level. The HCP dataset provides high quality datasets that are obtained twice in participants over separate days. To ensure the network organization we discovered was not an artifact of averaging across subjects, we analyzed these data to determine whether LDA networks could be detected within individual subjects and whether they would show reliability. 
 Pairwise correlation of the 7-network LDA estimates between the two sessions of each subject was 0.60 on average. The best subject had a mean pairwise correlation of 0.75. The median subject had a mean pairwise correlation of 0.61. Nine of the twelve subjects had average correlations of at least 0.56, suggesting moderate reliability. 
 The 7-network LDA estimates of the best and median subjects are shown in  Figures 5  and  6 . The estimated networks were well replicated across the two sessions even for the median subject. This is consistent with previous assessments of test-retest reliability of resting-state networks ( Shehzad et al., 2009 ;  Zuo et al., 2010 ). 
 In both subjects ( Figures 6  and  7 ), the visual (row 1), somatomotor (row 2) and paralimbic (rows 6 and 7) networks were well replicated. However, the dorsal attention (green), ventral attention (violet) and frontoparietal control (orange) networks tended to inter-mix across sessions (rows 3 to 5 of  Figures 5  and  6 ). This is not surprising given that the regions from these networks are correlated ( Fox et al. 2006 ;  Yeo et al. 2011 ). For example, dorsal attention regions are known to correlate with ventral attention regions ( Fox et al. 2006 ;  Yeo et al. 2011 ). 
 
 
 Choice of Thresholding LDA Estimates 
 We should emphasize that the choice of thresholding the LDA networks at 1e-4 was not critical for our analyses. While thresholding Pr(vertex | network) networks was necessary to visualize the results, statistics of agreement among different data-driven approaches and datasets ( Figure 1 ,  Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 ) were computed independent of the threshold. Similarly, statistics for test-retest reliability ( Figures 5  and  6 ) were computed independent of the threshold. Finally, given the relatively stringent threshold of 1e-4 (almost twice the minimal threshold of 1/18715), using a lower threshold would simply confirm our broad point that different cortical regions identified in  Table 1  were involved in multiple subnetworks ( Figures 3  and  4 ). 
 
 
 Cortical Network Structure is Invariant to Global Signal Regression 
 To ensure the network organization we discovered was not an artifact of global signal regression (GSR) during fcMRI preprocessing, we estimated 7 and 17 networks in the non-GSR dataset consisting of 100 GSP subjects processed without global signal regression. The 7-network and 17-network clustering estimates from the non-GSR dataset are shown in  Supplemental Figure 7 . We found excellent agreement between the network estimates from the non-GSR and full GSP datasets. In particular, the overlap of the 7-network clustering estimates was 95%, while the overlap of the 17-network clustering estimates was 91% across the two datasets. The mean pairwise correlation of the 7-network LDA estimates was 0.99, while the mean pairwise correlation of the 17-network LDA estimates was 0.85 across the two datasets. 
 
 
 Cortical Network Structure is Replicated in Degenerate Network Estimates 
 Finally, we assessed whether degenerate network estimates reaffirmed the network organization we discovered.  Figure 7A  plots the overlap between the best 7-network clustering estimate and estimates derived from the 1000 random initializations using the GSP dataset. The clustering estimates were ordered from the highest likelihood (best estimate) to the smallest likelihood. Out of 1000 random initializations, 415 resulted in solutions with overlap of over 90% with the best solution, suggesting the best estimate corresponds to a robust local optimum. 
 Figure 7B  shows the “exhaustive” set of 7-network clustering estimates. The eight clustering estimates were selected to be different from each other and spanned the solution space of the mixture model. Even though the seven “degenerate” clustering estimates do not have the highest likelihoods, they still explained interesting variance in the data. For example, three degenerate solutions fractionate the somatomotor cortex into dorsal-ventral portions, just like in the best 17-network estimate ( Figure 3A ). 
 Importantly, while the details of the clustering estimates varied, the broad property that early sensory and late motor cortices appeared to participate in preferentially local networks was also found across all degenerate solutions. Furthermore, (1) each association network spanned multiple lobes and (2) the components of multiple networks were spatially adjacent. Therefore, the broad property that the human association cortex consisted of multiple, parallel networks was found across all degenerate solutions. 
 Similarly, we found that across 100 random initializations of the 7-network and 17-network LDA ( Figure 8 ), many association regions appeared to participate in multiple networks, while large portions of early sensory and late motor cortices participated in single networks. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Complex behaviors are subserved by distributed networks of specialized brain areas ( Posner et al., 1988 ;  Distler et al., 1993 ;  Mesulam 1998 ;  Shadlen and Newsome, 2001 ). In this work, we show that the human association cortex consists of multiple, interdigitated distributed networks in contrast to early sensory and late motor cortices participating in preferentially local networks ( Figure 1 ). Many association regions appear to participate in multiple networks, while large portions of early sensory and late motor cortices participate in single networks ( Figure 2 ;  Supplemental Figure 4 ). We demonstrate examples of overlapping paralimbic networks ( Figure 3 ) and overlapping hierarchically organized networks ( Figure 4 ). This architecture was detected and replicated in individual subjects ( Figures 5  and  6 ). Additional control analyses confirmed similar network organization regardless of global signal regression ( Supplemental Figure 7 ) and across degenerate network estimates ( Figures 7  and  8 ). The overlaps among networks may provide clues to the network interactions that support human cognition. 
 
 Association Cortex Comprises Interdigitated, Segregated Large-Scale Circuits 
 Our findings suggest that the early sensory and late motor cortices participate in preferentially local networks ( Figure 1 ; also see  Sepulcre et al. 2010 ). In contrast, the association cortex comprises interdigitated, partially overlapping large-scale circuits ( Figures 1  and  2 ;  Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 ). The key features of this organization are that (1) each association network consists of strongly coupled brain regions spanning frontal, parietal, temporal, and cingulate cortices, and (2) the components of multiple networks exist adjacent to each other and are partially overlapping. 
 This organization is replicable across datasets (GSP and HCP) and techniques (clustering, LDA and ICA;  Figure 1  and  Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 ). Although details may differ, we can replicate this general organization across different number of estimated networks ( Supplemental Figure 3 ), with and without global signal regression ( Supplemental Figure 7 ) and across degenerate network estimates ( Figure 7 ). Finally, the organization can be detected in individual subjects and replicated across sessions in the HCP dataset ( Figures 5  and  6 ), indicating that this parallel architecture is not an artifact of group averaging. 
 Given the convergence in cortical network organization across datasets and methods, it is surprising that this parallel organization has not been emphasized in previous ICA analyses. We suspect the main reason is that the winner-takes-all approach allows us to juxtapose the spatial organization of different networks in one single map (top row of  Figure 1 ), as opposed to more sophisticated approaches allowing for multiple memberships (bottom rows of  Figure 1 ). The parallel architecture is easily appreciated in the top row of  Figure 1 , but is less clear in the bottom rows, even though the estimated networks are extremely similar (88% overlap in the HCP dataset). Furthermore, most previous analyses (e.g.,  Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  De Luca et al., 2006 ;  Smith et al., 2009 ) visualized the estimated networks (components) using brain slices, making it difficult to appreciate complex topographic relationships. 
 
 
 Estimates of Segregation and Overlap of Functional Connectivity Networks 
 In general, network overlaps occur throughout association cortex ( Figure 2a ). These overlaps do not exclusively co-localize with the presence of a border ( Figure 2b ;  Table 1 ;  Supplemental Figure 4 ). We exclude these boundary regions in our analyses ( Figure 2b ;  Table 1 ;  Supplemental Figure 4 ) because they may reflect uncertainties in the network estimations (c.f.  Power et al., 2013 ). The default and dorsal attention networks have the largest proportions of brain vertices participating in multiple networks ( Figure 2b ;  Supplemental Figure 4 ). These results can be replicated with different number of networks ( Supplemental Figure 5 ), different thresholds ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) and across degenerate network estimates ( Figure 8 ). 
 We will focus on the dorsal attention and default networks in the following sections. However, we should emphasize that regions in other association networks also participate in multiple networks. Our emphasis on the default and dorsal attention networks may simply be due to their large sizes and our exclusion of regions close to network boundaries. This necessarily precludes investigation of the smaller regions of any network, though examples of regions possessing multiple network membership can be found in all networks at the resolution examined. 
 For example, there are regions in the posterior cingulate sulcus portion of the ventral attention network (area 5Ci;  Scheperjans et al. 2008a ,  2008b ) at least 10mm away from any network boundaries, which also participate in the dorsal attention network (rows 4 and 5 of  Figure 1 ). This is consistent with the correlations ( Fox et al., 2006 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ) and close functional relationships ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ) between the two networks.  Corbetta et al. (2008) , as part of a review, noted that a region of right prefrontal cortex overlapped the dorsal and ventral attention systems, providing a candidate region for allowing interactions between the otherwise distinct systems (also see  Asplund et al., 2010 ). The present results suggest the cingulate is also a potential point of interaction with the caveat that, for all such observations, it is difficult to know whether there is true spatial convergence or distinct modules are present below our level of resolution. With this caveat in mind, we now focus our attention on two examples of overlapping networks. 
 
 Overlapping parallel paralimbic networks 
 Numerous lines of evidence from both human imaging and non-human primate anatomical tract tracing suggest the existence of a network of brain regions, known as the default network, involved in internal mentation (for reviews, see  Buckner et al., 2008 ;  Binder et al., 2009 ). These regions include the medial temporal lobe, posterior medial cortex (precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex), medial prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal cortex and lateral temporal cortex. 
 Recent evidence ( Laird et al., 2009 ;  Andrews-Hanna et al, 2010 ;  Leech et al., 2011 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ) suggests functional heterogeneity within the default network. In particular,  Andrews-Hanna et al. (2010)  suggested that the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and the (anterior) medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) form the core of two overlapping default sub-networks. Our current analysis extends Andrews-Hanna's results, suggesting that the precuneus (PCUN), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), lateral temporal cortex (LTC) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC) participate in multiple paralimbic networks that overlap traditional default network regions ( Figure 3 ). In particular, our analysis highlights the LTC, which appears to participate in all four paralimbic networks. 
 Previous results have suggested functional heterogeneity within the posterior medial cortex ( Laird et al., 2009 ;  Margulies et al., 2009 ;  Leech et al., 2011 ;  Fornito et al., 2012 ). Our results also suggest the presence of such heterogeneity. For example, the PCC appears to preferentially participate in paralimbic networks 1 and 4 ( Figure 3 ), while PCUN (asterisk in  Figure 3 ) preferentially participates in paralimbic networks 1, 2 and 4. 
 While we have focused on its involvement in paralimbic networks ( Figure 3 ), the PCUN region may also participate in a network that prominently includes the specific rostral regions of prefrontal cortex (row 5 in  Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 ), although the involvement is clearer in the LDA estimates than in the ICA estimates. Since the rostral prefrontal cortex is implicated in tasks requiring complex rule application (e.g.,  Badre and D'Esposito, 2007 ), this network might be involved in higher-order cognitive control. This may be consistent with heterogeneity of the precuneus previously reported, such as “Cognitive/Associative Central Precuneus” in  Marguiles et al. (2009)  and “Frontoparietal Network” in  Fornito et al. (2012) . 
 
 
 Overlapping hierarchical networks in a canonical sensory-motor pathway 
 While the early sensory and late motor cortices mostly participate in single networks ( Figure 2b ;  Supplemental Figure 4 ), there are exceptions. For example, overlaps between the sensory and motor networks with the dorsal attention network in association cortex ( Figure 4 ) may be expected from the non-human primate connectivity anatomical studies ( Felleman and Van Essen, 1991 ) and may be involved in the hierarchical flow of information among sensory and motor areas. 
 The canonical sensory-motor pathway, including retinotopic visual cortex, the MT+ complex, parietal area LIP and the FEF, has been well characterized in the monkey ( Maunsell and Van Essen, 1983 ;  Andersen et al. 1990 ;  Colby and Goldberg 1999 ;  Shadlen and Newsome 2001 ;  Gold and Shadlen 2007 ). The idea is that visual information propagates from early visual areas to MT+, which constrains decision processes arising from interactions with LIP and FEF in the upper stages of the hierarchy. The anatomical connectivity among the areas within this pathway has been extensively explored in nonhuman primates ( Maunsell and Van Essen 1983 ;  Felleman and Van Essen, 1991 ). In the human literature, this pathway has been studied both in relation to spatially directed movements and also in relation to spatial attention, with components of the pathway sometimes referred to as the dorsal attention network ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ). 
 This visual hierarchy was tested in  Yeo et al. (2011)  via a series of seed-based functional connectivity (also see  Sepulcre et al., 2012b ). The seed-based analysis was necessary because the winner-takes-all approach does not capture information about interactions among regions that fall in separate networks ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). In contrast, the LDA estimate of cortical networks detects overlap among functional networks comprising early retinotopic visual areas and other components of this sensory-motor processing stream that were not previously appreciated ( Figure 4 ). 
 In particular, the estimated human LIP homologue is involved in all four networks in  Figure 4 , including a network comprising mostly regions in the occipital lobe (network 1), a network comprising mostly regions in occipital and parietal lobes (network 2), a network comprising mostly regions in parietal and frontal lobes (network 3) and a higher association network spanning parietal, temporal and frontal lobes (network 4). Therefore networks 2 and 3 may serve as a bridge between early visual cortex (network 1) and higher association cortex (network 4). The FEF region is preferentially involved in the association networks (Networks 2-4), but less so in the early visual network (network 1), consistent with the fact that FEF occupies a higher position than LIP in the sensory-motor hierarchy ( Maunsell and Van Essen 1983 ;  Felleman and Van Essen, 1991 ). 
 
 
 
 Parallel Architecture, Network Interactions and Human Behavior 
 The neurophysiological literature has long recognized the importance of network interactions to cognition (e.g.,  Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004 ;  Fries 2005 ;  Akam and Kullman, 2010 ;  Buschman et al., 2012 ). In recent years there has been increasing interest to use human brain imaging to study how functionally distinct networks interact to support complex behaviors ( Spreng et al., 2010 ;  Bassett et al., 2011 ;  de Pasquale et al, 2012 ;  Fornito et al., 2012 ;  Spreng et al., 2013 ). 
 Our current work suggests that a particularly robust form of interaction might take place in association cortex ( Figures 2 ,  3  and  4 ;  Supplemental Figure 9 ). This is consistent with anatomical evidence that heteromodal association regions serve as critical gateways for information processing ( Pandya and Kuypers, 1969 ;  Jones and Powell, 1970 ;  Goldman-Rakic 1988 ;  Mesulam 1998 ). While we have emphasized long-distance interactions by focusing on overlapping regions at some distance from network boundaries ( Figures 2b ,  3  and  4 ), the interdigitated topography of networks in association cortex suggests a stereotypic spatial architecture, through which network components can locally interact with adjacent components of other functionally distinct networks (also see  Power et al., 2013 ). In other words, local interactions among networks may occur within recurrent spatial patterns or motifs ( Sporns and Kotter, 2004 ;  Bullmore and Sporns, 2009 ;  Rubinov and Sporns, 2010 ;  Power et al., 2011 ). The expectation is that these local and distant interactions among functionally distinct networks facilitate emergent complex behaviors. 
 This network organization can be detected and replicated in individual subjects, although the details might vary across sessions and across subjects, especially in the association cortex ( Figures 5  and  6 ). This variability in network organization may underlie individual differences in behavior or even variability in behavior within a subject. This would be consistent with recent results showing that intersubject variability in functional connectivity is the highest in the association cortex, with regions predicting individual differences in cognitive domains predominantly located in regions of high connectivity variability ( Mueller et al., 2013 ). 
 The distributed association networks converge on cortical regions that are late to develop ( Hill et al., 2010 ) and are expanded in the human brain relative to the macaque brain ( Van Essen and Dierker, 2007 ). Therefore, these distributed association networks have likely been under strong selective pressure to expand in recent hominin evolution. Consequently, even though this parallel architecture may also exist in monkeys ( Goldman-Rakic 1988 ), the details of the interdigitation and overlaps ( Figures 1 ,  3  and  4 ) may differ from monkeys and contribute to human cognition (see  Buckner and Krienen, in press  for discussion). 
 
 
 Limitations and Future Work 
 Tract tracing and physiological studies in monkeys and cats suggest that the cerebral cortex forms spatially organized circuits that include prominent connections with subcortical structures (for review, see  Haber 2003 ;  Jones 2007 ;  Strick et al., 2009 ). In the present work we limit our analysis to the cerebral cortex, and therefore do not consider interactions between the cerebral cortex and subcortical structures. This limitation is partly methodological. Subcortical structures have significantly lower signal-to-noise ratio than the cerebral cortex and so are typically analyzed separately in functional connectivity studies ( Di Martino et al. 2008 ;  Zhang et al. 2008 ;  Krienen and Buckner, 2009 ;  Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ;  Dobromyslin et al., 2012 ; but see  Habas et al., 2009 ;  O'Reilly et al., 2010 ). Our (unpublished) observations suggest that including subcortical structures with cortical analyses would probably not alter the estimated cortical networks, even though subcortical results might be suboptimal. Consequently, we focus on the cerebral cortex in this paper. We are currently exploring techniques that can more effectively jointly analyze cortical and subcortical structures. 
 In addition, this work focuses on the spatial relationships among resting-state functional connectivity networks. The parallel architecture and overlaps in hierarchical and paralimbic networks suggest stereotypic spatial motifs in network interactions. However, our (essentially) correlational analyses will miss vital details of the dynamics of network interactions (Chang et al., 2010;  de Pasquale et al, 2012 ;  Smith et al., 2012 ;  Hutchison et al., 2013 ;  Allen et al., In Press ). Our resting-state analyses will also miss changes in network interactions as a result of task performance ( Bassett et al., 2006 ;  Spreng et al., 2010 ;  Bassett et al., 2011 ;  Fornito et al., 2012 ). These potential issues are outside the scope of this paper and will be addressed in future work. 
 The network organization we found is robust across datasets (GSP and HCP), preprocessing (with and without global signal regression), number of networks, degenerate/alternate network estimates and techniques (clustering, LDA and ICA). Although details vary, corroboration across the different analyses increases our confidence that the general organization of cortical networks is intrinsic to the data. However, we caution that the agreement among different techniques (clustering, LDA and ICA) may simply result from underlying assumptions common across the techniques. For example, while there are similarities between gradient-based ( Cohen et al., 2008 ) and clustering/modularity-based parcellations ( Power et al., 2011 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ), the boundaries in certain brain regions (e.g., visual cortex) can be qualitatively different ( Wig et al., in press ; Buckner and Yeo, under revision). While we suspect the general network organization we discovered would generalize to gradient-based parcellation, we leave this replication (or refutation) to future work. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The human association cortex consists of multiple, interdigitated large-scale networks that, while partially overlapping, possess predominantly parallel organization. This architecture can be detected and replicated in individual subjects. Many, but not all, association regions appear to participate in multiple networks, including those that lie some distance from estimates of network boundaries. The present work suggests that it is possible to consider both the divergent and convergent nature of connectivity in the human cerebral cortex using functional connectivity MRI. Our results suggest that segregation and interdigitation of networks in association cortex may be a true feature of cortical organization and not an artifact of the methods used to estimate their topography. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This work was supported by the National Medical Research Council, Singapore (STaR/0004/2008), Massachusetts General Hospital-University of California, Los Angeles Human Connectome Project (U54MH091665), the Simons Foundation and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Data were provided by the Brain Genomics Superstruct Project (Principal Investigators: Randy Buckner, Jordan Smoller, and Joshua Roffman) and by the Human Connectome Project, WU-Minn Consortium (Principal Investigators: David Van Essen and Kamil Ugurbil; 1U54MH091657) funded by the 16 NIH Institutes and Centers that support the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research; and by the McDonnell Center for Systems Neuroscience at Washington University. This research also utilized resources provided by the Center for Functional Neuroimaging Technologies, P41EB015896 and instruments supported by S10RR021110, S10RR023401 and S10RR019307 from the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging at the Massachusetts General Hospital. The authors would like to thank Jesisca Tandi for help with some of the figures in this paper. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 
 http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~blei/lda-c/ 
 
 
 
 2 
 Using a different measure (e.g., KL-divergence) achieves the same results. 
 
 
 3 
 We note that this negative spatial weight issue is different from the anti-correlations issue discussed in the functional connectivity literature ( Fox et al. 2009 ;  Murphy et al. 2009 ). 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Akam 
 T 
 
 
 Kullmann 
 DM 
 
 
 Oscillations and filtering networks support flexible routing of information. 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 67 
 308 
 320 
 20670837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 EA 
 
 
 Damaraju 
 E 
 
 
 Plis 
 SM 
 
 
 Erhardt 
 EB 
 
 
 Eichele 
 T 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Tracking whole-brain connectivity dynamics in the resting state. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andersen 
 RA 
 
 
 Asanuma 
 C 
 
 
 Essick 
 G 
 
 
 Siegel 
 RM 
 
 
 Corticocortical connections of anatomically and physiologically defined subdivisions within the inferior parietal lobule. 
 J Comp Neurol 
 1990 
 296 
 65 
 113 
 2358530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Reidler 
 JS 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Poulin 
 R 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain's default network. 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 65 
 550 
 562 
 20188659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asplund 
 CL 
 
 
 Todd 
 JJ 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AP 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 A central role for the lateral prefrontal cortex in goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention. 
 Nature neuroscience 
 2010 
 13 
 507 
 512 
 20208526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a hierarchical organization of the prefrontal cortex. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2007 
 19 
 2082 
 2099 
 17892391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Is the rostro-caudal axis of the frontal lobe hierarchical? organization of the frontal lobes. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2009 
 10 
 659 
 669 
 19672274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Meyer-Linderberg 
 A 
 
 
 Sophie 
 A 
 
 
 Duke 
 T 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Adaptive reconfiguration of fractal small-world human brain functional networks. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2006 
 103 
 19518 
 19523 
 17159150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Wymbs 
 NF 
 
 
 Porter 
 MA 
 
 
 Mucha 
 PJ 
 
 
 Carlson 
 JM 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 Dynamic reconfiguration of human brain networks during learning. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2011 
 108 
 7641 
 7646 
 21502525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Probabilistic independent component analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging. 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 2004 
 23 
 137 
 152 
 14964560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 DeLuca 
 M 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Investigations into resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis. 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 2005 
 360 
 1001 
 1013 
 16087444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Rosa-Neto 
 P 
 
 
 Lyttelton 
 OC 
 
 
 Benali 
 H 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 51 
 1126 
 1139 
 20226257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2767 
 2796 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Yetkin 
 FZ 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. 
 Magn Reson Med 
 1995 
 34 
 537 
 541 
 8524021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blei 
 DM 
 
 
 Ng 
 AY 
 
 
 Jordan 
 MI 
 
 Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
 
 J Mach Learn Res 
 2003 
 3 
 993 
 1022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews- Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 The brain's default network. 
 Ann New York Acad Sci 
 2008 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 The evolution of distributed association networks in the human brain. 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 A 
 
 
 Diaz 
 JC 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2011 
 106 
 2322 
 2345 
 21795627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Opportunities and limitations of functional connectivity MRI. 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2013 
 16 
 832 
 837 
 23799476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Borders, map clusters and supra-areal organization in visual cortex 
 submitted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2009 
 10 
 186 
 198 
 19190637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buschman 
 TJ 
 
 
 Denovellis 
 EL 
 
 
 Diogo 
 C 
 
 
 Bullock 
 D 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Synchronous oscillatory neural ensembles for rules in the prefrontal cortex. 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 76 
 838 
 846 
 23177967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buzsáki 
 G 
 
 
 Draguhn 
 A 
 
 
 Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks. 
 Science 
 2004 
 304 
 1926 
 1929 
 15218136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Adali 
 T 
 
 
 Pearlson 
 GD 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2001 
 14 
 140 
 151 
 11559959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 KA 
 
 
 Pearlson 
 GD 
 
 
 Modulation of temporally coherent brain networks estimated using ICA at rest and during cognitive tasks. 
 Hum. Brain Mapp 
 2008 
 29 
 828 
 838 
 18438867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Time–frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured with fMRI. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 81 
 98 
 20006716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choi 
 EY 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BT 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of the human striatum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2012 
 108 
 2242 
 2263 
 22832566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Dierker 
 D 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Defining functional areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity MRI. 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 41 
 45 
 57 
 18367410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colby 
 CL 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 ME 
 
 
 Space and attention in parietal cortex. 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1999 
 22 
 319 
 349 
 10202542 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind. 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 58 
 3 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2002 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 James 
 GA 
 
 
 Holtzheimer 
 PE 
 
 
 Hu 
 XP 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2012 
 33 
 8 
 1914 
 1928 
 21769991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction. 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damoiseaux 
 JS 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2006 
 103 
 13848 
 13853 
 16945915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain. 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 29 
 1359 
 1367 
 16260155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Pasquale 
 F 
 
 
 Penna 
 SD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Marzetti 
 L 
 
 
 Pizzella 
 V 
 
 
 Romani 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 A cortical core for dynamic integration of functional networks in the resting human brain. 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 74 
 753 
 764 
 22632732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Walters 
 JR 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 2735 
 2747 
 18400794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Distler 
 C 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Cortical connections of inferior temporal area TEO in macaque monkeys. 
 J Comp Neurol 
 1993 
 334 
 125 
 150 
 8408755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dobromyslin 
 VI 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Fortier 
 CB 
 
 
 Leritz 
 EC 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Milberg 
 WP 
 
 
 McGlinchey 
 RE 
 
 
 Distinct functional networks within the cerebellum and their relation to cortical systems assessed with independent component analysis. 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 2073 
 2085 
 22342804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 RAT 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2007 
 104 
 11073 
 11078 
 17576922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doucet 
 G 
 
 
 Naveau 
 M 
 
 
 Petit 
 L 
 
 
 Delcroix 
 N 
 
 
 Zago 
 L 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Jobard 
 G 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Mellet 
 E 
 
 
 
 Brain activity at rest: a multiscale hierarchical functional organization. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2011 
 105 
 2753 
 2763 
 21430278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Ramanna 
 S 
 
 
 Gunther 
 M 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Multiplexed Echo Planar Imaging for sub-second whole brain fMRI and fast diffusion imaging. 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 e15710 
 21187930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Felleman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1991 
 1 
 1 
 47 
 1822724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 FreeSurfer. 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 62 
 774 
 781 
 22248573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. 
 Neuroimage 
 1999a 
 9 
 195 
 207 
 9931269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Tootell 
 RBH 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 High-resolution intersubject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1999b 
 8 
 272 
 284 
 10619420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Zalesky 
 A 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Competitive and cooperative dynamics of large-scale brain functional networks supporting recollection. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2012 
 109 
 31 
 12788 
 12793 
 22807481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2005 
 102 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Spontaneous neuronal activity distinguishes human dorsal and ventral attention systems. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2006 
 103 
 10046 
 10051 
 16788060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2009 
 101 
 3270 
 3283 
 19339462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 Spontaneous low- frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: An fMRI investigation of the resting- state default mode of brain function hypothesis. 
 Human brain mapping 
 2005 
 26 
 15 
 29 
 15852468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fries 
 P 
 
 
 A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2005 
 9 
 474 
 480 
 16150631 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Sotiropoulos 
 SN 
 
 
 Wilson 
 JA 
 
 
 Coalson 
 TS 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Andersson 
 JL 
 
 
 Junqian 
 Xu 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Webster 
 M 
 
 
 Polimeni 
 JR 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 the WU-Minn HCP Consortium 
 
 The Minimal Preprocessing Pipelines for the Human Connectome Project. 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 80 
 105 
 124 
 23668970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 JI 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 The neural basis of decision making. 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 30 
 535 
 574 
 17600525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Topography of cognition: parallel distributed networks in primate association cortex. 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 1988 
 11 
 137 
 156 
 3284439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Good 
 BH 
 
 
 de Montjoye 
 YA 
 
 
 Clauset 
 A 
 
 
 Performance of modularity maximization in practical contexts. 
 Phys. Rev. E 
 2010 
 81 
 046106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2003 
 100 
 253 
 258 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greve 
 DN 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based registration. 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 48 
 63 
 72 
 19573611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Habas 
 C 
 
 
 Kamdar 
 N 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 D 
 
 
 Prater 
 K 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Distinct cerebellar contributions to intrinsic connectivity networks. 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 8586 
 8594 
 19571149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 The primate basal ganglia: parallel and integrative networks. 
 J Chem Neuroanat 
 2003 
 26 
 317 
 330 
 14729134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Chen 
 ZJ 
 
 
 Yan 
 C 
 
 
 Yang 
 H 
 
 
 Tang 
 H 
 
 
 Zhu 
 C 
 
 
 Gong 
 Q 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Uncovering intrinsic modular organization of spontaneous brain activity in humans. 
 PLoS One 
 2009 
 4 
 e5226 
 19381298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hill 
 J 
 
 
 Inder 
 T 
 
 
 Neil 
 J 
 
 
 Dierker 
 D 
 
 
 Harwell 
 J 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 D 
 
 
 Similar patterns of cortical expansion during human development and evolution. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2010 
 107 
 13135 
 13140 
 20624964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 M 
 
 
 Blei 
 DM 
 
 
 Bach 
 F 
 
 
 Online learning for latent dirichlet allocation. 
 Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 
 2010 
 23 
 856 
 864 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutchison 
 RM 
 
 
 Womelsdorf 
 T 
 
 
 Allen 
 EA 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Penna 
 SD 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gonzalez-Castillo 
 J 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Keilholz 
 S 
 
 
 Kiviniemi 
 V 
 
 
 Leopold 
 DA 
 
 
 dc Pasquale 
 F 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Walter 
 M 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Dynamic functional connectivity: Promises, issues, and interpretations. 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 80 
 360 
 378 
 23707587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Bannister 
 P 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images. 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 17 
 825 
 841 
 12377157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 EG 
 
 
 The Thalamus 
 2007 
 Cambridge Univ. Press 
 Cambridge, UK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 EG 
 
 
 Powell 
 TPS 
 
 
 An anatomical study of converging sensory pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey. 
 Brain 
 1970 
 93 
 793 
 820 
 4992433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jovicich 
 J 
 
 
 Czanner 
 S 
 
 
 Greve 
 D 
 
 
 Haley 
 E 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Gollub 
 R 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 D 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 F 
 
 
 Brown 
 G 
 
 
 MacFall 
 J 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Reliability in multi-site structural MRI studies: effects of gradient non-linearity correction on phantom and human data. 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 30 
 436 
 443 
 16300968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2485 
 2497 
 19592571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuhn 
 H 
 
 
 The Hungarian Method for the assignment problem. 
 Nav. Res. Logist. Q 
 1955 
 2 
 83 
 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Robin 
 DA 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Investigating the functional heterogeneity of the default mode network using coordinate-based meta-analytic modeling. 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 14496 
 14505 
 19923283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Vul 
 E 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Golland 
 P 
 
 
 Discovering structure in the space of fMRI selectivity profiles. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 1085 
 1098 
 20053382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 DD 
 
 
 Seung 
 HS 
 
 
 Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factorization. 
 Nature 
 1999 
 401 
 788 
 791 
 10548103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 MH 
 
 
 Hacker 
 CD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Leuthardt 
 EC 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 Clustering of resting state networks. 
 Plos One 
 2012 
 7 
 e40370 
 22792291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leech 
 R 
 
 
 Kamourieh 
 S 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fractionating the default mode network: distinct contributions of the ventral and dorsal posterior cingulate cortex to cognitive control. 
 J Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 3217 
 3224 
 21368033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex. 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 579 
 588 
 17604651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 XF 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 20069 
 20074 
 19903877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maunsell 
 JHR 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 The connections of the middle temporal visual area (MT) and their relationship to a cortical hierarchy in the macaque monkey. 
 J Neurosci 
 1983 
 3 
 2563 
 2586 
 1983 
 6655500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral neglect. 
 Ann Neurol 
 1981 
 10 
 309 
 325 
 7032417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 From sensation to cognition. 
 Brain 
 1998 
 121 
 1013 
 1052 
 9648540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meunier 
 D 
 
 
 Lambiotte 
 R 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Ersche 
 KD 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Hierarchical modularity in human brain functional networks. 
 Front Neuroinform 
 2009 
 3 
 37 
 19949480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Olman 
 CA 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Multiband multislice GE-EPI at 7 tesla, with 16-fold acceleration using partial parallel imaging with application to high spatial and temporal whole-brain fMRI. 
 Magn Reson Med 
 2010 
 63 
 1144 
 1153 
 20432285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mueller 
 S 
 
 
 Wang 
 D 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Shafee 
 R 
 
 
 Lu 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Individual Variability in Functional Connectivity Architecture of the Human Brain. 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 77 
 586 
 595 
 23395382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Reilly 
 JX 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Tomassini 
 V 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 953 
 965 
 19684249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 Kuypers 
 HG 
 
 
 Cortico-cortical connections in the rhesus monkey. 
 Brain Res 
 1969 
 13 
 13 
 36 
 4185124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Localization of cognitive operations in the human brain. 
 Science 
 1988 
 240 
 1627 
 1631 
 3289116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Vogel 
 AC 
 
 
 Laumann 
 TO 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Functional network organization of the human brain. 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 72 
 665 
 678 
 22099467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Lessov-Schlaggar 
 CN 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Evidence for Hubs in Human Functional Brain Networks. 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 79 
 798 
 813 
 23972601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubinov 
 M 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretation. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 52 
 1059 
 1069 
 19819337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubinov 
 M 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Weight conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks. 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 56 
 2068 
 2079 
 21459148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salvador 
 R 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Coleman 
 M 
 
 
 Pickard 
 J 
 
 
 Menon 
 D 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain Cereb. 
 Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 1332 
 1342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheperjans 
 F 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Hömke 
 L 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Hermann 
 K 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Probabilistic maps, morphometry, and variability of cytoarchitectonic areas in the human superior parietal cortex. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008a 
 18 
 2141 
 2157 
 18245042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheperjans 
 F 
 
 
 Hermann 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Observer-independent cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human superior parietal cortex. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2008b 
 18 
 846 
 867 
 17644831 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 2349 
 2356 
 17329432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selemon 
 LD 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Common cortical and subcortical targets of the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices in the rhesus monkey: evidence for a distributed neural network subserving spatially guided behavior. 
 J Neurosci 
 1988 
 8 
 4049 
 4068 
 2846794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Setsompop 
 K 
 
 
 Gagoski 
 BA 
 
 
 Polimeni 
 JR 
 
 
 Witzel 
 T 
 
 
 Wedeen 
 VJ 
 
 
 Wald 
 LL 
 
 
 Blipped-controlled aliasing in parallel imaging for simultaneous multislice echo planar imaging with reduced g-factor penalty. 
 Magn Reson Med 
 2012 
 67 
 1210 
 1224 
 21858868 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Talukdar 
 T 
 
 
 Martincorena 
 I 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of local and distant functional connectivity in the human brain. 
 PLoS Comput Biol 
 2010 
 6 
 e1000808 
 20548945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Network assemblies in the functional brain. 
 Curr Opin Neurol 
 2012a 
 25 
 384 
 391 
 22766721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Yeo 
 TB 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Stepwise connectivity of the modal cortex reveals the multimodal organization of the human brain. 
 J Neurosci 
 2012b 
 32 
 10649 
 10661 
 22855814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 Newsome 
 WT 
 
 
 Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey 
 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Gotimer 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Lee 
 SH 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Roy 
 AK 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2209 
 2229 
 19221144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Filippini 
 N 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Toro 
 R 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Correspondence of the brain's functional architecture during activation and rest. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 13040 
 13045 
 19620724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Drobnjak 
 I 
 
 
 Flitney 
 D 
 
 
 Niazy 
 RK 
 
 
 Saunders 
 J 
 
 
 Vickers 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL. 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 S208 
 S219 
 15501092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 EJ 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 D 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 EC 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Temporally-independent functional modes of spontaneous brain activity. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2012 
 109 
 3131 
 3136 
 22323591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Kotter 
 R 
 
 
 Motifs in brain networks. 
 PLoS Biol 
 2004 
 2 
 e369 
 15510229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Kötter 
 R 
 
 
 Identification and classification of hubs in brain networks. 
 PLoS One 
 2007 
 2 
 e1049 
 17940613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Network attributes for segregation and integration in the human brain. 
 Curr Opin Neurobiology 
 2013 
 23 
 162 
 171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Stevens 
 WD 
 
 
 Chamberlain 
 JP 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 53 
 303 
 317 
 20600998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Turner 
 GR 
 
 
 Stevens 
 WD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Intrinsic architecture underlying the relations among the default, dorsal attention, and frontoparietal control networks of the human brain. 
 J Cognitive Neurosci 
 2013 
 25 
 74 
 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 Dum 
 RP 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Cerebellum and nonmotor function. 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2009 
 32 
 413 
 434 
 19555291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Cortical connections of visual area MT in the macaque. 
 J Comp Neurol 
 1986 
 248 
 190 
 222 
 3722458 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van den Heuvel 
 MP 
 
 
 Mandl 
 RCW 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 Functionally linked resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the human brain. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2009 
 30 
 3127 
 3141 
 19235882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 AJW 
 
 
 Benner 
 T 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Brain morphometry with multiecho MPRAGE. 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 40 
 559 
 569 
 18242102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KRA 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Venkataraman 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 KC 
 
 
 Lazar 
 SW 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2010 
 103 
 297 
 321 
 19889849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 A population-average, landmark- and surface-based (PALS) atlas of human cerebral cortex. 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 635 
 662 
 16172003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Dierker 
 DL 
 
 
 Surface-based and probabilistic atlases of primate cerebral cortex. 
 Neuron 
 2007 
 56 
 209 
 225 
 17964241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Barch 
 D 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Bucholz 
 R 
 
 
 Chang 
 A 
 
 
 Chen 
 L 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Curtiss 
 SW 
 
 
 Penna 
 SD 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 D 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Heath 
 AC 
 
 
 Larson-Prior 
 L 
 
 
 Marcus 
 D 
 
 
 Michalareas 
 G 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Oostenveld 
 R 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SR 
 
 
 Prior 
 F 
 
 
 Schlagger 
 BL 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 the WU-Minn HCP Consortium 
 
 The Human Connectome Project: A data acquisition perspective. 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 62 
 2222 
 2231 
 22366334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 the WU Minn HCP Consortium 
 
 The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: An overview. 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 80 
 62 
 79 
 23684880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Varoquaux 
 G 
 
 
 Gramfort 
 A 
 
 
 Pedregosa 
 F 
 
 
 Michel 
 V 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 Multi-subject dictionary learning to segment an atlas of brain spontaneous activity. 
 Information processing in medical imaging 
 2011 
 562 
 573 
 21761686 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 Andrews 
 JR 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal parietal memory network. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2006 
 96 
 3517 
 3531 
 16899645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2008 
 100 
 3328 
 3342 
 18799601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Laumann 
 TO 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 An approach for parcellating human cortical areas using resting-state correlations. 
 Neuroimage 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Highly accelerated whole brain imaging using aligned-blipped-controlled-aliasing multiband EPI. 
 Proc Int Soc Mag Reson Med 
 2012 
 20 
 2306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Hollinshead 
 M 
 
 
 Roffman 
 JL 
 
 
 Smoller 
 JW 
 
 
 Zollei 
 L 
 
 
 Polimeni 
 JR 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2011 
 106 
 1125 
 1165 
 21653723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 Qiu 
 B 
 
 
 Giles 
 CL 
 
 
 Foley 
 HC 
 
 
 Yen 
 J 
 
 
 An LDA-based community structure discovery approach for large-scale social networks. 
 IEEE Intelligence and Security Informatics 
 2007 
 200 
 207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Sansbury 
 MW 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Intrinsic functional relations between human cerebral cortex and thalamus. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2008 
 100 
 1740 
 1748 
 18701759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Adelstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Klein 
 DF 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Reliable intrinsic connectivity networks: test-retest evaluation using ICA and dual regression approach. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 49 
 2163 
 2177 
 19896537 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We estimated overlapping cortical networks from resting fMRI data (N=1012). 
 
 
 Many association regions involved in multiple interdigitated, segregated networks. 
 
 
 Many sensory-motor regions involved in single, preferentially local, networks. 
 
 
 Architecture converges across two datasets and three methods. 
 
 
 Results replicable across sessions of individual Human Connectome Project subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Large-scale network organization is reliable across datasets (GSP and HCP) and across methods (clustering and LDA). Top row shows the 7-network clustering estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets in the left hemisphere. Overlap (fraction of vertices with same network labels) between GSP and HCP estimates was 78% across the entire cerebral cortex. Five (purple, blue, green, violet and orange) of the seven networks were virtually identical. Bottom rows show the 7-network LDA estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets overlaid on blue boundaries corresponding to the clustering estimates of respective datasets. All seven LDA networks were highly similar across the two group datasets. The mean of the Pearson correlation coefficients of the seven pairs of LDA network estimates was 0.93. The colored squares (center column) indicate correspondences between the LDA and clustering estimates. For example, the LDA estimate in the second row correspond to the purple visual cluster. The percent overlap between the clustering and winner-takes-all LDA estimates in the GSP dataset was 82%, while the overlap in the HCP dataset was 88%. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Regions of association cortex often participate in multiple cortical networks. Early sensory and late motor cortices are involved in fewer networks than many association regions. (A) The colors represent the number of LDA networks each cortical region participates in for the 7-network LDA estimate in the GSP dataset. The number was computed by counting for each vertex the number of networks whose Pr(network | vertex) exceeds 1/7. Boundaries correspond to 7-network clustering solution in GSP dataset. The black asterisks correspond to default network regions that (1) were at least 10mm from both the clustering and winner-takes-all LDA boundaries and (2) participated in multiple networks. The blue asterisks correspond to dorsal attention regions that (1) were at least 10mm from both the clustering and winner-takes-all LDA boundaries and (2) participated in multiple networks.  Table 1  reports the MNI coordinates of the six regions. (B) Fraction of vertices within the 7-network clustering estimates participating in multiple networks. Only vertices at least 10mm away from the clustering boundaries are considered. The dotted line indicates that 44% of the vertices (at least 10mm away from clustering boundaries) participated in multiple networks. Visual: Visual network; SomMot: somatomotor network; DorsAttn: dorsal attention network; VentAttn: ventral attention network; Control: frontoparietal control network; Default: default network; Limbic: limbic network. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 The precuneus (PCUN), lateral temporal cortex (LTC), posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) participate in multiple subnetworks. (A) 17-network clustering estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets. Only left hemisphere estimates are shown. The percent overlap between the clustering estimates in the two datasets was 69%. (B) Four of the 17-network LDA estimates overlapping traditional default network regions are shown. The LDA networks in the 1st, 2nd and 4th panels overlap with the yellow, red and dark-blue networks in (A) respectively. Panel 3 shows the LDA network that overlaps with the gold and cream networks in (A). The asterisks correspond to the default regions (PCUN, LTC, PPC and MPFC) defined in  Table 1 . An asterisk is colored black if Pr(vertex | network) > 1e-4 at that brain location. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 The lateral intraparietal area (LIP) and frontal eye fields (FEF) participate in multiple subnetworks. (A) 17-network clustering estimates of the GSP and HCP datasets. Only left hemisphere estimates are shown. (B) Four of the 17-network LDA estimates overlapping traditional dorsal attention regions are shown. Panel 1 shows the LDA network that overlaps with the red and purple networks in (A). The LDA networks in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th panels overlap with the light-green, dark-green and orange networks in (A) respectively. The asterisks correspond to LIP and FEF defined in  Table 1 . An asterisk is colored black if Pr(vertex | network) > 1e-4 at that brain location. . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Cortical networks are reliable within individual subjects. LDA of the HCP subject with the best test-retest reliability estimates is displayed. Top row corresponds to the 7-network clustering estimate of the entire HCP dataset. Bottom rows show the 7-network LDA estimates of the subject in two different sessions overlaid on the boundaries of the 7-network clustering estimate. The mean of the Pearson correlation coefficients of the seven pairs of network estimates was 0.75. The dotted lines indicate correspondences between the LDA networks across the two sessions. By visual inspection, the third and fourth networks in session 1 were merged in session 2, while the fifth network in session 1 was split into two in session 2. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Similar to Figure 6, LDA estimates of the HCP subject with the median test-retest reliability is displayed. Format is identical to Figure 6. The mean of the Pearson correlation coefficients of the seven pairs of network estimates was 0.61. The dotted lines indicate correspondences between the LDA networks across the two sessions. By visual inspection, the third, fourth and fifth networks in sessions 1 and 2 were inter-mixed across the sessions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Parallel network structure replicated across degenerate clustering estimates. (A) Overlap between the best 7-network clustering estimate and estimates derived from the 1000 random initializations using the GSP dataset. The clustering estimates were ordered from the highest likelihood (best estimate) to the smallest likelihood. Out of 1000 random initializations, 415 resulted in solutions with at least 90% overlap with the best solution, suggesting the best estimate corresponds to a robust local optimum. (B) “Exhaustive” set of 7-network clustering estimates. The eight clustering estimates were selected to be different from each other and spanned the solution space of the mixture model. Similar to the best estimate, the early sensory and late motor cortices participated in preferentially local networks in all 7 degenerate solutions. Similarly, each association network spanned multiple lobes and the components of multiple networks were spatially adjacent. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Pattern of network segregation and overlap replicated across degenerate LDA estimates. The plots show the number of LDA networks each cortical region participates in for the 7-network and 17-network LDA estimates in the GSP dataset, averaged across 100 random initializations. Many association regions participated in multiple networks, while large portions of early sensory and late motor cortices participated in single networks. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Locations of Default and Dorsal Attention Network Regions That Participate in Multiple Networks 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Network 
 Distance to clustering boundaries 
 Distance to winner-takes-all LDA boundaries 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus (PCUN) 
 −8, −57, 36 
 default 
 16mm 
 19mm 
 
 
 Lateral Temporal Cortex (LTC) 
 −58, −11, −15 
 default 
 27mm 
 29mm 
 
 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex (PPC) 
 −43, −67, 39 
 default 
 16mm 
 15mm 
 
 
 Medial Prefrontal Cortex (MPFC) 
 −11, 46, −3 
 default 
 17mm 
 10mm 
 
 
 Lateral Intraparietal (LIP) area 
 −28, −61, 60 
 dorsal attention 
 18mm 
 14mm 
 
 
 Frontal Eye Fields (FEF) 
 −26, −6, 48 
 dorsal attention 
 14mm 
 11mm 
 
 
 
 
 
