
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 24269802 
 3932560 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.11.019 
 NIHMS543215 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Individual Differences in the Morphometry and Activation of Time
Perception Networks are Influenced by Dopamine Genotype 
 
 
 
 
 Wiener 
 Martin 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 Yune-Sang 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 
 Lohoff 
 Falk W. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Coslett 
 H. Branch 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 1 Dept. of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania 
 2 Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania 
 3 Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Pennsylvania 
 
 Correspondence should be addressed to Dr.Wiener at: Dept. of
Psychology David King Hall George Mason University 4400 University Drive, MSN
3F5 Fairfax, VA 22030  mwiener@gmu.edu 
 
 
 8 
 1 
 2014 
 
 
 19 
 11 
 2013 
 
 
 1 
 4 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 4 
 2015 
 
 89 
 10 
 22 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Individual participants vary greatly in their ability to estimate and
discriminate intervals of time. This heterogeneity of performance may be caused
by reliance on different time perception networks as well as individual
differences in the activation of brain structures utilized for timing within
those networks. To address these possibilities we utilized event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while human participants (n=25)
performed a temporal or color discrimination task. Additionally, based on our
previous research, we genotyped participants for DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a, a
single-nucleotide polymorphism associated with a 30-40% reduction in striatal D2
density and associated with poorer timing performance. Similar to previous
reports, a wide range of performance was found across our sample; crucially,
better performance on the timing versus color task was associated with greater
activation in prefrontal and sub-cortical regions previously associated with
timing. Furthermore, better timing performance also correlated with increased
volume of the right lateral cerebellum, as demonstrated by voxel-based
morphometry. Our analysis also revealed that A1 carriers of the Taq1a
polymorphism exhibited relatively worse performance on temporal, but not color
discrimination, but greater activation in the striatum and right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, as well as reduced volume in the cerebellar cluster. These
results point to the neural bases for heterogeneous timing performance in
humans, and suggest that differences in performance on a temporal discrimination
task are, in part, attributable to the DRD2/ANKK1 genotype. 
 
 
 
 National Institute of Mental Health : NIMH 
 R01 MH076227 || MH 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Individuals vary greatly in their ability to estimate and discriminate
intervals of time ( Carlson & Feinburg,
1968 ;  Brown, Newcomb & Kahrl,
1995 ). This variability may arise from multiple factors including memory
and decision-making processes ( Buhusi & Meek,
2005 ). Between-subject variance in time perception has been largely
ignored until recently. Here we explore the neural and genetic factors that
contribute to heterogeneous timing performance across individuals. 
 Human neuroimaging studies of timing demonstrate a wide degree of
heterogeneity in the neural regions that become activated during a given timing
task. Recently, we characterized this variability with a quantitative meta-analysis
of the likelihood of activation of any given neural structure during different time
perception tasks. Our results demonstrated that the likelihood of activation
differed, depending on the temporal context ( Wiener,
Turkeltaub & Coslett, 2010 ). Generally, subcortical structures, such
as the basal ganglia and cerebellum, were more likely to be activated during
sub-second intervals, whereas cortical regions, such as the prefrontal cortex, were
more likely to be activated during supra-second intervals. Furthermore, the right
inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) and supplementary motor area (SMA) were highly likely
to be active across all timing tasks. An additional finding from our meta-analysis
was that the pattern of basal ganglia activation likelihood differed depending on
the temporal context; given the proposed involvement of regions of the basal ganglia
(i.e. caudate, putamen) in different cognitive functions ( Grahn, Parkinson & Owen, 2008 ), and the central role of the
basal ganglia in current models of timing ( Matell
& Meek, 2004 ), this differential pattern of activity may be
particularly relevant. 
 Although the results of our meta-analysis provided some clarification of the
heterogeneity of neuroimaging findings for timing, they are based on inferences from
group performance. A shortcoming of group averaging of fMRI performance is that
individual differences in activation patterns will not be detected ( Fedorenko, Behr & Kanwisher, 2011 ). For
example, the SMA may be implicated across most timing studies, but this does not
guarantee that every subject activates the SMA to the same extent, or, indeed, at
all (Ferrandez, et al. 2003). In a recent study combining transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and electroencephalography (EEG) ( Wiener, et al. 2012 ), we found that the behavioral effect of TMS to the
right supramarginal gyrus differed substantially between subjects, with respect to
both the ability to alter timing performance and the polarity of contingent negative
variation (CNV), a waveform that is in part mediated by the SMA ( Nagai, et al. 2004 ). Similar findings have been
demonstrated within the working memory literature, where substantial differences
between group and individual-based fMRI and EEG responses have been found ( Feredoes & Postle, 2007 ;  Vogel & Awh, 2008 ) with only
individual-based regions predicting behavioral disruptions from TMS ( Feredoes, Tononi & Postle, 2007 ). As such,
group differences in fMRI can tell us the regions most likely to be activated during
time perception, but not whether those regions are differentially activated in
individual subjects. 
 One explanation for individual differences in activation of timing networks
is that different timing procedures may be employed as a function of task demands or
subject strategy ( Wiener, Matell & Coslett,
2011 ). One example of the effects of strategy comes from recent
neuroimaging evidence demonstrating that networks of activated structures differ
both within and between subjects as a function of whether subjects employ beat-based
( Grahn & McAuley, 2009 ) or counting
strategies ( Hinton, et al. 2004 ) during
timing. 
 Another factor that may account, at least in part, for individual differences
in temporal processing is basic personality profiles. Numerous studies have
demonstrated differences between different personality indices and time perception
abilities (see  Rammsayer, 1997  for a brief
review). Consistent among these differences is the notion that the rate of an
internal pacemaker varies between individuals leading to a “faster”
clock for some and “slower” clock for others. 
 Finally, several investigators have reported data that genetic factors
influence temporal processing. We demonstrated that timing performance differs
between individuals with single-nucleotide polymorphisms of genes affecting dopamine
function on temporal perception ( Wiener, Lohoff
& Coslett, 2011 ) and production (Balci, et al. 2012). Such
differences have also been found for dopamine genes in different cognitive domains,
such as working memory ( Berryhill, et al.
2013 ), learning (Klein, et al. 2006) and task switching ( Stelzel, et al. 2010 ). Additionally,
differences as a function of genotype have been found in fMRI responses to a variety
of cognitive tasks ( Green, et al. 2008 ).
These differences may be used as intermediate phenotypes between genetic differences
and the behavioral manifestation of different psychiatric disorders (Winterer &
Weinberger, 2006). 
 Within the neuroimaging literature, two recent studies have focused
specifically on individual differences in the brain mechanisms recruited for time
perception.  Tipples, Brattan and Johnston
(2013)  utilized fMRI while subjects performed a sub-second temporal
bisection task with face stimuli or an orthogonal gender identification task in a
blocked design. The bisection point, a measure of accuracy, when regressed against
activation, revealed a correlation with activity in the SMA and rIFG, with greater
activity associated with overestimation of durations. A second study by  Gilaie-Dotan, Kanai and Rees (2011)  examined
differences in structural morphometry associated with performance on supra-second
discrimination tasks. Significant positive correlations were found between
discriminability and gray matter differences in right primary auditory and secondary
somatosensory cortices for longer (12s) durations; negative correlations were also
found between discriminability and bilateral parahippocampal volume. Shorter (2s)
durations did not correlate with any region when correcting for whole-brain
significance levels, although primary visual cortices (positively) and SMA volume
(negatively) did correlate at uncorrected thresholds. 
 Additional studies, not focusing directly on individual differences, have
also noted correlations between subject performance and activation.  Wencil and colleagues (2010) , utilizing a
between-subject covariate for accuracy on a sub- to supra-second temporal
discrimination task noted positive correlations between performance and activation
within bilateral inferior frontal gyrus. In contrast,  Coull and colleagues (2008)  noted that activity within the left
putamen positively correlated with sub- to supra-second temporal discrimination
accuracy; notably this correlation was only found for encoding, as opposed to
retrieval. As a further difference,  Harrington and
colleagues (2004a)  noted a positive correlation between supra-second
bisection points and right parahippocampal activation. Notably, some of these
studies only examined correlational activity post-hoc, in regions that had already
been activated in group-level contrasts. 
 In order to elucidate the neural mechanisms associated with differences
 across  individuals, we conducted a study using event-related
fMRI to measure activity within brain regions correlating with inter-individual
differences in behavior. Additionally, we used voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to
address the question of morphological, as well as functional differences. Finally,
in order to investigate the contribution of genetic predisposition on individual
differences in brain network recruitment during temporal perception, we separated
subjects on the basis of a well-known genetic polymorphism (DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a)
previously implicated in temporal perception. We hypothesized that individual
differences in timing ability would be associated with differential activation of
frontostriatal circuitry commonly activated in studies of temporal perception ( Wiener, et al. 2010 ). Additionally, we expected
to find that A1 allele carriers of the DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a polymorphism would
demonstrate impaired timing performance, but only with durations in the sub-second
range ( Wiener, et al. 2011 ), and not on a
control task. We further hypothesized that this difference in performance would also
be associated with a difference in activation within the brain regions we
identified. However, we note that we were agnostic as to the direction (over- or
under-activation) of this effect, as alterations in the dopamine system may lead to
either increased ( Jahanshahi, et al. 2010 ) or
decreased ( Coull, et al. 2012 ) levels of
activity during timing along with decreases in performance. 
 A common and vexing issue in neuroimaging studies of time perception is the
choice of an appropriate control task. In any timing paradigm, the duration of the
stimulus cannot be known until the interval is over; thus, unlike many other
stimulus features (i.e. size, pitch, intensity, etc.) that may be classified with
very brief presentation, processing of a temporal interval necessarily extends for
the duration of the stimulus. For our analysis of individual differences in brain
activation, we therefore chose to use the well-known time-color behavioral paradigm
( Coull, et al. 2004 ). This task, utilized
by a number of fMRI researchers ( Coull, et al.,
2004 ;  2008 ;  2012 ;  Livesey, et al.
2007 ;  Morillon, et al., 2009 ),
surmounts the above issue by presenting subjects with two sequentially presented,
rapidly flickering colored stimuli; in the timing condition, subjects must judge the
relative duration of both stimuli, whereas in the color condition they must judge
the overall color of both stimuli by integrating information from the entire
exposure. In this way, subjects cannot make a judgment regarding the colored
stimulus until it has extinguished. The use of this task has been previously
demonstrated to provide adequate control of the attentional and working memory
demands in temporal discrimination, as both tasks use identical stimulus conditions
( Coull et al, 2004 ). 
 In order to investigate the role of individual differences in time
processes, we chose to use the relative difference in performance between time and
color tasks within subjects, rather than raw accuracy on each task. This decision
was motivated by the fact that the time and color tasks share many of the same task
requirements (e.g., sustained attention, visual processing). Thus, although
performances on the color and time tasks are not correlated ( Gilaie-Dotan, et al. 2011 ), the signed difference between them
is likely to reflect the relative differences in task-specific ability. As such, a
large difference indicates that an individual is better at leveraging timing (or
color) related circuitry than color (or timing) circuitry. Support for this approach
is provided by pharmacological studies (Coull, et al. 2009;  2012 ) utilizing the time-color paradigm that demonstrated
impairments in timing with preserved color processing. We believe that raw accuracy
scores would be less informative for regressing against hemodynamic responses, as
differences in performance may reflect discrepancies in non task-related processing.
We hypothesized that subjects who are better are leveraging timing-related regions
than color-related regions will also show greater activation in timing-related
regions than those with little or no difference. 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1. Subjects 
 Twenty-five right-handed subjects participated in the experiment (14
females, mean age 25 years (SD 3.8 years). All subjects had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and provided written consent, as approved by the
local institutional review board. All subjects were screened for personal and
familial neurologic, psychiatric, and other medical conditions as well as drug
use and abuse; female subjects were screened for premenstrual tension. Subjects
were recruited from two larger behavioral studies of temporal processing and
genotype ( Wiener, et al., 2011 ; Balci, et
al., 2012). Twenty subjects were Caucasian, three were of African descent and
one was of Asian descent. Fifteen subjects (7 female) were identified as having
at least one copy of the A1 allele of the DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a genotype (hereafter,
A1+); ten subjects (7 female) did not have a copy of the A1 allele (hereafter,
A1-). The A1 allele of the DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a polymorphism has previously been
associated with a 30-40% reduction in the density of striatal D2 receptors
( Jönsson, et al. 1999 ), with
relatively preserved density at extra-striatal sites ( Hirvonen, et al. 2009 ). 
 
 
 2.2. Task 
 Subjects performed a temporal or color discrimination task. Subjects
began by viewing a white fixation cross on a dark background. Positioned above
or below the fixation cross was the word COLOR or TIME, respectively; this cue
signaled to subjects which task they would be performing on the subsequent
trial. The task cue extinguished after 1000ms, during which subjects viewed the
fixation point alone for a jittered interval (1400-2600ms). Following this, two
4×4cm squares were presented consecutively in the center of the screen,
separated by an inter-stimulus interval (ISI) of 2500ms; the color of the square
rapidly alternated (50ms) between different admixtures of red and blue. The
duration of the first square (S1) persisted for either 500 or 2000ms, whereas
the second square (S2) persisted for one of six different durations, depending
on the length of S1. If S1 was 500ms, S2 persisted for 350, 400, 450, 550, 600,
or 650ms; if S1 was 2000ms, S2 persisted for 1400, 1600, 1800, 2200, 2400, or
2600ms. Following S2, the word RESPOND appeared on the screen for 500ms. An
inter-trial-interval, consisting of a dark screen, persisted for 2000ms until
the onset of the next task cue. 
 On trials marked by the word TIME, subjects were required to judge the
duration of the S2 relatile to S1 and respond whether S2 was longer or shorter
than S1. For trials marked by the word COLOR, subjects were required to judge
the average shade of S2 relative to S1 and respond whether S2 was more or less
red than S1. Responses were made on a fORP (Current Designs) fiber optic button
box, held in both hands; both trials used the same button/response-mapping
(longer = more red/ shorter = less red). The laterality of hand responses was
also counterbalanced between subjects, with 13 subjects using their right hand
for responding longer/more red and their left hand for responding shorter/less
red, and 12 subjects using the opposite mapping. Hence, all stimulus features
remained identical between each task type, with the task cue signaling the
relevant dimension to be attended (color, or time). 
 
 
 2.3. Protocol 
 All subjects performed a 10-minute practice version of the task
immediately prior to entering the scanner. Upon entering the scanner, subjects
lay supine facing a rear-projection mirrored display. Subjects performed four
runs of the task lasting eight minutes and fifty-four seconds each. Each run
contained 48 trials, with equal counterbalancing between all twelve intervals
(six S2 intervals per each S1) and two tasks (Time & Color). Trials within
each run were presented in a pseudo-randomized, permuted order, for an
event-related design ( Josephs & Henson,
1999 ). There were a total of 192 trials across four runs, with 96
trials for each task; 16 trials with each interval were presented, with 8 trials
per interval in each task. 
 
 
 2.4. fMRI acquisition 
 A 3.0 Tesla Siemens TIM Trio with an eight-channel coil was used to
acquire all functional and structural volumes. All subjects initially received a
high resolution, T1-weighted 3-D magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo
(MPRAGE) scan ( TR = 1620ms,  TE = 3ms,
 TI = 950ms, matrix size 192 × 256, voxel size 0.9766
× 0.9766 × 0.9766mm) for anatomical localization and morphometric
analysis. For subsequent functional runs, T2* weighted echo-planar,
blood-oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) images ( TR = 3000ms,
 TE = 30ms, matrix size 64 × 64, voxel size 3.4
× 3.4 × 3 mm) were acquired in an interleaved order. Fifty slices
were acquired in the axial plane (3 mm). Head motion was minimized by foam
padding and on-line prospective motion correction. The first three volumes of
each run were discarded to allow for steady-state magnetization. 
 
 
 2.5. Behavioral Data Analysis 
 Reaction time (RT) and accuracy (proportion correct) for both time and
color tasks were determined. Responses were collected during the response cue
and inter-trial-interval. Mean performance measures were determined and the data
were analyzed in SPSS (IBM) as separate, mixed-model ANOVAs for RT and accuracy
data, with task (COLOR or TIME) and duration (sub-second or supra-second) as
within-subject factors and genotype (A1-, A1+) as a between-subject factor.
Additionally, as we hypothesized differences as a function of duration, planned
paired-samples  t -tests were carried out as within-genotype
analyses, similar to our previous investigation ( Wiener, et al. 2011 ), by separately comparing accuracy and RT
measures for A1+ and A1- subjects between both tasks and duration ranges. 
 
 
 2.6. fMRI Data Analysis 
 Image pre-processing and data analysis was carried out with SPM8
( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ;  Friston, et al. 1995 ) and Matlab (Mathworks). Slice-timing
acquisition correction was applied for all volumes, which were realigned to the
first volume of the first run, then normalized into standard stereotaxic
(Montreal Neurological Institute) space. All volumes were then smoothed with a
8mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. 
 At the first-level, functional data of each subject were evaluated
whereby trial-types, time-locked to the onset of S1, were separately convolved
with a canonical hemodynamic response function ( Friston, et al. 1998 ). Responses were then estimated using the
general linear model at each voxel, modeling the activation effects for TIME and
COLOR trials. A high-pass filter (128s cutoff) was applied to remove noises
(e.g., slow scanner drifts) unrelated to the experimental task. Additionally,
six motion parameters were included as regressors to account for
movement-related signals. Finally, contrast maps were separately derived for
TIME or COLOR only, and TIME vs COLOR. 
 Subsequently, these single contrast maps were entered into a
second-level, random-effects analysis (RFX). Whereas one-sample t-tests were
used for assessing the main effect of TIME and COLOR, a multiple regression
analysis was conducted for [TIME vs. COLOR] with subjects’ behavioral
accuracy difference scores (Time – Color) as a covariate. The multiple
regression analysis permitted us to interrogate whether activation at a given
voxel was modulated by relative behavioral differences in time perception over
color perception across subjects; accordingly, a positive relationship would
indicate that better relative performance on the time task over the color task
was associated with greater activation in a given region. A statistical
threshold was set to  p <0.05, corrected for Family-Wise
Error (FWE) at the cluster-level (height threshold
 p <0.001, uncorrected); this threshold was used to
interrogate voxels across the whole brain and at predetermined regions of
interest with small volume correction (SVC). Regions of interest were selected
on the basis of results from our prior meta-analysis of 41 fMRI studies of
timing. Those regions included the basal ganglia (caudate, putamen), SMA,
bilateral prefrontal cortex (superior, middle and inferior frontal gyrus), and
inferior parietal cortex and were defined using the WFU pickatlas ( Maldjian, et al. 2003 ) with automated
anatomical labeling ( Tzourio-Mazoyer et al.
2002 ). Similar differences for the color task were also evaluated by
examining negative loadings on the multiple regression factor in SPM. In this
analysis, SVC was applied to color-specific regions of interest, as defined by
previous studies utilizing this exact same paradigm ( Coull, et al. 2012 ;  2008 ; 2005;  Morillon, et al.
2009 ;  Livesey, et al. 2007 )
and including bilateral V4, inferior frontal gyrus and inferior parietal cortex.
We note this analysis is very similar in many respects to a recent investigation
of timing and dopamine challenge by  Coull and
colleagues (2012) . 
 The influence of DRD2/ANKK1 genotype on individual timing performance
and activation was also evaluated by investigating functional activations at the
group level. Activation was evaluated as a two-sample  t -test
between A1- and A1+ groups for the main effects of TIME and COLOR conditions
separately. For this exploratory analysis, candidate voxels were chosen from the
result of [TIME vs. COLOR] regression with behavioral difference scores
(uncorrected  p <0.005, k = 10) in order to compare the
genotype effect within the regions that were differentially modulated by the
relative degree of behavioral timing over color performance. For color
processing, we used the result of the [COLOR vs. TIME] regression analysis
(uncorrected  p <0.01) as an inclusive mask for the main
effect of COLOR in the two-sample  t -test between A1- and A1+
groups; we used a lower threshold for this mask as no suprathreshold voxels were
detected with  p <0.005 in this contrast. 
 Finally, we conducted an exploratory analysis to investigate any
differences in activation associated with differences in the duration of
intervals ( Coull, et al. 2012 ;  Wiener, et al. 2011 ). Due to design
constraints, there was insufficient time to fully separate the hemodynamic
responses for sub-second and supra-second interval conditions. Nevertheless, the
first-level analysis for each subject also included a covariate for duration
range (sub-second or supra-second) in order to explore any potential differences
that may exist between these conditions in another first level analysis.
Separate single-subject contrasts were derived for the main effect of TIME at
sub-second or supra-second levels; these contrasts were separately fed into
second-level, independent samples  t -tests between A1+ and A1-
groups for each duration range, and masked with the [TIME vs. COLOR] regression
contrast as described above. 
 
 
 2.7. VBM Analysis 
 Individual T1-weighted structural images were segmented into gray
matter, white matter and cerebro-spinal fluid using the segmeimWRn functions in
SPM8. Diffeomorphic anatomical registration through integrated lie algebra was
performed using DARTEL functions ( Ashburner,
2007 ) with the VBM toolbox ( http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/ ). Individual structural images
were further smoothed with a 8mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian kernel. The
evaluation of individual differences was conducted in a similar manner to the
fMRI data; a multiple regression tested for differences in gray matter volume
between subjects by utilizing difference scores for the accuracy of [TIME vs.
COLOR] conditions as a covariate. Regional effects were evaluated at the
whole-brain level and included subcortical structures such as the basal ganglia,
using the same threshold as the fMRI analysis ( p <0.05
cluster threshold FWE,  p <0.001 height threshold); as few
studies have examined morphometric differences in timing, we attempted to
examine the whole-brain rather than few a-priori candidate regions. An absolute
threshold of 0.1 was used as a mask for the resulting statistical images. The
same statistical threshold used for functional data analysis was also applied to
the structural data analysis. We note that, as morphometric data provide only a
single set to analyze, we did not have an orthogonal set with which to evaluate
the genotypic influence on individual differences in behavior. However, we
evaluated differences in significant regions in a post-hoc manner by segregating
regression data between A1- and A1+ groups; as this does not fully address the
issue of circularity, we stress caution in the interpretation of these data and
have included it as an exploratory measure. 
 For differences between sub-second and supra-second measures, we
separated accuracy difference scores between duration ranges and included them
as separate covariates in our multiple regression analysis. This allowed us to
measure whether morphometric differences were differentially associated with
sub- or supra-second duration ranges. We chose to utilize difference scores in
our VBM analysis to make the results more compatible with our fMRI multiple
regression analysis, which used the same behavioral covariates. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral Data 
 For the TIME and COLOR tasks, a substantial difference between
individual performances was found ( Figure
1 ). We found that subjects performed better on COLOR as opposed to TIME
tasks (main effect of task  F (1, 23) = 5.455,
 p = 0.029, η p 2  = 0.192), and better
on supra-second, as opposed to sub-second versions (main effect of duration:
 F (1,23) = 16.583,  p  = 0.0004,
η p 2  = 0.419). However, no interaction between
the two effects was found [ F (1,23) = 0.020,
 p > 0.05, η p 2  = 0.001],
indicating that there was no differential effect of duration range on a
particular task. Analysis of genotypic differences revealed a significant main
effect of genotype [ F (1,23) = 4.841,  p = 0.038,
η p 2  = 0.174], as well as a within-subject
interaction between genotype and task [ F (1,23) = 4.812,
 p = 0.039, η p 2  = 0.173].
Post-hoc analysis showed that DRD2 genotype influenced performance only for
TIME, as opposed to COLOR tasks, at both sub-second [ t (23) =
4.426,  p = 0.0001, η 2  = 0.459] and
supra-second [ t (23) = 2.3,  p = 0.031,
η 2  = 0.187] duration ranges ( Figure 1 ). Within-genotype analyses demonstrated that A1+ subjects
performed significantly worse for sub-second than supra-second durations on both
the TIME [ t (14) = −2.241,  p = 0.042,
η 2  = 0.264] and COLOR [ t (14) =
−3.352,  p  = 0.005, η 2  = 0.445] tasks,
whereas A1- subjects did not differ in performance as a function of duration for
either task [TIME:  t (9) = −1.833,
 p > 0.05, η 2  = 0.272; COLOR:
 t (9) = −1.002,  p > 0.05,
η 2  = 0.1]. No other significant effects or interactions
were found for this analysis, or for the analysis of RT scores (all
 p > 0.05). 
 We examined the consistency of performance across color and duration
conditions, in the manner reported by  Gilaie-Dotan et al, (2011) . Like these investigators, we found no
correlation between subject performance (accuracy) across the TIME and COLOR
tasks, for either sub-second [Pearson  r = 0.116,
 p > 0.05] or supra-second [ r = 0.305,
 p > 0.05] ranges. However, we found a strong
correlation between performance with sub- and supra-second durations on the
COLOR task [ r = 0.594,  p  = 0.002]; performance
with sub- and supra-second TIME stimuli correlated at a trend level
[ r = 0.383,  p  = 0.058]; this trend was not
found with a non-parametric spearman correlation [ρ = 0.318,
 p = 0.121]. 
 We also note that a number of participants exhibited very poor
performance, with one subject performing below chance on the sub-second COLOR
task and supra-second TIME task. As the goal of our study is to characterize the
causes of individual differences in timing, this subject was included; we note,
however, that removing this subject did not alter the effects reported. Another
point of interest is that the majority of subjects reported the COLOR task to be
more difficult than the TIME task, even though they were more accurate on the
former. 
 
 
 3.2. fMRI Data 
 The results of all experimental fMRI analyses are summarized in both
 Figures 2  and  3 , and  Table 1  (Also
see supplementary materials, for summary of main effect for TIME and COLOR
conditions and the behavioral difference scores). Our primary regression
analysis yielded activation within the bilateral basal ganglia, peaking in the
right putamen (MNI x,y,z=21, 0, 21), right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
encompassing the superior frontal gyrus (Brodmann Area, BA10) and middle frontal
gyrus (BA 11), with a peak in the superior frontal gyrus (MNI x,y,z = 21, 55,
6), and a small separate cluster in the right premotor cortex (BA 6) (MNI ,y,z
=: 31, 14, 63), indicating a greater activation for time vs. color can be
predicted by better behavioral performance in the time than in color task ( Figure 2 ). Post-hoc examination revealed that
these effects were significant when examined with a non-parametric Spearman rank
correlation [right superior frontal gyrus: ρ = 0.741,
 p < 0.0001; right putamen: ρ = 0.631,
 p < 0.001; right middle frontal gyrus (BA6): ρ
= 0.56,  p < 0.005] ( Schwarzkopf, de Haas & Rees, 2012 ), ruling out the possible
influence from outliers. However, this effect was only found when regressing
with difference-scores from the supra-second interval range. No significant
peaks or clusters were found when regressing sub-second difference scores at a
matched threshold of activation. Additionally, we note that several regions not
implicated by our prior meta analysis also exhibited significant correlation
( p <0.001, uncorrected) with performance, yet did not
survive FWE cluster-wise correction. These areas included the left superior (BA
22) and right inferior (BA20) temporal gyri (left MNI x,y,z: −52, 41,
−91 [ρ = 0.578,  p < 0.005]; right: 52,
−31, −12 [ρ = 0.424,  p < 0.05]), and
the left parahippocampal gyrus (BA 28) (MNI x,y,z: −28, −21,
−3 [ρ = 0.541,  p < 0.005]). No significant
peaks or clusters were found when examining the reverse contrast of [COLOR vs.
TIME] associated with better performance on the COLOR than TIME task, at either
corrected or uncorrected thresholds. 
 Subsequently, the effect of genotype the (i.e., DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a
polymorphism) on time processing was examined. To this end, candidate brain
regions were delineated from the results of the regression analysis described
above. We found that subjects with the A1+ genotype exhibited significantly
greater activation in the bilateral basal ganglia, centered in the left caudate
(MNI x,y,z = −14, −3, 15), and right superior frontal gyrus (MNI
x,y,z = 28, 52, 15), whereas A1- subjects exhibited no significant increases in
these regions ( Figure 3 ). For the main
effect of COLOR, we used a contrast from the multiple regression analysis
examining voxels with increased activation associated with better performance on
the COLOR than TIME task, with a very relaxed threshold (height
 p <0.05) in order to find significant voxels, as a
mask for genotype effects. No significant differences were found for the main
effect of COLOR for A1+ or A1- subjects. 
 For our exploratory analysis of duration range effects on genotype, we
repeated the above analysis for the main effect of TIME, but only in those
voxels that were modulated by our duration range covariate for either sub-second
or supra-second intervals. When separately examining the main effect of TIME for
A1+ and A1- subjects at sub-second afcl supra-second ranges, we found that the
basal ganglia clusters were significant for A1+ subjects in both the sub-second
and supra-second conditions ( Figure 3 ),
with peaks in the left putamen (MNI x,y,z : −21, 0, 21) and right caudate
(MNI x,y,z : 10, 0, 9,); in contrast, the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
across superior and middle frontal gyri (peak MNI coordinate: 31, 52, 0) was
found for the supra-second and not sub-second duration range. No significant
increases in either region were found for A1-carriers. No significant increases
were found for A1+ carriers relative to A1- carriers or vice versa. 
 
 
 3.3. VBM Data 
 The results of the VBM analysis revealed a single, significant cluster
in the right cerebellum ( Figure 4 ). The
peak of this cluster [MNI x,y,z: 38, −51, −57,
 t -score = 5.49, volume = 1620] was located in the lobule Villa
according to the probabilistic cerebellar atlas of Diedrichsen and colleagues
(2009) [probability = 0.72]. Accordingly, larger relative cerebellar volume in
this cluster was associated with greater performance on the TIME relative to the
COLOR task. When comparing sub-second and supra-second durations, performance at
both duration ranges were significantly associated with greater cerebellar
volume ( Figure 4 ); both effects were
significant with Spearman rank correlations [sub-second: ρ = 0.78,
 p < 0.0001; supra-second: ρ = 0.727,
 p < 0.0001]. No significantly greater effects were
found for better COLOR relative to TIME performance. 
 For our exploratory analysis of genotypic effects, subjects were
segregated according to DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a status; A1+ subjects exhibited lower
cerebellar volume than A1- subjects in the cluster identified by the regression
analysis [ t (24) = 2.194, p = 0.039,
η 2  = 0.173]. To summarize, A1+ exhibited both reduced
behavioral performance on the timing relative to the color task at both duration
ranges, and lower cerebellar volume in an area associated with better
performance on the timing task relative to the color control task. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 
 4.1. Main Findings 
 We investigated the neural regions associated with heterogeneous
performance on a perceptual timing task. Substantial differences in performance
were observed, with some subjects performing well, and others performing close
to chance. Furthermore, on the basis of behavioral and neural data suggesting
differential processing as a function of interval duration range ( Lewis & Miall, 2003 ;  Wiener, et al. 2010 ), we employed both sub-
and supra-second intervals; we found that subjects performed better on both the
perceptual timing and color control task when the interval range was long
(>1s). When regressing the difference between timing and color tasks
against differences in BOLD signal derived from a standard contrast of timing
and control task activity, we found bilateral regions of the basal ganglia
(caudate and putamen) and a cluster in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
that covaried with performance. Furthermore, these differences were only found
for performance at longer duration ranges. In a similar analysis of structural
differences, we found that better performance on the timing task than the color
task at both duration ranges correlated with volume within a large cluster of
the right cerebellum, despite the fact that no BOLD differences were observed in
this region. These results provide greater contextualization of the regions
likely to be active across different temporal task contexts, and provide further
evidence regarding brain regions that are crucial for timing. 
 
 
 4.2. Behavioral heterogeneity 
 The present study employed a task that has been successful at
disentangling working memory and attentional effects from time perception
processes in neuroimaging ( Coull, et al.
2004 ;  2008 ;  2012 ;  Livesey, et al. 2007 ;  Morillon, et
al. 2009 ). The time-color task is useful in that both tasks require
the subject to sustain attention and integrate information over time in order to
reach a decision, using the same perceptual stimuli in both conditions; as such,
non-temporal demands are equal between both tasks. Our experiment differed from
previous work, however in that we employed a different range of durations,
centered on two local maxima (500 and 2000 ms). Previous studies utilizing the
time-color task have either used exclusively supra-second ( Livesey, et al. 2007 ;  Gilaie-Dotan, et al. 2011 ) intervals, or collapsed across sub and
supra-second ranges ( Coull, et al. 2004 ;
 2008 ; 2009;  2012 ;  Morillon, et al.
2009 ); as such, our study is the first of which we are aware to
examine performance on the time-color task at separate duration ranges. Like
previous investigators (e.g.,  Gilaie-Dotan, et
al. 2011 ), we found that performance on the time and color tasks do
not correlate, suggesting that time and color perception are at least partially
independent. Consistent with this claim we found a strong correlation between
performance with sub and supra-second intervals for the color task, but only a
trend for correlation between timing performance at different intervals. These
findings suggest that performance on the color task relies on a similar
mechanism for sub- and supra-second intervals, whereas the timing task may
involve separate mechanisms ( Wiener, et al.
2011 ;  Gooch, et al. 2011 ). 
 
 
 4.3. Neural heterogeneity 
 In the present experiment, when covarying for subject performance on the
time minus color task with the fMRI contrast for the same conditions, we found
significant voxels in a large cluster covering the basal ganglia bilaterally, as
well as the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, covering the superior and
middle frontal gyri. Both of these regions have been strongly implicated in time
perception processes, across a wide variety of task contexts ( Wiener, et al. 2010 ). Intriguingly,
activation in these regions was only revealed when covarying for activity in the
supra-second version of the task, rather than the sub-second. It is important to
note that there are three key differences between the supra and sub-second
conditions. First, subjects performed less well on the sub-second as compared to
the supra-second condition, thereby reducing power to observe an effect.
Secondly, whereas the duration was varied every 200 ms among the six intervals
for the supra-second condition, it was varied only every 50 ms for the
sub-second condition. Third, the overall duration of a trial was shorter for the
sub-second than supra-second condition, thereby potentially reducing BOLD signal
in this condition ( Pfeuffer, et al.
2003 ). Together, these factors may have obscured the differential
activity in response to the sub-second condition. Future studies are warranted
to directly compare supra vs. sub-second timing differences. 
 Activation of the basal ganglia and right prefrontal cortex in the
present study is consistent with previous work demonstrating activation in these
regions tied to temporal processing. We found that activation across bilateral
caudate and putamen correlated with greater accuracy on the timing than color
task, with peak activation in the right putamen, (cf,  Coull, et al. 2008 ). The basal ganglia have been afforded a
critical role in many models of time perception ( Buhusi & Meek, 2005 ;  Coull,
Cheng & Meek, 2010 ).  Matell and
Meck's (2004)  Striatal Beat Frequency (SBF) model posits the striatum
as a coincidence-detection mechanism that tracks the similarity of oscillating
cortical input to previously experienced durations. Consistent with this theory,
diseases of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson's and Huntington's disease show
disruptions on temporal perception tasks, with greater impairments found with
greater disease progression ( Allman & Meek,
2012 ). In a recent study utilizing the same time-color paradigm used
here,  Coull and colleagues (2012) 
demonstrated that dopamine precursor depletion via APTD similarly reduced
striatal activation and impaired behavioral performance. The correlation with
accuracy and basal ganglia activity in the present study may thus relate to the
ability of the striatum to retain temporal intervals in memory. 
 In addition to striatal activation, we also found a significant cluster
in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, encompassing the middle and
superior frontal gyri (BA 10/11), and a second cluster in the right middle
frontal gyri, across the premotor cortex (BA 6) where greater activation was
associated with better performance on the timing task relative to the color
task. Activation in these regions has been demonstrated on time-color tasks
previously ( Coull, et al. 2012 ;  Morillon, et al., 2009 ;  Livesey, et al., 2007 ). The right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex may be related to decision-making components for
temporal information;  Morillon and colleagues
(2009) , using the time-color task, found activation in this region
corresponding to an interaction between duration length and correct decisions on
the timing task, which they termed the ‘counting’ system.
Similarly,  Brunia and colleagues (2000) ,
using positron emission tomography (PET), observed right prefrontal activation
associated with feedback on a time estimation task, suggesting that this region
corrects and improves temporal responses. Finally, using a temporal
discrimination task with both sub- and supra-second stimuli and a carefully
designed covariate for temporal comparison activity, we ( Wencil et al, 2010 ) found prefrontal activation associated
with better performance. Similarly, lesions of the right prefrontal cortex found
in stroke patients have been associated with poor perceptual timing performance
( Gooch, et al. 2011 ) and TMS of the
right, but not left, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex disrupts temporal
reproduction abilities specifically related to comparison processes ( Jones, et al. 2004 ). The right premotor
cortex (BA6), has also been implicated in perceptual timing tasks ( Wiener, et al. 2010 ) –  Coull and colleagues (2012)  found
activation within this same region during the measurement of comparison duration
stimuli in the time-color task. However, we note that this cluster was not
significant when tested with a non-parametric correlation, and so should be
interpreted with caution. 
 In addition to timing regions explicitly investigated, we note that
several other regions were also activated in the regression contrast with timing
performance. These areas included bilateral regions of the temporal cortex,
including the left superior temporal gyrus and right inferior temporal gyrus, as
well as a small sub-cortical cluster approximately in the left parahippocampal
gyrus; although these regions were outside our  a-priori  regions
of interest and only significant at a lower cluster threshold, these regions
warrant discussion in the context of time perception performance. Notably, these
regions have also been implicated in time perception when covarying for subject
performance.  Harrington and colleagues
(2004a)  noted a post-hoc positive correlation between accuracy on a
temporal bisection task and activity in the right parahippocampal gyrus. In
contrast,  Gilaie-Dotan and colleagues
(2011)  noted a negative correlation between temporal discrimination
accuracy and gray-matter volume in the bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, as well
as a positive correlation between accuracy and gray-matter volume in the right
primary auditory cortex; this effect was found for both auditory and visual
stimuli. The involvement of the parahippocampal gyrus suggests the recruitment
of mnemonic processes during temporal performance. The hippocampus has also
received renewed attention in animal studies of temporal processing, due to the
existence of so-called ‘time-cells’ that appear to track delay
lengths and may provide a metric for measuring time ( MacDonald et al. 2011 ). Similarly, in a previous
neuroimaging study employing the same time-color task used here, activity was
reported in the left parahippocampal gyrus that parametrically varied with
increases in stimulus duration ( Morillon, et al.
2009 ). The association of the left parahippocampal gyrus in the
present experiment with subject performance may thus be related to the ability
of individual subjects to track the remembered duration of presented stimuli.
For the auditory cortex activations also observed in the present study, we note
that these regions have also been found in previous neuroimaging studies using
the time-color task ( Morillon, et al.
2009 ;  Coull, et al. 2008 ;
 2012 ). The involvement of auditory
cortex regions may at first seem unexpected given the visual nature of both
tasks. However, recent studies have suggested that the auditory cortex may serve
as a supramodal timing system. Consistent with this are findings that auditory
cortex disruption with TMS impacts both visual and auditory temporal perception
( Kanai, et al. 2011 ), and that
auditory stimuli dominate temporal percepts when both auditory and visual
information are present ( Guttmarm, Gilroy &
Blake, 2005 ). Activation in these regions correlated with accuracy on
the timing task may thus relate to the ability of subjects to leverage this
supramodal system for inputting duration information. 
 Notably absent in the present study is any association with accuracy and
activation of the SMA. Most studies utilizing the time-color task have
demonstrated SMA activation during timing ( Coull, et al. 2004 ;  2008 ;
 2012 ;  Morillon, et al. 2009 ), and the SMA is most commonly activated
during time perception tasks ( Wiener, et al.
2010 ). The SMA has been suggested to serve as a temporal accumulator
that indexes the elapsed passage of time during an interval (Casini & Vidal,
2011), and is related to the speed of a hypothetical internal clock ( Gibbon, Church & Meek, 1984 ). One
possibility for the absence of an effect of SMA in the present study is the
nature of our analysis. In the present study, we covaried differences between
subjects in behavioral performance with neural activation. Our use of a
difference score tested for areas corresponding to better timing-specific
performance over color-specific performance. As such, differential activation in
the SMA between subjects may not have been predictive of the relative difference
in performance between these two tasks and across individuals. Indeed,  Coull and colleagues (2012)  found that
APTD-induced decreases in timing performance on the time-color task decreased
SMA activity  within  subjects on the time task. Similarly, we
have recently demonstrated that TMS to a parietal region shown to increase
subjective duration within-subject is also associated with larger frontocentral
negativity in EEG recordings, consistent with an increase in accumulator output
( Wiener, et al. 2012 ). While this
difference may still be difficult to reconcile, we note that our findings using
difference scores are consistent with many other neuroimaging studies of timing
that exhibit frontostriatal activity in conjunction with time perception ( Wiener, et al. 2010 ). 
 We also note that the rIFG, a region also highly linked to time
perception activity and performance, was not active in the present study. It
remains possible that the rIFG activity implicated in our meta-analysis and the
superior/middle frontal gyrus activity in the present study represent the same
cognitive process; future studies will be necessary to determine the similar (or
different) roles of these regions. 
 A second goal of our study was to examine morphometric differences that
may account for individual differences in behavior. In recent years, voxel-based
morphometry has been utilized to demonstrate associations between gray-matter
volume and individual variations in a number of distinct cognitive and
perceptual functions ( Kanai & Rees,
2011 ;  Schwartz et al, 2011 ,
 2012 ). In the present study, we found
a single large cluster associated with performance in the right lateral
cerebellum (lobule VIIIa). Within this cluster, there was an association between
larger cerebellar volume and better timing as compared to color performance at
both sub-second and supra-second duration ranges. The cerebellum has long been
implicated in timing performance ( Ivry &
Keele, 1989 ), although its exact role remains controversial ( Harrington, et al. 2004b ). Previous
neuroimaging ( Wiener, et al. 2010 ;  Aso, et al. 2010 ) evidence has suggested
that the cerebellum is activated during both motor and perceptual timing
studies, and is exclusively activated during sub-second processing. However,
recent work has demonstrated that patients with cerebellar stroke also exhibit
supra-second timing deficits ( Gooch, et al.
2010 ), particularly for shorter supra-second stimuli (~2s). In
a recent study examining the effects of training on a time perception task,
 Bueti and colleagues (2012) 
demonstrated that four weeks of training led to increases in cerebellar volume
in a region of the right lateral cerebellum very close to the one reported here
(lobule Vila); these increases paralleled improvements in timing performance
with training, and suggest that larger cerebellar volume relates directly to the
ability of an individual to perform a timing task. Also similar to the present
results,  Bueti and colleagues (2012) 
found no activation differences in BOLD signal in the cerebellum. However, we
note that a possible explanation for the discrepancy between fMRI and VBM
results in the present study is that we had a lower BOLD signal quality in the
lateral regions of the cerebellum, where the VBM result was located
(supplementary materials). VBM, which is based on T1-weighted structural images,
may thus be more sensitive to differences in the cerebellum. Future fMRI studies
may focus exclusively on the cerebellum to interrogate differences between BOLD
and VBM results (Spencer, et al. 2007). We also note that another previous VBM
study of time perception did not find cerebellar differences associated with
performance ( Gilaie-Dotan, et al. 2011 );
however, in this study the authors did not use a difference measure as in the
present study. Differences in cerebellar volume may thus relate to the ability
to perform  better  on a timing task than a control task. Our
findings suggest that cerebellar volume may be a useful metric for predicting
differences in timing performance in disorders such as autism and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder ( Allman &
Meek, 2012 ). 
 
 
 4.4. Genetic influence on timing 
 As described above, numerous factors contribute to timing performance.
We have previously demonstrated that functional variants in genes regulating
dopamine homeostasis are associated with inter-individual differences in
perceptual timing performance ( Wiener, et al.
2011 ). The DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a polymorphism was associated with a
decrease in temporal precision for sub-second, but not supra-second stimuli.
Given that the Taq1a polymorphism regulates the encoding of striatal D2
receptors, with a single copy of the A1 allele leading to a 30-40% reduction in
striatal D2 density ( Jönsson, et al.
1999 ), we assessed in the present experiment, the implications of the
Taq1a polymorphism for interval timing. When our sample was divided into A1- and
A1+ groups, we found a number of differences in both behavioral and neural
measures. 
 We found that A1+, but not A1-, subjects performed worse with respect to
accuracy on the time as compared to the color task; A1+ subjects thus
predominantly exhibited negative difference scores in the time-color behavioral
contrast. This finding is similar to previous pharmacological work showing that
APTD-induced decreases in dopamine precursors ( Coull, et al. 2012 ), as well as ketamine administration (Coull, et
al. 2009) reduce performance only on the time, but not color condition of the
time-color task, further suggesting that, although both tasks use identical
stimuli, the attention to one dimension or another crucially relies on separate
circuits. We further note that the over-representation of A1+ subjects in our
sample may explain the difference between performance ontB^tmie and color tasks;
that is, as the 15 A1+ subjects performed less well with time as compared to
color processing, their performance may have biased the group results.
Consistent with our earlier findings ( Wiener, et
al. 2011 ), A1+ subjects performed relatively worse at sub-second as
opposed to supra-second intervals. However, A1+ subjects also performed worse
than their A1- counterparts at both sub- and supra-second durations. This result
may appear contradictory to our earlier finding that A1+ subjects are
preferentially disrupted at sub-second intervals ( Wiener, et al. 2011 ). However, we note that, in the present
study, subjects performed both time and color trials, with both duration ranges,
within the same block and in pseudo-random order, and so were required to
rapidly switch between both tasks, whereas our previous study only tested one
task and duration range at a time. Recent research has demonstrated that A1
carriers of the Taq1a polymorphism are impaired in task-switching ability that
crucially relies on frontostriatal activity ( Stelzel, et al. 2010 ). Furthermore, A1+ subjects exhibit increased
caudate activation during task-switching behavior; as such, one possible
explanation for poorer performance across both sub and supra-second intervals is
impaired task-switching. However, as A1+ subjects were not impaired on the color
task, a task-switching deficit cannot fully account for the timing deficit. This
issue may be investigated further in future studies. 
 For the neural measures, when examining differences between A1- and A1+
subjects in those regions modulated by subject performance and on timing-related
activation, we found that A1+ subjects significantly activated the bilateral
basal ganglia, centered on the left caudate, and the right superior frontal
gyrus (BA10), whereas A1- subjects did not. When duration length was used as a
covariate to separate timing-related responses, A1+ subjects exhibited activity
in the basal ganglia for sub- and supra-second stimuli but right superior
frontal gyrus activation for supra-second durations only. This finding is
consistent with  Coull and colleagues’
(2012)  recent study in which APTD-induced decreases in timing
performance also showed a difference in basal ganglia activation specifically
for a sub-second interval (540ms). However, we note that APTD led to a decrease
in striatal activity, whereas A1+ subjects in the present study exhibited
increased activation. One explanation may stem from the difference between an
acute pharmacological administration and a lifelong developmental polymorphism
– each may affect the same system but in different ways. In a similar
vein, patients with Parkinson's disease when scanned in an off-medication state
also exhibit greater striatal activation in both motor and perceptual timing
tasks, that is attenuated when returned to an on-medication state ( Harrington, et al. 2011 ;  Jahanshahi, et al. 2010 ).  Jahanshahi and colleagues (2010)  suggested
that excessive inhibitory pallidal outflow in the off-medication state led to
reduced timing performance that was later renormalized on-medication. Although
D2 receptors are inhibitory, and so a decrease in D2 density would be expected
to lead to a  decrease  in pallidal outflow, evidence suggests
that the Taq1a polymorphism is specific to D2 autoreceptors projecting from the
substantia nigra ( Laakso, et al. 2005 ); a
reduction in D2 autoreceptors would thus lead to an increase in dopamine
availability at D2 post-synaptic receptors and thus increase inhibitory
activation similar to that observed in Parkinson's disease. Similarly, A1+
subjects also exhibit slower mean tapping rates on a motor tempo task ( Wiener, et al. 2011 ). 
 We acknowledge that the fMRI findings of A1+ subjects may be difficult
to reconcile with the multiple regression analysis at first; the regression
analysis demonstrated that defter performance on the timing task was associated
with greater activation in the basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex, yet A1+
subjects, who are worse at the timing task, show increased activation in these
regions. To clarify, we note that the regression analysis examined the
correlation between differences in performance on the time and color tasks with
the activation difference between the time and color tasks; the A1+ effects
examined activation in this group for the main effect of time, without
subtracting color task activation. Accordingly, the regression analysis examined
relative differences in activation, whereas the genotype analysis examined
absolute differences in activation. As such, A1+ subjects show greater absolute
levels of activity in these regions for timing, whereas greater relative levels
of activity compared to color processing are necessary within these regions for
better performance. 
 The observation that A1+ subjects exhibit increased activation in both
striatal and prefrontal cortex for supra-second stimuli suggests that both
systems are involved in the processing of longer duration stimuli. This finding
is consistent with  Hellstrom & Rammsayer's
(2002)  dual-systems theory, that postulates separate systems for sub-
and supra-second timing, but stipulates that the sub-second system will also be
utilized during supra-second processing (but not vice-versa). The coinciding
involvement of striatum and prefrontal cortex also mirrors well-known
connectivity between both regions, as well as their implication in timing
processes ( Jones & Jahanshahi, 2011 ).
One explanation for increased prefrontal activation during supra-second
processing in A1+ subjects is that these subjects required greater activation of
this system to compensate for inefficient temporal processing resulting from
sub-second striatal dysfunction. 
 For the morphometric results, A1+ subjects exhibited lower cerebellar
volume than A1- subjects within the right cerebellar cluster associated with
timing performance for both sub-second and supra-second ranges. Thissurprising
result suggests that the effects of the Taq1a polymorphism extend beyond
striatal differences, and have long-range effects that impact cerebellar
morphometry. Of course, it is difficult to ascribe directional consequences with
our data alone, as cerebellar volume may be reduced in these subjects as a
consequence of poor timing abilities, rather than a direct genetic link.
Nevertheless, disruption of D2 receptor functioning has been shown to have a
direct influence on glucose metabolism in the cerebellum ( Volkow, et al. 1997 ), and Parkinson's disease patients show
a decrease in cerebellar activation when receiving dopaminergic medication and
performing a motor timing task ( Jahanshahi, et
al. 2010 ). We suggest that the A1+ findings here demonstrate a
widespread impact of reduced D2 function on both activation and morphometry in
time perception regions. 
 We note that, in the present study, we utilized a modest sample size (25
subjects). However, the primary goal of our study was to investigate the neural
effects underlying individual differences in timing behavior, for which we
believe our sample size is adequate. However, for comparing the results between
different genotypes, we encourage caution in extrapolating our results to much
larger sample sizes without further testing. Nevertheless, our results do fit
within the larger and predicted framework of temporal processing, and provide
additional testable hypothesis that may be further evaluated. Furthermore, we
note that the false-positive rate in imaging genetics is relatively low,
suggesting that standard significance-correction techniques in neuroimaging can
control for spurious findings when comparing genetic polymorphisms ( Meyer-Lindenberg, et al. 2008 );
additionally, we note that the sample size used in the present study is within
the range of other neuroimaging studies investigating the DRD2/ANKK1 Taq1a
polymorphism that found similar results ( Stelzel, et al. 2010 ;  Jocham, et al.
2009 ;  Klein, et al. 2007 ;
 Fossella, et al. 2006 ). 
 
 
 4.5. Conclusions 
 Understanding individual differences is a crucial challenge for
cognitive neuroscience. Central to this is fractionating inter-individual
variance into separable components. In the present study, we demonstrate that
the wide variety of performance seen in perceptual timing may be tied to
individual differences in the recruitment of frontostriatal circuitry, as well
as the morphometry of the lateral cerebellum. Furthermore, we demonstrate here
for the first time that developmental genetic polymorphisms affecting the
dopamine system are associated with differences in frontostriatal activation and
cerebellar volume. Furthermore, these differences may have different
implications for sub- and supra-second temporal processing. These findings
contribute to the understanding of the neural mechanisms utilized for temporal
processing, and provide possible connections to neuropsychological and
psychiatric disorders in which timing disruptions are present. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 02 
 
 
 
 03 
 
 
 
 04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited
manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 EA 
 
 
 Erhardt 
 EB 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Data Visualization in the Neurosciences: Overcoming the Curse of
Dimensionality. 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 74 
 4 
 603 
 608 
 doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.05.001 
 22632718 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allman 
 MJ 
 
 
 Meek 
 WH 
 
 
 Pathophysiological distortions in time perception and timed
performance. 
 Brain 
 2012 
 135 
 3 
 656 
 677 
 doi:10.1093/brain/awr210 
 21921020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 A fast diffeomorphic image registration
algorithm. 
 Neurolmage 
 2007 
 38 
 1 
 95 
 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aso 
 K 
 
 
 Hanakawa 
 T 
 
 
 Aso 
 T 
 
 
 Fukuyama 
 H 
 
 
 Cerebro-cerebellar interactions underlying temporal information
processing. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2010 
 22 
 12 
 2913 
 2925 
 20044898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balci 
 F 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Cavdaroglu 
 B 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Epistasis effects of dopamine genes on interval timing and reward
magnitude in humans. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2013 
 51 
 2 
 293 
 308 
 22903038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berryhill 
 ME 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Stephens 
 JA 
 
 
 Lohoff 
 FW 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 COMT and ANKK1-Taq-Ia Genetic Polymorphisms Influence Visual
Working Memory. 
 PLoS ONE 
 2013 
 8 
 1 
 e55862 
 doi: 10.137 l/journal.pone.0055862.g004 
 23383291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brunia 
 CHM 
 
 
 de Jong 
 BM 
 
 
 van den Berg-Lenssen 
 MMC 
 
 
 Paans 
 AMJ 
 
 
 Visual feedback about time estimation is related to a right
hemisphere activation measured by PET. 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 2000 
 130 
 3 
 328 
 337 
 doi:10.1007/s002219900293 
 10706432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 SW 
 
 
 Newcomb 
 DC 
 
 
 Kahrl 
 KG 
 
 
 Temporal-signal detection and individual differences in
timing. 
 Perception 
 1995 
 24 
 5 
 525 
 538 
 7567428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buhusi 
 CV 
 
 
 Meek 
 WH 
 
 
 What makes us tick? Functional and neural mechanisms of interval
timing. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2005 
 6 
 10 
 755 
 765 
 doi:10.1038/nrnl764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bueti 
 D 
 
 
 Lasaponara 
 S 
 
 
 Cercignani 
 M 
 
 
 Macaluso 
 E 
 
 
 Learning about time: plastic changes and interindividual brain
differences 
 2012 
 75 
 4 
 725 
 737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carlson 
 VR 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 I 
 
 
 Individual variations in time judgment and the concept of an
internal clock. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1968 
 77 
 4 
 631 
 640 
 5676839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Vidal 
 F 
 
 
 Nazarian 
 B 
 
 
 Macar 
 F 
 
 
 Functional anatomy of the attentional modulation of time
estimation. 
 Science 
 2004 
 303 
 1506 
 1508 
 15001776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Nazarian 
 B 
 
 
 Vidal 
 F 
 
 
 Timing, storage, and comparison of stimulus duration engage
discrete anatomical components of a perceptual timing
network. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 2185 
 2197 
 18457512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Cheng 
 R-K 
 
 
 Meek 
 WH 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical and Neurochemical Substrates of
Timing. 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2010 
 36 
 1 
 3 
 25 
 doi:10.1038/npp.2010.113 
 20668434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Hwang 
 HJ 
 
 
 Leyton 
 M 
 
 
 Dagher 
 A 
 
 
 Dopamine Precursor Depletion Impairs Timing in Healthy Volunteers
by Attenuating Activity in Putamen and Supplementary Motor
Area. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 47 
 16704 
 16715 
 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1258-12.2012 
 23175824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coull 
 JT 
 
 
 Morgan 
 H 
 
 
 Cambridge 
 VC 
 
 
 Moore 
 JW 
 
 
 Giorlando 
 F 
 
 
 Adapa 
 R 
 
 
 Corlett 
 PR 
 
 
 
 Ketamine perturbs perception of the flow of time in healthy
volunteers. 
 Psychopharmacology 
 2011 
 218 
 3 
 543 
 556 
 doi:10.1007/s00213-0112346-9 
 21603893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Behr 
 MK 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Functional specificity for high-level linguistic processing in
the human brain. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of SciencMSA 
 2011 
 108 
 39 
 16428 
 16433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feredoes 
 E 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 Localization of load sensitivity of working memory storage:
Quantitatively and qualitatively discrepant results yielded by
single-subject and group-averaged approaches to fMRI group
analysis. 
 Neurolmage 
 2007 
 35 
 2 
 881 
 903 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.12.029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feredoes 
 E 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 The Neural Bases of the Short-Term Storage of Verbal Information
Are Anatomically Variable across Individuals. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 41 
 11003 
 11008 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1573-07.2007 
 17928441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fossella 
 J 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Fan 
 J 
 
 
 Evaluation of a structural polymorphism in the ankyrin repeat and
kinase domain containing 1 (ANKK1) genet and the activation of executive
attention networks. 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 2006 
 6 
 1 
 71 
 78 
 16869231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Poline 
 J-B 
 
 
 Grasby 
 PJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 SCR 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Analysis of fMRI Time-Series Revisited. 
 Neurolmage 
 1995 
 2 
 1 
 45 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Nonlinear event-related responses in fMRI. 
 Magnetic Resonance In Medicine 
 1998 
 39 
 1 
 41 
 52 
 9438436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gibbon 
 J 
 
 
 Church 
 RM 
 
 
 Meek 
 WH 
 
 
 Scalar timing in memory. 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1984 
 423 
 52 
 77 
 6588812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilaie-Dotan 
 S 
 
 
 Kanai 
 R 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Anatomy of human sensory cortices reflects inter-individual
variability in time estimation. 
 Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 
 2011 
 5 
 76 
 doi: 10.3389/fnint.2011.00076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gooch 
 CM 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Wencil 
 EB 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Interval timing disruptions in subjects with cerebellar
lesions. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2010 
 48 
 4 
 1022 
 1031 
 19962999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gooch 
 CM 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 CA 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Temporal discrimination of sub- and suprasecond time intervals: a
voxel-based lesion mapping analysis, Frontiers in
Integrative 
 Neuroscience 
 2011 
 1 
 10 
 doi: 10.3389/fnint.2011.00059/abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Munafo 
 MR 
 
 
 DeYoung 
 CG 
 
 
 Fossella 
 JA 
 
 
 Fan 
 J 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Using genetic data in cognitive neuroscience: from growing pains
to genuine insights. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2008 
 9 
 710 
 720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grahn 
 JA 
 
 
 McAuley 
 JD 
 
 
 Neural bases of individual differences in beat
perception. 
 Neurolmage 
 2009 
 47 
 4 
 1894 
 1903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grahn 
 JA 
 
 
 Parkinson 
 JA 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 The cognitive functions of the caudate nucleus. 
 Progress in Neurobiology 
 2008 
 86 
 141 
 155 
 18824075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guttman 
 SE 
 
 
 Gilroy 
 LA 
 
 
 Blake 
 R 
 
 
 Hearing what the eyes see. Auditory encoding of visual temporal
sequences. 
 Psychological Sciences 
 2005 
 16 
 3 
 228 
 235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hancock 
 PA 
 
 
 On the left hand of time. 
 American Journal of Psychology 
 2011 
 124 
 2 
 177 
 188 
 21834403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrington 
 DL 
 
 
 Boyd 
 LA 
 
 
 Mayer 
 AR 
 
 
 Sheltraw 
 DM 
 
 
 Lee 
 RR 
 
 
 Huang 
 M 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Neural representation of interval encoding and decision
making. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2004a 
 21 
 2 
 193 
 205 
 doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.01.010 
 15464351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrington 
 DL 
 
 
 Lee 
 RR 
 
 
 Boyd 
 LA 
 
 
 Rapcsak 
 SZ 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Does the representation of time depend on the cerebellum? Effect
of cerebellar stroke. 
 Brain 
 2004b 
 127 
 561 
 574 
 14711883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrington 
 DL 
 
 
 Zimbelman 
 JL 
 
 
 Hinton 
 SC 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Neural Modulation of Temporal Encoding, Maintenance, and Decision
Processes. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 6 
 1274 
 1285 
 doi:10.1093/cercor/bhpl94 
 19778958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrington 
 DL 
 
 
 Castillo 
 GN 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 PA 
 
 
 Song 
 DD 
 
 
 Lessig 
 S 
 
 
 Lee 
 RR 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Neurobehavioral mechanisms of temporal processing deficits in
Parkinson's disease. 
 PLoS One 
 2011 
 6 
 2 
 el7461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hellström 
 A 
 
 
 Rammsayer 
 TH 
 
 
 
 
 Da Silva 
 JA 
 
 
 Matsushima 
 EH 
 
 
 Ribeiro Filho 
 NP 
 
 
 Mechanisms behind discrimination of short and long auditory
durations. 
 Fechner Day 2002. Eighteenth annual meeting of the international society
for psychophysics 
 2002 
 International Society for Psychophysics 
 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hinton 
 SC 
 
 
 Harrington 
 DL 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Durgerian 
 S 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Neural systems supporting timing and chronometric counting: an
FMRI study. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2004 
 21 
 2 
 183 
 192 
 doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.04.009 
 15464350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hirvonen 
 MM 
 
 
 Lumme 
 V 
 
 
 Hirvonen 
 J 
 
 
 Pesonen 
 U 
 
 
 Nagren 
 K 
 
 
 Vahlberg 
 T 
 
 
 Scheinin 
 H 
 
 
 
 C957T polymorphism of the human dopamine D2 receptor gene
predicts extrastriatal dopamine receptor availability in
vivo. 
 Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 
 2009 
 33 
 4 
 630 
 636 
 doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.02.021 
 19285111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ivry 
 RB 
 
 
 Keele 
 SW 
 
 
 Timing functions of the cerebellum. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1989 
 1 
 136 
 152 
 23968462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 Jones 
 CR 
 
 
 Zijlmans 
 J 
 
 
 Katzenschlager 
 R 
 
 
 Lee 
 L 
 
 
 Quinn 
 N 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Lees 
 AJ 
 
 
 Dopaminergic modulation of striato-frontal connectivity during
motor timing in Parkinson's disease. 
 Brain 
 2010 
 133 
 3 
 727 
 745 
 20305278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jocham 
 G 
 
 
 Klein 
 TA 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Reuter 
 M 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Dopamine DRD2 polymorphism alters reversal learning and
associated neural activity. 
 J. Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 12 
 3695 
 3704 
 19321766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 CG 
 
 
 Rosenkranz 
 K 
 
 
 Rothwell 
 J 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 The right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is essential in time
reproduction: an investigation with repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation. 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 2004 
 158 
 3 
 doi: 10.1007/s00221-004-1912-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 CR 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 Dopamine modulates striato-frontal functioning during temporal
processing. 
 Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 
 2011 
 5 
 70 
 doi: 10.3389/fnint.2011.00070 
 22046150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jönsson 
 EG 
 
 
 Nothen 
 MM 
 
 
 Grunhage 
 F 
 
 
 Farde 
 L 
 
 
 Nakashima 
 Y 
 
 
 Propping 
 P 
 
 
 Sedvall 
 GC 
 
 
 Polymorphisms in the dopamine D 2  receptor gene and
their relationships to striatal dopamine receptor density of healthy
volunteers. 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 1999 
 4 
 290 
 296 
 10395223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging: modeling,
inference and optimization. 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B Biological
Sciences 
 1999 
 354 
 1387 
 1215 
 1228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanai 
 R 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 The structural basis of inter-individual differences in human behaviour
and cognition 
 2011 
 1 
 12 
 doi:10.1038/nrn3000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanai 
 R 
 
 
 Lloyd 
 H 
 
 
 Bueti 
 D 
 
 
 Walsh 
 V 
 
 
 Mfcdally-independent role of the primary auditory cortex in time
estimation. 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 2011 
 209 
 3 
 465 
 471 
 doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2577-3 
 21318347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klein 
 TA 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 Reuter 
 M 
 
 
 Hennig 
 J 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Genetically determined differences in learning from
errors. 
 Science 
 2007 
 318 
 1642 
 1645 
 18063800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laakso 
 A 
 
 
 Pohjalainen 
 T 
 
 
 Bergman 
 J 
 
 
 Kajander 
 J 
 
 
 Haaparanta 
 M 
 
 
 Solin 
 O 
 
 
 Syvalahti 
 E 
 
 
 Hietala 
 J 
 
 
 The Al allele of the human D2 dopamine receptor gene is associated with
increased activity of stratal L-amino acid decarboxylase in healthy
subjects 
 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis 
 PA 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 Distinct systems for automatic and cognitively controlled time
measurement: evidence from neuroimaging. 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2003 
 13 
 2 
 250 
 255 
 doi:10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00036-9 
 12744981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Livesey 
 AC 
 
 
 Wall 
 MB 
 
 
 Smith 
 AT 
 
 
 Time perception: Manipulation of task difficulty dissociates
clock functions from other cognitive demands. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 2 
 321 
 331 
 doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.06.033 
 16934301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macaluso 
 DBSLMCE 
 
 
 Lasaponara 
 S 
 
 
 Cercignani 
 M 
 
 
 Macaluso 
 E 
 
 
 Learning about Time: Plastic Changes and Interindividual Brain
Differences. 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 75 
 4 
 725 
 737 
 doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.07.019 
 22920262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 CJ 
 
 
 Lepage 
 KQ 
 
 
 Eden 
 UT 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Hippocampal “Time Cells”” Bridge the Gap in
Memory for Discontiguous Events. 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 71 
 4 
 737 
 749 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.012 
 21867888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic anad cytoarchitectonic
atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets. 
 Neurolmage 
 2003 
 19 
 3 
 1233 
 1239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matell 
 MS 
 
 
 Meek 
 WH 
 
 
 Cortico-striatal circuits and interval timing: coincidence
detection of oscillatory processes. 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 2004 
 21 
 2 
 139 
 170 
 doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.06.012 
 15464348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer-Lindenberg 
 A 
 
 
 Nicodemus 
 KK 
 
 
 Egan 
 MF 
 
 
 Callicott 
 JH 
 
 
 Mattay 
 V 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 False positives in imaging genetics. 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 40 
 2 
 655 
 661 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.11.058 
 18201908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morillon 
 B 
 
 
 Kell 
 CA 
 
 
 Giraud 
 AL 
 
 
 Three Stages and Four Neural Systems in Time
Estimation. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 47 
 14803 
 14811 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3222-09.2009 
 19940175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nagai 
 Y 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Featherstone 
 E 
 
 
 Fenwick 
 PBC 
 
 
 Trimble 
 MR 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Brain activity relating to the contingent negative variation: an
fMRI investigation. 
 Neurolmage 
 2004 
 21 
 4 
 1232 
 1241 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeuffer 
 J 
 
 
 McCullough 
 JC 
 
 
 Van de Moortele 
 P-F 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Hu 
 X 
 
 
 Spatial dependence of the nonlinear BOLD response at short
stimulus duration. 
 Neurolmage 
 2003 
 18 
 990 
 1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rammsayer 
 TH 
 
 
 On the relationship between personality and time
estimation. 
 Personality and Individual Differences 
 1997 
 23 
 5 
 739 
 744 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Kimberg 
 DY 
 
 
 Walker 
 GM 
 
 
 Brecher 
 A 
 
 
 Faseyitan 
 OK 
 
 
 Dell 
 G 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical dissociation for taxonomic and thematic knowledge
in the human brain. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
 2011 
 108 
 8520 
 8524 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Faseyitan 
 OK 
 
 
 Kim 
 J 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 The dorsal stream contribution to phonological retrieval in
object naming. 
 Brain 
 2012 
 135 
 3799 
 3814 
 23171662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwarzkopf 
 DS 
 
 
 De Haas 
 B 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Better ways to improve standards in brain-behavior correlation
analysis. 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2012 
 6 
 200 
 doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelzel 
 C 
 
 
 Basten 
 U 
 
 
 Montag 
 C 
 
 
 Reuter 
 M 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Frontostriatal Involvement in Task Switching Depends on Genetic
Differences in D2 Receptor Density. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2010 
 30 
 42 
 14205 
 14212 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-10.2010 
 20962241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tipples 
 J 
 
 
 Brattan 
 V 
 
 
 Johnston 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 Sinigaglia 
 C 
 
 
 Neural Bases for Individual Differences in the Subjective
Experience of Short Durations (Less than 2 Seconds). 
 PLoS ONE 
 2013 
 8 
 1 
 e54669 
 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054669.t001 
 23342176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 Papathanassiou 
 D 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Delcroix 
 B 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Joliot 
 M 
 
 
 Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a
macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject
brain. 
 Neurolmage 
 2002 
 15 
 1 
 273 
 289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vidai 
 F 
 
 
 Casini 
 L 
 
 
 The SMAs: neural substrate of the temporal
accumulator? 
 Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 
 2011 
 1 
 3 
 doi:10.3389/fnint.2011.00035/abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vogel 
 EK 
 
 
 Awh 
 E 
 
 
 Using individual differences to constrain cognitive
theory. 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 2008 
 17 
 2 
 171 
 176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 Wang 
 G-J 
 
 
 Fowler 
 JS 
 
 
 Logan 
 J 
 
 
 Angrist 
 B 
 
 
 Hitzemann 
 R 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 J 
 
 
 Pappas 
 N 
 
 
 Effects of methylphenidate on regional brain glucose metabolism
in humans: relationship to dopamine D2 receptors. 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 1997 
 154 
 1 
 50 
 55 
 8988958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wencil 
 EB 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 Carving the Clock at Its Component Joints: Neural Bases for
Interval Timing. 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2010 
 104 
 1 
 160 
 168 
 doi: 10.1152/jn.00029.2009 
 20457861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 The Image of Time: A voxel-wise meta-analysis. 
 Neurolmage 
 2010 
 49 
 1728 
 1740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Lohoff 
 FW 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Double dissociation of dopamine genes and timing in
humans. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 10 
 2811 
 2821 
 21261454 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Matell 
 MS 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Multiple mechanisms for temporal process. 
 Frontiers Integrative Neuroscience 
 2011 
 1 
 3 
 doi: 10.3389/fnint.2011.00031/abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Kliot 
 D 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 RH 
 
 
 Wolk 
 DA 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Parietal Influence on Temporal Encoding Indexed by Simultaneous
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation and
Electroencephalography. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 35 
 12258 
 12267 
 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2511-12.2012 
 22933807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winterer 
 G 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 Genes, dopamine and cortical signal-to-noise ratio in
schizophrenia. 
 Trends in Neuroscience 
 2004 
 27 
 683 
 690 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We investigated the neural bases of individual differences in time
perception. 
 
 
 Individuals were additionally genotyped for the DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a
polymorphism. 
 
 
 Activity in striatum and prefrontal cortex was associated with better
performance. 
 
 
 Greater cerebellar volume was also associated with better performance. 
 
 
 Differences within these regions were found for Taq1a carriers. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Behavioral performance for individual subjects on TIME and COLOR tasks. Top:
Accuracy data (proportion correct) for TIME and COLOR tasks, separated by
duration range. Each circle represents an individual subject; diamonds indicate
the group mean. Subjects performed better on the COLOR task than the TIME task
at both interval ranges, but overall performed better with supra-second
intervals. Bottom: Accuracy data for subjects genotyped for DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a
polymorphism. Triangles indicate group mean for each genotype (A1-, A1+).
Subjects with the A1 allele performed worse on the TIME, but not COLOR tasks at
both duration ranges. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Timing specific differenpwun activation tied to subject performance. Individual
differences were examined ay regressing the difference in accuracy between TIME
and COLOR tasks with the difference in activation. Activation in right
prefrontal cortex and bilateral basal ganglia were associated with better
performance on the TIME relative to the COLOR task. Right panels indicate
significant correlations between behavioral difference scores from the
supra-second version of the task and parameter estimates (β values) in
the right superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and right putamen, where basal ganglia
differences peaked. Both correlations were also significant with non-parametric
Spearman correlations, suggesting that neither effect crucially relied on
outliers. Effects displayed are significant at a height threshold of
 p <0.001, uncorrected, and a cluster threshold of
 p <0.05 FWE corrected with SVC in regions of
interest. A.U. = Arbitrary Units. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Effect of genotype on activation during the TIME condition. In a comparison
between A1+ and A1- genotypes, only A1+ subjects exhibited significant
activation, exclusively in the bilateral basal ganglia and right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. When dividing this contrast into sub and supra-second
duration intervals, A1+ subjects exhibited basal ganglia activation for both
ranges, but only right prefrontal activation for supra-second intervals. A1-
subjects did not exhibit any differences at either range. All contrasts were
masked by the TIME vs. COLOR regression contrast and are significant at
 p <0.001, uncorrected . Right
panels display mean parameter estimates (β values) for A1+ and A1- groups
in left caudate and SFG for sub and supra-second intervals, error bars indicate
standard error. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Differences in voxel-based morphometry associated with better relative
performance on the timing as compared to the color task. A single cluster in the
right cerebellum, centered on lobule Villa, exhibited a significant relationship
between gray matter (GM) volume and performance. Bottom panels indicate
significant correlations between normalized GM volume and behavioral difference
scores. GM values in this region were positively associated with better timing
performance at both duration ranges. Both correlations were also significant
with non-parametric Spearman correlations, suggesting that neither effect
crucially relied on outliers. Significant voxels are displayed at a height
threshold of  p <0.001, uncorrected, and a cluster
threshold of  p <0.05 FWE corrected. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brain regions differentially activated by individual subject performance. Task
accuracy effect represents the regression analysis on the TIME vs. COLOR
contrast with supra-second behavioral difference scores. Asterisks indicate
regions that did not survive cluster-wise correction (FWE
 p<0.05  in combination with a voxel-wise threshold at
 P<0.001 , uncorrected), either within or outside
regions of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Location 
 hemisphere 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 t-score 
 Volume 
 
 
 
 
 Task accuracy effect [TIME - COLOR] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 21 
 55 
 6 
 6.02 
 82 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 11) 
 R 
 28 
 41 
 −9 
 5.34 
 
 
 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus (BA 22)* 
 L 
 −52 
 −7 
 −6 
 4.99 
 12 
 
 
 Putamen 
 R 
 21 
 0 
 21 
 4.83 
 249 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 −14 
 0 
 6 
 4.81 
 
 
 
 Lateral Globus Pallidus 
 R 
 14 
 3 
 6 
 4.81 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 R 
 31 
 14 
 63 
 4.43 
 13 
 
 
 Parahippoca mpal Gyrus (BA 28)* 
 L 
 −28 
 −21 
 −3 
 4.2 
 10 
 
 
 Inferior Temporal Gyrus (BA 20)* 
 R 
 52 
 −31 
 −12 
 4.09 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Results of the genotype analysis on the main effect of TIME are shown for
combined, and individual sub- and supra-second interval conditions. Asterisks
indicate regions that did not survive cluster-wise correction (FWE
 p<0.05  in combination with a voxel-wise threshold at
 P<0.001 , uncorrected), either within or outside
regions of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Location 
 hemisphere 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 t-score 
 Volume 
 
 
 
 
 Main effect of TIME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A1+ vs A1- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 L 
 −14 
 −3 
 15 
 5.65 
 136 
 
 
 Putamen 
 R 
 21 
 3 
 18 
 5.62 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 −21 
 0 
 18 
 5.34 
 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 28 
 52 
 15 
 5.02 
 14 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 28 
 58 
 6 
 4.2 
 
 
 
 Parahippoca mpal Gyrus (BA 28)* 
 L 
 −24 
 −21 
 −6 
 4.99 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 sub-second A1+ vs A1- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 −21 
 0 
 21 
 5.75 
 47 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 L 
 −14 
 −3 
 15 
 5.1 
 
 
 
 Lentiform Nucleus Lateral Globus Pallidu 
 L 
 −14 
 −3 
 6 
 4.74 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 R 
 21 
 3 
 18 
 5.46 
 33 
 
 
 Thalamus Ventral Anterior Nucleus 
 R 
 17 
 −7 
 15 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 R 
 14 
 10 
 12 
 3.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 supra-second A1+ vs A1- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 R 
 10 
 0 
 9 
 5.92 
 179 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 L 
 −14 
 3 
 15 
 5.63 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 −7 
 −3 
 0 
 5.39 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 31 
 52 
 0 
 5.9 
 38 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 28 
 52 
 15 
 5.09 
 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus (BA 10) 
 R 
 21 
 58 
 12 
 4.21 
 
 
 
 Inferior Temporal Gyrus (BA 20)* 
 R 
 52 
 −31 
 −15 
 5.17 
 16 
 
 
 Sub-Gyral Hippocampus* 
 L 
 −31 
 −21 
 −6 
 4.79 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
