
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8218014 
 1577 
 Brain Cogn 
 Brain Cogn 
 
 Brain and cognition 
 
 0278-2626 
 1090-2147 
 
 
 24412087 
 4090287 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2013.12.004 
 NIHMS551951 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Social Anhedonia and Medial Prefrontal Response to Mutual Liking in Late Adolescents 
 
 
 
 
 Healey 
 Kati L. 
 
 
 
 
 Morgan 
 Judith 
 
 
 
 
 Musselman 
 Samuel C. 
 
 
 
 
 Olino 
 Thomas M. 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 Erika E. 
 
 * 
 
 University of Pittsburgh, Department of Psychology 
 
 
 * Corresponding author.  forbese@upmc.edu . Phone: 412-383-5438, 3811 O’Hara St., WPIC—Loeffler 319, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
 
 
 3 
 2 
 2014 
 
 
 10 
 1 
 2014 
 
 
 8 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 8 
 2015 
 
 89 
 39 
 50 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Anhedonia, a cardinal symptom of depression defined as difficulty experiencing pleasure, is also a possible endophenotype and prognostic factor for the development of depression. The onset of depression typically occurs during adolescence, a period in which social status and affiliation are especially salient. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), a region implicated in reward, self-relevant processing, and social cognition, exhibits altered function in adults with anhedonia, but its association with adolescent anhedonia has yet to be investigated. We examined neural response to social reward in 27 late adolescents, 18–21 years old, who varied in social anhedonia. Participants reported their social anhedonia, completed ratings of photos of unfamiliar peers, and underwent a functional magnetic resonance imaging task involving feedback about being liked. Adolescents with higher social anhedonia exhibited greater mPFC activation in response to mutual liking (i.e., being liked by someone they also liked) relative to received liking (i.e., being liked by someone whom they did not like). This association held after controlling for severity of current depressive symptoms, although depressive severity was also associated with greater mPFC response. Adolescents with higher levels of social anhedonia also had stronger positive connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and the mPFC during mutual versus received liking. These results, the first on the pathophysiology of adolescent anhedonia, support altered neural reward-circuit response to social reward in young people with social anhedonia. 
 
 
 Anhedonia 
 Reward 
 Social Cognition 
 Adolescence 
 Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 Depression 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Anhedonia, or difficulty experiencing pleasure in anticipation or response to rewarding stimuli, is a cardinal feature of depression. Across the lifespan, depression is a leading cause of disability and suffering ( World Health Organization, 2011 ). In addition to characterizing depression, anhedonia is associated with the onset, course, and outcome of the disease. Low levels of anhedonia in people with depression are protective, presaging better outcomes ( Joiner et al., 2002 ) and a lower chance of recurrence ( Kasch et al., 2002 ). The clinical relevance of anhedonia is particularly important in young people, as anhedonia predicts the onset of clinical-level depression in children and adolescents ( Pine et al., 1999 ;  Wilcox & Anthony, 2004 ) and resistance to standard depression treatment in adolescents ( McMakin et al., 2012 ). Despite anhedonia’s associations with the development of depression, a disorder that most commonly begins during adolescence ( Lewinsohn et al., 1994 ), relatively little work has been done to examine the neural correlates of anhedonia in adolescence. 
 Anhedonia is relevant to appetitive and consummatory aspects of reward function, which reflect the motivation to pursue rewarding experiences and the enjoyment of rewarding experiences once obtained, respectively. Frontostriatal circuits, including dopamine-targeted regions such as the ventral striatum (VS) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), play critical roles in reward function. Specifically, the striatum contributes to the motivation to approach rewarding stimuli and the enjoyment of those stimuli, and a subregion of the mPFC (i.e., Brodmann Areas 24, 32, and medial 10) contributes to the regulation of reward function, partly through its input to the striatum ( Haber & Knutson, 2010 ). Broadly, meta-analytic evidence indicates that depression involves low striatal response to monetary reward for youth and adults ( Zhang et al., 2013 ). More specifically,  Wacker et al. (2009)  found that self-reported anhedonia—but not other symptoms of depression—were associated with nucleus accumbens activation to reward receipt during a monetary incentive delay task. In that study, anhedonia was negatively correlated with self-reported positive affect, indicating that affective aspects of anhedonia are related to neural response to reward. 
 Consistent with anhedonia’s subjective, behavioral, and neural aspects, adolescents with depression experience lower subjective positive affect ( Lonigan et al., 2003 ;  Silk et al., 2011 ), express shorter-duration, lower-intensity positive affect ( Sheeber et al., 2009 ), and exhibit low striatal response to reward (see  Forbes & Dahl, 2012 ). Specific associations between anhedonia and neural response to reward have yet to be reported in adolescents, but the literature on clinical-developmental neuroscience suggest that adolescence is an important developmental period for investigating anhedonia. Reward-related behavior and affect change markedly during adolescence, with increased risky, reward-seeking activities (see  Somerville et al., 2010 ), more sensation-seeking ( Steinberg et al., 2008 ), and stronger experience of rewards ( Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Steinberg et al., 2008 ). Strikingly, these changes occur in tandem with apparent decreases in reward responding, including low levels of subjective positive affect (e.g.,  Larson et al., 2002 ), and increasing levels of depressive symptoms ( Sawyer et al., 2009 ). Developmental neuroimaging studies indicate that adolescents show altered response to reward in the striatum ( Bjork et al., 2004 ;  Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Forbes et al., 2010 ;  Galván et al., 2006 ) and mPFC ( Bjork et al., 2004 ;  Forbes et al., 2010 ). 
 Response in the mPFC may be particularly relevant to adolescent anhedonia. In addition to its role in reward processing as the destination of the mesocortical dopamine pathway, the mPFC is a key region in the brain’s default-mode network and is implicated in affect regulation and in processing social and self-relevant stimuli ( Amodio & Frith, 2006 ;  Denny et al., 2012 ). In responding to rewarding events, mPFC response could therefore indicate how relevant the reward is to one’s preferences and whether the reward enhances one’s status among others. Depression is associated with greater mPFC response to reward, which could reflect processes such as difficulty shifting out of a negative, self-focused pattern of thought or over-regulation of more basic, striatal response to reward ( Forbes & Dahl, 2012 ). Notably, anhedonia itself is associated with greater mPFC response to positive autobiographical memories but less mPFC response to negative stimuli ( Keedwell et al., 2005b ). This pattern is similar to that observed in adults with depression but the opposite of that exhibited by healthy adults ( Keedwell et al., 2005a ). This suggests that neural function underlying anhedonia, especially in the context of depression, is disrupted in response to what are generally highly valued, self-defining experiences. Furthermore, this disruption in the mPFC could reflect a pattern of responding to such typically pleasant, poignant stimuli as somehow aversive. 
 In addition to specific regional responding, anhedonia is postulated to involve altered connectivity between the mPFC and VS, such that the mPFC might serve to dampen VS responses to reward ( Forbes & Dahl, 2012 ). The disruption of functional connectivity between the mPFC and VS during response to monetary reward in adolescents with a history of depression ( Morgan et al., under review ) suggests that such functional connectivity—likely via altered input to the VS from the ventral tegmental area—could be a mechanism for the development of anhedonia. Neural response to reward and functional connectivity between regions in rewarding contexts answer different questions: the first, about response in specific regions in isolation, and the second, about coordination between regions during specific contexts. Both of these can address function in reward circuitry, but they provide different information. Given that previous conceptual models have postulated that both neural response and frontostriatal connectivity are disrupted in anhedonia and in those who develop depression, investigations with anhedonia in adolescents are crucial to critically test developmental hypotheses. 
 Although functional connectivity techniques such as psychophysiological interaction (PPI) have been traditionally used to examine how regions coordinate in response to task context, there is a burgeoning mental health literature in which investigations of brain circuitry in psychopathology include examining whether psychopathology is related to functional connectivity within the circuitry of interest. For example, studies of affective disorders have reported differences between subgroups of patients or between patients and healthy comparison participants in functional connectivity between the amygdala and orbitofrontal or prefrontal cortex during the processing of affective faces (e.g.,  Almeida et al., 2009 ;  Almeida et al., 2011 ;  Kong et al., 2013 ;  Versace et al., 2010 ;  Wang et al., 2012 ). Similarly, in schizophrenia, another disorder that includes the symptom of anhedonia, group differences in functional connectivity have been reported during experiences such as working memory and social processing (e.g.,  Eack et al., 2013 ;  Mukherjee et al., 2013 ;  Straube et al., 2013 ). Aside from categorical group differences, studies of mental health have also employed functional connectivity to examine function in neural circuitry that varies with a dimensional characteristic, such as neuroticism or symptom severity ( Cremers et al., 2010 ;  Davey et al., 2012 ;  Doucet et al., 2013 ;  Servaas et al., 2013 ;  Yue et al., 2013 ). Several studies have now used both approaches, describing functional connectivity as a correlate of both between-group differences and continuous, within-sample variability (e.g.,  Davey et al., 2012 ). Most relevant to our questions in the current study, a study of adults recently reported that trait anhedonia is associated with altered response  and  altered functional connectivity in contexts involving pleasant musical stimuli ( Keller et al., 2013 ). 
 Research with adolescents introduces important considerations. One is the definition of adolescence itself, which has been debated in the fields of psychology, anthropology, and pediatrics, among others. Adolescence is defined as the period between the end of puberty and the attainment of adult-level status and competence. Specifying an age range for this developmental period requires consideration of a variety of factors (e.g., psychological and biological processes), as well as consideration of the ongoing developmental tasks. For research purposes, it is particularly important to consider the ongoing developmental tasks that are relevant to a research question when defining an adolescent population. Given that the developmental tasks of adolescence are postulated to include impulse control, accurate assessment of risk vs. reward, and affect regulation during challenges ( Hazen et al., 2008 ) and that the neural circuitry underlying these cognitive and behavioral functions continues development throughout the teen years and into the 20s ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2006 ), we defined adolescence as occurring through the early 20s. That is, our deliberate focus on a population in which the processes of interest (i.e., function in reward circuitry, social processing) have not yet reached adult levels led us to consider this a study of  adolescent  development. Other approaches might classify participants over age 18 as adults based on legal or cultural changes in status at that age (e.g., attaining the right to vote or perform military service). It is also notable that many psychology studies conducted with undergraduate samples describe their participants as adults rather than late adolescents, and this practice has been identified as a key limitation for interpreting findings on constructs that involve self and social cognition ( Sears, 1987 ). Other terms have also been used for the late adolescent developmental period, such as “emerging adulthood” ( Conger & Little, 2010 ). Based upon our focus on neural reward circuitry and the emergence of a symptom relevant to several forms of psychopathology that have onset during the later stages of brain development, we studied a population from age 18–21 years, termed hereafter as  late adolescents . 
 In addition, investigating function in reward circuitry during adolescence requires sufficient context. First, reward circuitry is undergoing substantial development during adolescence ( Spear, 2000 ). The function of the striatum and mPFC in response to reward changes with puberty ( Forbes, 2009 ) and with adolescent development ( Bjork et al., 2004 ;  Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Galván et al., 2007 ). Thus, these brain regions are especially malleable and, consequently, potentially vulnerable to developing dysfunction during this period ( Davey et al., 2008 ). Second, the value and salience of social contexts increases as adolescents spend more time with peers, experience more intense emotions in peer contexts, and pursue newly valued abstract social rewards (e.g., initiating a romantic relationship;  Furman & Simon, 1999 ;  Larson et al., 1999 ;  Steinberg, 2008 ). Hence, a class of rewards that is perhaps most important to anhedonia, to the function of frontostriatal reward circuitry, and to adolescent development is social reward. In particular, adolescents’ reward circuitry and decision-making behavior are sensitive to peer context ( Albert et al., 2013 ;  Chein et al., 2011 ), and peer experiences are postulated to influence the development of reward circuitry ( Albert et al., 2013 ). Thus, peer social reward is likely to be salient during this developmental period. 
 The model presented by  Davey et al. (2008)  may be further elaborated to emphasize the role of being accepted by peers when peers’ opinions are highly valued, as opposed to being minimally valued or ambiguous. Accordingly,  Davey and colleagues (2010)  developed a social reward paradigm in which participants view images of unfamiliar peers and rate how much they thought they would like the peer. Participants are led to believe that their own images will also be evaluated by these unfamiliar peers. In a separate fMRI assessment session, participants receive feedback about whether these unfamiliar peers liked them (i.e., social reward) or whether unfamiliar peers were unable to provide ratings (i.e., ambiguous outcome). A key feature of this paradigm is the participants’ own ratings of the unfamiliar peers, which allows the neural response to both acceptance in general and to mutual acceptance to be investigated. Indeed,  Davey et al. (2010)  found that being liked activates primary reward regions, such as the nucleus accumbens and vmPFC, for 15- to 24-year-old adolescents and young adults. Furthermore, mutual acceptance, or being liked by highly regarded peers, activated the mPFC more strongly in that study than being liked by less-liked peers. Response to social reward could be particularly relevant to  social anhedonia , or difficulty experiencing pleasure from social contact ( Blanchard et al., 2000 ). Whereas previous studies have focused on anhedonia as broadly related to  hedonic capacity —a construct that can include physical, affective, and social components—the importance of social reward to adolescents and the disruption of social functioning in depression together point to the importance of understanding neural response to social reward in relation to social anhedonia. 
 Using an fMRI paradigm involving feedback about peer social acceptance—specifically, presenting whether unfamiliar peers the participant had rated for their likeability also rated the participant as likeable—we examined the association of social anhedonia with adolescents’ mPFC response and functional connectivity during social reward contexts. Specifically, we examined functional connectivity between the ventral striatum and the mPFC, two key regions in reward circuitry that are also relevant to processing social reward and likely to respond in tandem to social reward. We hypothesized that late adolescents’ social anhedonia would be associated with higher mPFC response during the social reward of mutual acceptance, as opposed to acceptance from peers whom participants liked less. In addition, to confirm that mutual liking—rather than all positive feedback—was particularly associated with altered mPFC response, we examined whether mPFC response to social reward in general was associated with social anhedonia. 
 
 
 2. Method 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Participants were 27 late adolescents, aged 18–21 ( M =20.4,  SD=.80 ; 51.9% female; 78% European American, 7% African American, 4% Asian and 11% other). An additional 7 participants took part in the study but were excluded from analyses (and, therefore, did not contribute data to the current paper) for the following reasons: not completing the questionnaires ( n =1), not completing the fMRI task ( n =5), or excessive movement during fMRI data acquisition ( n =1). These 7 participants had higher severity of both anhedonia and depression than the 27 participants in the final data set ( F  = 5.81,  p  = .02 and  F  = 5.65,  p  = .02, respectively). Sample characteristics and results described below all refer to the sample of 27 participants. 
 The sample was recruited in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area by flyers, online ads, and from a previous large, psychometric study of depression and temperament in young adults ( n  = 6) ( Olino et al., 2013 ). To obtain variability in anhedonia, recruitment materials targeted both healthy adolescents and adolescents with depression. Participants were allowed to have current Major Depressive Disorder ( n =9) and anxiety disorders other than Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)  n =2, Social Phobia  n =1). Participants were excluded if they met criteria for Bipolar Disorder or lifetime Substance Dependence because of those disorders’ association with altered reward function ( Koob & Le Moal, 2008 ;  Nusslock et al., 2012 ). Diagnoses were made by interview with the KSADS-PL ( Kaufman et al., 2000 ). All participants were free of lifetime psychotropic medications and free of illicit drugs on the day of the scan. Written informed consent was obtained after a complete description of the study and study procedures according to the guidelines of the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
 2.2 Measures 
 
 2.2.1 Anhedonia 
 Participants completed the Revised Chapman Social Anhedonia Scale (RSAS;  Eckblad et al., 1983 ), a widely used, 40-item true/false questionnaire that focuses on anhedonia experienced in social contexts (e.g., “having close friends is not as important as many people say”). We used the total score of the RSAS measure ( M =7.17,  SD =7.22, Range 0–26), for which internal consistency was high in this sample (α=.91). Anhedonia was sufficiently normally distributed, as indicated by its acceptable level of skewness (1.49,  SE =.45,  p >.001). 
 
 
 2.2.2 Depression 
 The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D;  Radloff, 1977 ) is a 20-item questionnaire that assesses depressive symptom severity, and contains 4 items related to anhedonia (e.g., “I felt I was just as good as other people”). We used the total score of the CES-D ( M =12.63 , SD =14.52, Range 0–45), for which internal consistency was high in this sample (α=.97). Depression severity was sufficiently normally distributed, as indicated by its acceptable level of skewness (.94,  SE =.45,  p >.001). 
 
 
 2.2.3 Social reward task 
 We adapted the likeability task developed by Davey and colleagues ( Davey et al., 2010 ). Participants were asked to rate photos of other late adolescents (40 photos; 50% female) based on how much they thought that they would like the people in the photos. They were told that they would, in turn, be rated by other participants. Approximately 3 weeks before the scan, participants had their photo taken and rated the photo stimuli. Ratings were made on a 1–9 scale, with 1 being “not at all” liked and 9 being “very much” liked. Photo stimuli were drawn from a database of face stimuli ( Martinez & Benavente, 1998 ;  http://www.ece.osu.edu/~aleix/ARdatabase.html ). As ratings of likeability may have been influenced by sexual attraction, participants were asked about their sexual orientation. One participant reported being “100% homosexual,” and the remaining participants reported being either “mostly heterosexual” or “100% heterosexual.” As a result, we did not include sexual identity in our analyses ( Corliss et al., 2009 ). 
 Ratings of the photo stimuli were classified into 3 sets of stimuli for each participant:  most-liked  stimuli (participant’s 8 highest-rated faces, 4 of each sex),  least-liked  stimuli (participant’s 8 lowest-rated faces, 4 of each sex), and  neutral  stimuli (16 faces per participant, based on rank order 7–14 of each sex). These classifications were used to create the stimulus sets for the 3 types of blocks in the task:  mutual liking  blocks contained favorable feedback from the 8 stimuli rated by the participant as most highly liked,  received liking  blocks contained favorable feedback from the 8 stimuli rated by the participant as least liked, and  ambiguous  blocks contained no feedback from the neutral stimuli. Stimuli ranked 5, 6, 15, and 16 for each sex (i.e., 8 total stimulus faces) were discarded to increase the differential value between mutual liking, received liking, and ambiguous stimuli. For both mutual and received-liking blocks, the participant was told that the individuals in the photos had selected the participant as a highly liked peer. As a comparison, the participant was told that individuals in the ambiguous block did not have a chance to rate them. We term this type of feedback  ambiguous  because participants could interpret the no-feedback information in several possible ways. 
 The fMRI portion of the task was administered in a block design. Stimuli for positive-feedback blocks were displayed on a green background, and stimuli for ambiguous blocks were displayed on a white background ( Fig 1 ). The task contained positive-feedback blocks and ambiguous-feedback blocks. Each of the 32 stimulus photographs included in the final fMRI paradigm (16 positive-feedback faces [8 high-rated and 8 low-rated] and 16 ambiguous-feedback faces) were presented 3 times over 8 blocks. Each block consisted of 12 stimuli for a total of 84s, for a total task time of 12 minutes and 8 seconds. Of the 8 blocks, 2 were primarily mutual liking, 2 were primarily received liking, and 4 were primarily ambiguous feedback. Each block also contained 2 stimuli of the other type (e.g., an ambiguous block contained 2 positive-feedback faces). A proportion (16.67%) of non-block-category stimuli was included within each block in order to reduce the predictability and habituation that can accompany the repeated viewing of stimuli from a single stimulus category within a block. Each stimulus photograph was presented for 3s, with a jittered inter-trial fixation screen between stimuli (1, 3, 5, or 7 s). The inter-block interval (IBI) was 8 seconds. The instructions for each block were presented with either a green (positive feedback) or white (ambiguous feedback) background to signal the block type. 
 During the scan, the participants were instructed to pay attention to the faces in the photos and try to remember who liked them and who had not rated them. Participants were instructed to press any button when they saw a face, to confirm that they were awake and attending to the task. After the scan, participants completed ratings in which they recalled how good they felt when they saw each of the stimulus photos; the order of stimuli shown (faces from ambiguous blocks vs. faces from positive-feedback blocks) was counterbalanced across participants. At the end of the scan session, participants were debriefed on the deception in the task and informed that their photo had not been rated by others. 
 
 
 
 2.3 fMRI acquisition and preprocessing 
 Each participant was scanned using a Siemens 3T Trio scanner. BOLD functional images were acquired with a gradient echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence and covered 39 axial slices, 3.1 mm thick, beginning at the cerebral vertex and encompassing the entire cerebrum and the majority of the cerebellum (TR/TE=2000/25ms, FOV=20cm, matrix=64×64, flip angle=90°). All scanning parameters were selected to optimize the quality of the BOLD signal while maintaining a sufficient number of slices to acquire whole-brain data. Before the collection of fMRI data for each participant, we acquired a reference EPI scan that we visually inspected for artifacts (e.g., ghosting) and for good signal across the entire volume of acquisition. The fMRI data from all included participants were cleared of such problems. 
 Preprocessing and image analysis were completed using SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). For every scan, images for each participant were segmented and then realigned to correct for head motion. Data sets were then selected for quality based on our standard small-motion correction (<3mm). Realigned images were spatially normalized into standard stereotactic space (Montreal Neurological Institute template) using a 12-parameter affine model. Normalized images were smoothed with a 6mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian filter. Voxel-wise signal intensities were ratio normalized to the whole-brain global mean. Voxels were resampled during preprocessing to be 2mm 3 . 
 
 
 2.4 Data Analytic Strategy 
 We conducted two sets of analyses: one testing mPFC response to social reward and the other testing functional connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and the mPFC. The first set of analyses addressed whether mPFC response to reward varied with anhedonia. The second set of analyses addressed whether anhedonia was associated with the coordination of two important regions in reward circuitry during the processing of social reward. For both sets of analyses, we used widely applied, conventional strategies as implemented through SPM8: general linear models for mPFC response, and psychophysiologic interaction for functional connectivity. 
 In preparation for both sets of analyses, for each participant and scan, first-level predetermined condition effects (i.e., main effects of task) at each voxel were calculated using a  t -statistic, producing a statistical image for the 2 contrasts of interest: (a)  mutual liking  >  received liking  and (b)  all positive feedback  (i.e., mutual liking + received liking) >  ambiguous feedback . We were primarily interested in neural response to mutual liking > received liking, as this contrast reflects being reciprocally liked by an unfamiliar peer vs. being liked by an unfamiliar peer whom you had not rated as highly likeable. This contrast is proposed to capture both receiving social reward and weighing one’s own preferences in social stimuli. We included the  all positive feedback > ambiguous feedback  contrast to examine whether social anhedonia was also associated with disrupted response to social reward in general, regardless of the participant’s own preferences. 
 
 2.4.1 Analyses of mPFC Response to social reward 
 To test the association of social anhedonia with mPFC response to social reward, preprocessed data sets were analyzed using second-level random effect models that account for both scan-to-scan and participant-to-participant variability to determine task-specific regional responses. Individual contrast images were then included in the group-level (i.e., second-level) mPFC region of interest (ROI) analysis to test our hypotheses. The ROI was constructed using the WFU PickAtlas Tool (v2.4) and defined as a 25 mm-radius sphere including medial Brodmann Area (BA) 10 and BA32, which are part of the anterior rostral mPFC region implicated in social cognition and self-systems ( Forbes et al., 2010 ;  Forbes et al., 2012 ). Regression analyses were used to test associations between task-related mPFC reactivity and social anhedonia using the RSAS total score as a regressor in SPM. We also conducted exploratory, whole-brain analyses for these same models to confirm that the mPFC was one of the main regions engaged. To test whether social anhedonia was related to mPFC response on its own or because of its relation to depression, we then conducted regression analyses with RSAS but included CES-D score as a covariate to adjust for the influence of depressive severity. 
 
 
 2.4.2. Functional connectivity analyses 
 To test whether mPFC response detected in our first set of analyses might reflect the disruption of coordination of reward-circuit regions in relation to social anhedonia, we then conducted functional connectivity analysis. We conducted a single, fairly popular type of functional connectivity analysis: task-based PPI. The purpose of PPI analyses was to examine task-specific changes in the association between mPFC and ventral striatum connectivity in relation to level of social anhedonia. Functional connectivity allows the testing of functional interaction of separate regions within neural circuitry ( Friston, 1994 ,  2011 ;  O’Reilly et al., 2012 ). In the case of PPI, this functional interaction is related to a specific context (see  O’Reilly et al., 2012  for an excellent tutorial on PPI). In PPI, a region is selected as a seed – in the current study, the bilateral nucleus accumbens – and the strength of its association to other regions is examined during a psychological context – in the current study, the receipt of mutual vs. received liking. Specifically, the time course of the seed region’s response to the contrast of interest is modeled, entered into a GLM regression, and then used to create an interaction term between task-related time course and seed-region time course. This interaction is then used to identify voxels whose activity is associated with the task-seed interaction. Because of our focus on the potential role of the mPFC in social reward and anhedonia, we masked our PPI analyses using the same mPFC ROI described above. 
 Since we were interested not only in whether mPFC and VS had associated responses to social reward but whether this association was related to individual differences in social anhedonia, we conducted second-level regression analyses with social anhedonia score predicting PPI. We masked these results for mPFC response and also conducted exploratory whole-brain analyses to confirm that mPFC was among the areas whose functional connectivity with VS varied with level of social anhedonia. This approach has now been used in many studies to investigate whether psychopathology is related to functional coordination among regions in affective circuitry (e.g.,  Keller et al., 2013 ). In fact, given that neural response and PPI-based functional connectivity address different research questions—that is, task responding in specific brain regions vs. functional coordination between regions during a task context – it is now often the case that studies include both techniques in a single paper (e.g.,  Eack et al., 2013 ). 
 PPI analyses included 26 participants because one participant was removed from analyses due to incorrect file format. Given our hypotheses, the bilateral nucleus accumbens was selected as our seed region of interest and we evaluated correlations of activation between the nucleus accumbens and the mPFC. We examined whether social anhedonia was associated with fronto-striatal connectivity by regressing PPI on social anhedonia. We also conducted exploratory whole-brain analyses for our PPI hypothesis tests, to confirm that the mPFC was one of the main regions interacting with the accumbens during social reward. 
 For analyses testing our hypotheses, simulations in the AlphaSim program in AFNI were used to estimate the minimum number of contiguous voxels in each cluster required to avoid Type I error (corrected cluster level threshold of  p <.05) for the ROI masks. These simulations resulted in the following minimum extent for significant clusters: 136 voxels for mPFC and 580 voxels for whole-brain findings. 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavior 
 As in previous studies using this task, female faces were rated higher than male faces ( t =3.01, df=2, 25,  p< 0.01). Reaction times did not differ significantly between male and female faces. There was no correlation between post-scan ratings and mean reaction time for all stimuli ( r =−.02,  p=.92 ). Participant sex was unrelated to reaction time ( F =0.02,  p =.91), stimulus ratings ( F =.737,  p =.34 ) , and post-scan ratings ( F =2.60,  p =.12). There was no significant difference between participants’ post-scan ratings of their response to positive-feedback and ambiguous-feedback stimuli. Age was associated with higher RSAS ( r =.45,  p <.02) and CES-D scores ( r =.52,  p <.01). Sex was unrelated to RSAS ( F =1.56,  p =0.22) or CES-D scores ( F =0.20,  p =0.51). 
 
 
 3.2 Neural response 
 
 3.2.1 Effects of task 
 Analyses with a within-sample  t -test indicated that, as expected, participants exhibited mPFC response to mutual liking > received liking. ROI analysis yielded 2 clusters (dorsal anterior cingulate, 132 voxels, [peak voxel (Talairach): −14, 35, 31],  t =2.47,  p <.05; pregenual anterior cingulate; 60 voxels, [−14, 40, 20],  t =2.35,  p <.05), both of which also emerged in whole-brain analyses for the effects of this contrast ( Table 1 ). Whole-brain analyses for mutual liking > received liking also yielded response in several other mPFC clusters, as well as in reward processing regions such as the caudate, social processing areas such as the precuneus, and affective regions such as the insula. As expected, participants also exhibited mPFC response to all positive > ambiguous feedback. ROI analyses yielded 4 clusters (perigenual anterior cingulate, 206 voxels, [−8,41,10],  t =2.72,  p corrected <.05; rostral mPFC/dorsal mPFC/perigenual anterior cingulate, 161 voxels, [6,52,15],  t =2.37,  p corrected <.05). Whole brain analyses for all positive > ambiguous feedback also yielded response in several mPFC clusters, as well as in social/self-processing regions (e.g., temporoparietal junction, precuneus, posterior cingulate), reward regions (e.g., caudate, putamen, globus pallidus), and affective regions (e.g., insula, ventrolateral PFC). As participants varied in anhedonia and depressive symptoms, however, these findings do not represent the typical adolescent response to this task and thus are not suitable as a mask for hypothesis tests (see  Davey et al., 2010 , for a thorough exploration of the effects of this task in a healthy sample). 
 
 
 3.2.2 Social anhedonia and neural response to social reward 
 Higher social anhedonia was associated with heightened response to mutual liking > received liking in a large cluster in the mPFC (4826 voxels, [1,44,41],  t =4.01,  p corrected <.05;  Fig. 2 ). This cluster included the following subregions of mPFC, as described by Etkin et al. (2011): dorsal mPFC, pregenual anterior cingulate, and rostral mPFC. 
 Whole-brain analyses yielded a large cluster with a peak in the mPFC (see  Table 2  for all whole-brain results), confirming that the mPFC was one of the key brain regions associated with social anhedonia. Whole-brain analyses also indicated that the striatum (ventral and dorsal), precuneus, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and insula were among the other regions whose response to mutual liking was associated with level of social anhedonia (see  Table 2  for all whole-brain results for hypothesis tests). Social anhedonia was unrelated to mPFC response to all positive > ambiguous feedback. 
 
 
 3.2.3 Specificity of association between social anhedonia and neural response to social reward 
 To examine whether the association between social anhedonia and response in reward-circuit regions is evident after adjusting for depression, we re-computed regressions of brain function on social anhedonia, including CES-D score as a covariate. The association of social anhedonia remained in two somewhat smaller clusters of activation in the mPFC (peak in BA8, 814 voxels, [15,36,42],  t =3.29,  p corrected <.05; peak in BA9, 908 voxels, [6,46,18],  t =2.97,  p corrected <.05) in response to mutual liking > received liking. These clusters included the following regions: dorsal mPFC, pregenual anterior cingulate, and anterodorsal anterior cingulate. 
 
 
 3.2.4 Depression and neural response to social reward 
 Higher depression severity was associated with heightened response to mutual liking > received liking in a very large cluster centered in dorsal mPFC (peak in BA9, 2971 voxels, [14,1,44],  t =3.36,  p corrected <.05). This cluster included the following subregions: dorsal mPFC and anterodorsal anterior cingulate. Whole-brain analyses confirmed the association of the mPFC with depression, and they also indicated that function in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and precuneus was greater in late adolescents with higher depressive symptoms ( Table 2 ). Depression was unrelated to mPFC response to all positive > ambiguous feedback. 
 
 
 3.2.5 Social anhedonia and frontostriatal connectivity 
 Higher social anhedonia was associated with greater positive connectivity between the bilateral nucleus accumbens and the mPFC (peak in BA9, 1110 voxels, [−12,41,33],  t =3.44,  p corrected <.05; peak in BA32, 292 voxels, [−12,29,36],  t =3.26,  p corrected <.05) in response to mutual liking > received liking. This large cluster contained the following subregions: dorsal mPFC, pregenual anterior cingulate, rostral mPFC, and anterodorsal anterior cingulate. Whole brain analyses confirmed that the mPFC was a primary region whose function varied positively with that of the nucleus accumbens in late adolescents with higher social anhedonia. The large cluster containing the mPFC in our whole-brain findings also included the VS, orbitofrontal cortex, temporoparietal junction, and insula ( Table 1 ). 
 
 
 3.2.6 Specificity of association between social anhedonia and frontostriatal connectivity 
 As with analyses to examine neural response above, we examined the contribution of social anhedonia over and above that of depression severity by re-computing regressions of frontostriatal connectivity on social anhedonia, including CES-D score as a covariate and masking with the results of the original regression. The association of social anhedonia with greater positive connectivity between the bilateral nucleus accumbens and the mPFC remained (peak in BA9, 656 voxels, [6,54,32],  t =3.90,  p corrected <.05;  Figure 3 ) in response to mutual liking > received liking. This large cluster was located in the dorsal subregion of the mPFC. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 In a sample of late adolescents with varying levels of anhedonia, we found that neural response and frontostriatal connectivity to social reward were related to anhedonia and depression. Specifically, late adolescents with higher levels of social anhedonia and depression showed greater mPFC response and stronger positive connectivity between the mPFC and the nucleus accumbens to receiving positive peer social feedback. Notably, anhedonia and depression were associated with altered reward-circuit function to feedback about  mutual liking , in which late adolescents learned that peers whom they liked also liked them. The mPFC response to social reward was specific to anhedonia, as it remained even when depressive symptoms were covaried. Thus, anhedonia itself, above the effects of depression, was associated with disrupted neural responding to peer social feedback. These findings are among the first to focus on the neural substrates of adolescent anhedonia and to investigate social anhedonia in relation to social reward. 
 Interestingly, depression and social anhedonia were only associated with neural response to  mutual liking  relative to received (non-mutual) liking, not simply to all positive peer social feedback. Both mutual liking relative to received liking and positive feedback relative to ambiguous feedback elicited response in mPFC and other reward- and social-processing regions in this sample, but only the former was related to social anhedonia. Late adolescents higher in social anhedonia did not respond differently to positive feedback in general, but they showed greater mPFC response and greater positive functional connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and mPFC in response to mutual compared to received feedback about being liked. Because fMRI analyses rely on difference scores (i.e., contrasts of conditions), this pattern could reflect greater mPFC response (or VS-mPFC functional connectivity) to mutual liking, less mPFC response to received liking, or both. Given the putative functions of dorsal mPFC, these results could reflect altered social processing involving judgments of others ( Denny et al., 2012 ) or over-regulation of response to mutual liking ( Ochsner et al., 2012 ;  Phillips et al., 2008 ). Our results for functional connectivity indicate that the mPFC might engage more intensely when the VS responds in pleasant social contexts, potentially dampening the VS response and resulting in a positive correlation of function between these two regions during mutual liking. Alternatively, the mPFC could be signaling to elicit greater or more sustained response from the VS, which is not responding with typical magnitude or duration. Results for dorsal mPFC response could also indicate that late adolescents with anhedonia might respond to mutual liking as if it were aversive or, alternatively, to received liking as if it were less salient. The former possibility is consistent with previous findings on greater mPFC response to pleasant self-relevant stimuli in people with depression or anhedonia, which is the opposite pattern found in healthy adults, who exhibit greater mPFC response to unpleasant stimuli ( Keedwell et al., 2005a ,  2005b ). 
 Given the location of our findings in the mPFC in relation to meta-analytic findings about self-relevant judgments ( Denny et al., 2012 ), our results suggest that late adolescents with higher levels of anhedonia could possibly experience mutual liking as reflecting negatively on their identity or self, or, alternatively, could experience received liking as less meaningful for their identity or self. These late adolescents might thus be less motivated by mutual liking or less sensitive to its value. A possible cognitive consequence for such a response in reward circuitry could be that late adolescents with anhedonia second-guess or discount their own preferences. Then, instead of being more drawn to people they like, they could defer to others’ preferences, potentially allowing others to make decisions about social behavior for them. Thus, they might have weaker social preferences or might be less guided by their social preferences, so that they may not distinguish between liking and not liking others. Another possibility is that late adolescents with high levels of anhedonia respond to mutual liking with a kind of dread, in which they expect the other person to end up disliking or rejecting them, thereby dealing a blow to their identity and social status. These speculative interpretations are based upon the putative functions of the mPFC and the content of our task condition, and it will be compelling for future studies to examine the nuances of anhedonia’s influence on late adolescents’ social experience and behavior. 
 The pattern of greater mPFC response we found could be related specifically to social anhedonia or to the context of social reward. Notably,  Wacker et al. (2009) , despite hypothesizing that mPFC function would be related to anhedonia, did not find such an association in adults. That study used a monetary reward fMRI task, however, and defined anhedonia more generally. The recent study by  Keller et al. (2013)  reported findings in a set of affect-related regions that did not include mPFC, but they employed musical stimuli and focused on psychiatrically healthy adults. However, as with that study, we also found that anhedonia was associated with altered functional connectivity of VS and other reward-related regions. In the current study, although we focused specifically on the mPFC, we also found that VS response—occurring as part of two large clusters, one of which also contained the mPFC and OFC, and one of which also contained dorsal striatum and thalamus—was related to higher social anhedonia. The positive correlation between response in this large cluster and social anhedonia could reflect the role of reward-circuit regions in processing both rewarding and potentially aversive stimuli. Whole-brain results also indicated that late adolescents’ social anhedonia was associated with greater response or greater functional connectivity with the nucleus accumbens in regions implicated in social processing (i.e., the precuneus and temporoparietal junction;  Mar, 2011 ;  Van Overwalle et al., 2009 ), affective processing (i.e., insula, orbitofrontal cortex;  Phan et al., 2002 ;  Phillips et al., 2008 ), and effortful affect regulation (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex;  Phillips et al., 2008 ). In addition, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and precuneus exhibited greater response in those with higher depression. Together, these findings support the role of the mPFC and suggest that other regions in reward and affective circuitry also contribute to social anhedonia. 
 Similar to our results with social anhedonia, we found that depression severity was related to greater mPFC response to mutual liking relative to received liking. This is consistent with our previous findings on the association between adolescent depression and neural response to monetary reward ( Forbes et al., 2009 ;  Morgan et al., 2013 ), as well as with some other researchers’ findings on mPFC function in adult anhedonia and depression ( Keedwell et al., 2005a ,  2005b ;  Knutson et al., 2008 ). However, unlike other previous findings in adolescent depression ( Forbes et al., 2009 ;  Forbes et al., 2006 ), our whole-brain findings did not indicate that depressive severity was related to response in the VS. One possibility related to our choice of fMRI task is that the mPFC is especially sensitive to social rewards, and depression particularly disrupts responding to a social reward in that region rather than in the VS. Also, unlike a previous study using this social reward task with late adolescents ( Davey et al., 2011 ), we did not find that depression was related to amygdala response to social reward. That study took a group-differences approach, however, comparing a group of clinically depressed young people with a group of healthy young people. In addition, that study used an event-related version of the social reward task. 
 Our study is the first to examine reward-circuit response to social reward in relation to adolescent anhedonia. In contrast, most extant findings on reward in adolescents with depression or at risk for depression have used monetary or other non-social classes of reward (e.g.,  Forbes et al., 2009 ;  Gotlib et al., 2010 ;  McCabe et al., 2012 ;  Monk et al., 2008 ;  Olino et al., 2011 ). Despite the importance of the social context to adolescent depression and to adolescents’ reward processing (e.g.,  Chein et al., 2011 ), the study of social reward and its association with affective disorders has been minimal in adolescent research. In addition, much of the research on personally relevant stimuli has focused on social loss or exclusion rather than social reward. Social stimuli are especially salient if they are self-relevant, and previous studies either have used stimuli such as images, videos, or audio clips of loved ones (e.g.,  Hooley et al., 2005 ;  Leibenluft et al., 2004 ;  Whittle et al., 2012 ) or have employed paradigms that mimic situations participants encounter in the real world (e.g., playing a computer game with peers, as in  Eisenberger et al., 2003 ). Thus, it is valuable to note that our mPFC results echo findings for adolescents’ response to social evaluation paradigms, such as those reported with the social-exclusion cyberball task ( Bolling et al., 2011 ) and with a simulated chat room task ( Silk et al., 2012 ). It is not surprising that mPFC function is sensitive to social reward in various forms, such as being liked, being included, and being selected for interaction. 
 Furthermore, this is the first study to link late adolescents’ social anhedonia to functional connectivity in reward circuitry, with greater coordination between the nucleus accumbens and mPFC during the experience of mutual relative to received liking. Thus, it appears that the mPFC is not simply responding differently to social reward but is also coordinating its response more closely with the nucleus accumbens in those with higher levels of social anhedonia. Admittedly, the application of functional connectivity to answer questions about whether the coordination among regions in affective or social circuitry varies with psychopathology is a somewhat new approach. Nonetheless, this approach is also becoming widely applied in clinical neuroscience (e.g.,  Almeida et al., 2009 ;  Davey et al., 2012 ;  Mukherjee et al., 2013 ). The current findings thus build on an important emerging literature in the neural bases of affective and schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. 
 In terms of adolescent brain development, our findings indicate that low subjective response to social reward is associated with disrupted function in reward circuitry. This association might be especially pronounced during late adolescence, given the dramatic changes in social context, the pursuit of high-intensity rewarding experiences, and the enhanced intensity of social goals during this developmental period ( Davey et al., 2008 ). In addition, disrupted function in reward-relevant regions or in frontostriatal connectivity could be particularly evident in response to acceptance from peers, rather than to feedback involving people of other ages. One question we are now investigating is whether personally relevant peer social reward—for example, video stimuli of a close friend displaying positive affect during a conversation with the adolescent in the scanner—is particularly evocative of differences in neural circuitry that are linked to reward-related problems. 
 Clinically, the implications of our findings are that disrupted function of neural reward circuitry could play a role in the development of depression. Anhedonia is a strong prognostic factor for the onset and clinical course of depression in adolescents ( McMakin et al. 2012 ;  Pine et al., 1999 ;  Spijker et al., 2001 ;  Wilcox & Anthony, 2004 ) and its association with depression could be mediated by neural response to reward. Social anhedonia, which was the focus of the current study, might be addressed by preventive interventions that target adolescents who experience that symptom. In adolescents who are experiencing high levels of anhedonia in the context of depression, encouraging the pursuit and experience of social rewards in treatments such as behavioral activation therapy ( Dimidjian et al., 2011 ) or savoring ( McMakin et al., 2011 ) could be fruitful. Given that late adolescents with high social anhedonia were less responsive to mutual liking in the current study, adolescents with depression might be taught to be aware of or enhance their own responses to others. For example, mindfulness exercises could strengthen their experience of their social preferences and possibly facilitate a more intense response to feedback from people who are important to them. 
 While the present study represents an important step forward, it has limitations worth noting, including its relatively small sample, cross-sectional design, and focus on late adolescents. To fully address the range of variability in a continuous characteristic such as anhedonia, it will be valuable for future studies to include larger samples. We acknowledge that our data might reflect a restricted range of anhedonia severity, as the participants who could not be included in fMRI analyses tended to have higher severity of anhedonia than those who were included. Thus, it will be important to include broad range of anhedonia in future studies. If anything, this difference might have led to Type II error, as restricted range attenuates statistical power to detect associations. In addition, our strict adjustment for multiple comparisons resulted in very large clusters of BOLD response that encompassed many regions, a challenge that commonly occurs when using extent-based thresholds. This approach can also increase the risk of Type II error, since it can limit the ability to detect response in small regions. As a result of our cross-sectional design, we are unable to address anhedonia as a precursor to depression or the role of neural reward circuitry in the development of depression in late adolescents who are high in anhedonia. We describe our participants as  late adolescents , which is consistent with evidence of continued development in reward- and affect-related neural circuitry into the early 20s ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2006 ). We chose this developmental focus because of the importance of social reward and the ability to pursue that reward more freely during this period. While people in this developmental period may be assuming some adult-like status and roles in their lives, leading some researchers to describe this period as  emerging adulthood  (e.g.,  Conger & Little, 2010 ), they are likely to have quite a bit in common with younger adolescents in terms of their reward-related behavior and anhedonia. In addition, because our participants are past the typical age of onset of depression ( Kessler et al., 2001 ;  Lewinsohn et al., 1994 ), and many have already developed depression, our focus on neural response to reward in this age group could capture some effects of depression. 
 It is critical to examine the role of anhedonia across the range of development, and thus the inclusion of children, younger adolescents, and adults in future studies will be valuable for addressing potential developmental influence in the association between anhedonia and neural response to social reward. In addition, we focused on social reward and social anhedonia, which is only one type of anhedonia. It will be important to investigate other types of anhedonia in relation to neural response to various classes of reward stimuli. Furthermore, the instrument we used, the RSAS, assesses trait-like rather than state-like anhedonia, and it will be worthwhile for future work to consider episode-relevant anhedonia as a symptom. Finally, the examination of other types of psychopathology (e.g., substance use, psychosis, eating disorders) in future studies will also allow the examination of the role of anhedonia across other types of reward-related behaviors. 
 
 
 5. Conclusion 
 The current study is the first to focus on the neural correlates of adolescent anhedonia. This characteristic, which is a cardinal symptom in depression, a prognostic factor for the development of depression, and a potential endophenotype of depression, is an important dimension of psychopathology that reflects alterations in positive valence systems. In addition, this study is one of few to examine neural response to social reward, a class of reward that is especially salient to adolescents and may have meaning for the development of depression ( Forbes, 2009 ). Our findings of high responding in neural regions implicated in the regulation of reward responding, in combination with our finding of heightened positive connectivity between the VS and mPFC, provide preliminary evidence on the pathophysiology of adolescent anhedonia. These findings could thus contribute to our understanding of the role of anhedonia in the developmental psychopathology of reward-related problems. 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2013 
 The teenage brain: Peer influences on adolescent decision making 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 22 
 2 
 114 
 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Almeida 
 JR 
 
 
 Kronhaus 
 DM 
 
 
 Sibille 
 EL 
 
 
 Langenecker 
 SA 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Labarbara 
 EJ 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Abnormal left-sided orbitomedial prefrontal cortical-amygdala connectivity during happy and fear face processing: a potential neural mechanism of female MDD 
 Front Psychiatry 
 2 
 69 
 22163223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Almeida 
 JR 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Hassel 
 S 
 
 
 Quevedo 
 K 
 
 
 Kupfer 
 DJ 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Abnormal amygdala-prefrontal effective connectivity to happy faces differentiates bipolar from major depression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 66 
 5 
 451 
 459 
 19450794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amodio 
 DM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2006 
 Meeting of minds: The medial frontal cortex and social cognition 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 7 
 4 
 268 
 277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 GW 
 
 
 Caggiano 
 DM 
 
 
 Bennett 
 SM 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 2004 
 Incentive-elicited brain activation in adolescents: Similarities and differences from young adults 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 8 
 1793 
 1802 
 14985419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blanchard 
 JJ 
 
 
 Gangestad 
 SW 
 
 
 Brown 
 SA 
 
 
 Horan 
 WP 
 
 
 2000 
 Hedonic capacity and schizotypy revisited: a taxometric analysis of social anhedonia 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 109 
 1 
 87 
 95 
 10740939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolling 
 DZ 
 
 
 Pitskel 
 NB 
 
 
 Deen 
 B 
 
 
 Crowley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Mayes 
 LC 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2011 
 Development of neural systems for processing social exclusion from childhood to adolescence 
 Developmental Science 
 14 
 6 
 1431 
 1444 
 22010901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 L 
 
 
 Uckert 
 K 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2011 
 Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the brain’s reward circuitry 
 Developmental Science 
 14 
 2 
 F1 
 10 
 21499511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conger 
 KJ 
 
 
 Little 
 WM 
 
 
 2010 
 Sibling Relationships during the transition to adulthood 
 Child Development Perspectives 
 4 
 2 
 87 
 94 
 20700389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corliss 
 HL 
 
 
 Austin 
 SB 
 
 
 Roberts 
 AL 
 
 
 Molnar 
 BE 
 
 
 2009 
 Sexual risk in “mostly heterosexual” young women: influence of social support and caregiver mental health 
 Journal of Women’s Health 
 18 
 12 
 2005 
 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cremers 
 HR 
 
 
 Demenescu 
 LR 
 
 
 Aleman 
 A 
 
 
 Renken 
 R 
 
 
 van Tol 
 MJ 
 
 
 van der Wee 
 NJ 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Neuroticism modulates amygdala-prefrontal connectivity in response to negative emotional facial expressions 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 1 
 963 
 970 
 19683585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davey 
 CG 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Dwyer 
 DB 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Being liked activates primary reward and midline self-related brain regions 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 31 
 4 
 660 
 668 
 19823984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davey 
 CG 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Increased amygdala response to positive social feedback in young people with major depressive disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 69 
 8 
 734 
 741 
 21257158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davey 
 CG 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Yucel 
 M 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 2012 
 Regionally specific alterations in functional connectivity of the anterior cingulate cortex in major depressive disorder 
 Psychological Medicine 
 42 
 10 
 2071 
 2081 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davey 
 CG 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 2008 
 The emergence of depression in adolescence: development of the prefrontal cortex and the representation of reward 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 
 32 
 1 
 1 
 19 
 17570526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Denny 
 BT 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2012 
 A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of self- and other judgements reveals a spatial gradient for mentalizing in medial prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 24 
 8 
 1742 
 52 
 22452556 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dimidjian 
 S 
 
 
 Barrera 
 M 
 Jr 
 
 
 Martell 
 C 
 
 
 Muñoz 
 RF 
 
 
 Lewinsohn 
 PM 
 
 
 2011 
 The origins and current status of behavioral activation treatments for depression 
 Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 
 7 
 1 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doucet 
 GE 
 
 
 Skidmore 
 C 
 
 
 Sharan 
 AD 
 
 
 Sperling 
 MR 
 
 
 Tracy 
 JI 
 
 
 2013 
 Functional connectivity abnormalities vary by amygdala subdivision and are associated with psychiatric symptoms in unilateral temporal epilepsy 
 Brain and Cognition 
 83 
 2 
 171 
 182 
 24036129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eack 
 SM 
 
 
 Wojtalik 
 JA 
 
 
 Newhill 
 CE 
 
 
 Keshavan 
 MS 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 2013 
 Prefrontal cortical dysfunction during visual perspective-taking in schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckblad 
 ML 
 
 
 Chapman 
 LJ 
 
 
 Chapman 
 JP 
 
 
 Mishlove 
 M 
 
 
 1983 
 The revised social anhedonia scales 
 Unpublished test 
 copies available from 
 T.R. Kwapil, Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina 
 Greensboro, P.O. Box 26170, Greensboro, NC, 27402–6170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Liebermen 
 MD 
 
 
 Williams 
 KD 
 
 
 2003 
 Does rejection hurt? Am fMRI study of social exclusion 
 Science 
 302 
 290 
 292 
 14551436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Jazbec 
 S 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Amygdala and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and omission of gains in adults and adolescents 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 4 
 1279 
 1291 
 15850746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 2009 
 Where’s the fun in that? Broadening the focus on reward function in depression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 66 
 3 
 199 
 200 
 19577042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 2012 
 Research Review: Altered reward function in adolescent depression: what, when and how? 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 53 
 1 
 3 
 15 
 22117893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 May 
 JC 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Reward-related decision-making in pediatric major depressive disorder: an fMRI study 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 47 
 10 
 1031 
 1040 
 17073982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Moyles 
 DL 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Healthy adolescents’ neural response to reward: associations with puberty, positive affect, and depressive symptoms 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 49 
 2 
 162 
 172 
 e161 
 165 
 20215938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Stepp 
 SD 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Whalen 
 D 
 
 
 Axelson 
 DA 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Real-world affect and social context as predictors of treatment response in child and adolescent depression and anxiety: an ecological momentary assessment study 
 Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 
 22 
 1 
 37 
 47 
 22339611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1994 
 Functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging: A synthesis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2 
 56 
 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Functional and effective connectivity: A review 
 Brain Connectivity 
 1 
 1 
 13 
 36 
 22432952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Furman 
 W 
 
 
 Simon 
 VA 
 
 
 
 
 Furman 
 W 
 
 
 Brown 
 BB 
 
 
 Feiring 
 C 
 
 
 1999 
 Cognitive representations of adolescent romantic relationships 
 The Development of Romantic Relationships in Adolescence 
 75 
 98 
 Cambridge, UK 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galván 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Parra 
 CE 
 
 
 Penn 
 J 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Earlier development of the accumbens relative to orbitofrontal cortex might underlie risk-taking behavior in adolescents 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 25 
 6885 
 6892 
 16793895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galván 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Risk-taking and the adolescent brain: who is at risk? 
 Developmental Science 
 10 
 2 
 F8 
 F14 
 17286837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 JP 
 
 
 Cooney 
 RE 
 
 
 Singh 
 MK 
 
 
 Henry 
 ML 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural processing of reward and loss in girls at risk for major depression 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 67 
 4 
 380 
 387 
 20368513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 2010 
 The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 35 
 1 
 4 
 26 
 19812543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hazen 
 E 
 
 
 Schlozman 
 S 
 
 
 Beresin 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Adolescent psychological development: a review 
 Pediatrics in Review 
 29 
 5 
 161 
 167 
 18450837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hooley 
 JM 
 
 
 Gruber 
 SA 
 
 
 Scott 
 LA 
 
 
 Hiller 
 JB 
 
 
 Yurgelun-Todd 
 DA 
 
 
 2005 
 Activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in response to maternal criticism and praise in recovered depressed and healthy control participants 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 57 
 7 
 809 
 812 
 15820239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joiner 
 TE 
 Jr 
 
 
 Lewinsohn 
 PM 
 
 
 Seeley 
 JR 
 
 
 2002 
 The core of loneliness: lack of pleasurable engagement--more so than painful disconnection--predicts social impairment, depression onset, and recovery from depressive disorders among adolescents 
 Journal of Personality Assessment 
 79 
 3 
 472 
 491 
 12511016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kasch 
 KL 
 
 
 Rottenberg 
 J 
 
 
 Arnow 
 BA 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2002 
 Behavioral activation and inhibition systems and the severity and course of depression 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 111 
 4 
 589 
 597 
 12428772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 J 
 
 
 Birmaher 
 B 
 
 
 Brent 
 DA 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Rao 
 U 
 
 
 2000 
 K-SADS-PL 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 39 
 10 
 1208 
 11026169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keedwell 
 PA 
 
 
 Andrew 
 C 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 2005a 
 A double dissociation of ventromedial prefrontal cortical responses to sad and happy stimuli in depressed and healthy individuals 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 58 
 6 
 495 
 503 
 15993859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keedwell 
 PA 
 
 
 Andrew 
 C 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 2005b 
 The neural correlates of anhedonia in Major Depressive Disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 58 
 843 
 853 
 16043128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Young 
 CB 
 
 
 Kelley 
 E 
 
 
 Prater 
 K 
 
 
 Levitin 
 DJ 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2013 
 Trait anhedonia is associated with reduced reactivity and connectivity of mesolimbic and paralimbic reward pathways 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 47 
 10 
 1319 
 1328 
 23791396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kessler 
 RC 
 
 
 Avenevoli 
 S 
 
 
 Merikangas 
 K 
 
 
 2001 
 Mood disorders in children and adolescents: An epidemiologic perspective 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 49 
 12 
 1002 
 1014 
 11430842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Bhanji 
 JP 
 
 
 Cooney 
 RE 
 
 
 Atlas 
 LY 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural responses to monetary incentives in major depression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 63 
 7 
 686 
 692 
 17916330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kong 
 L 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Tang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wu 
 F 
 
 
 Driesen 
 N 
 
 
 Womer 
 F 
 
 
 
 2013 
 Functional connectivity between the amygdala and prefrontal cortex in medication-naive individuals with major depressive disorder 
 Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience 
 38 
 5 
 120117 
 23953680 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koob 
 GF 
 
 
 Le Moal 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Addiction and the brain antireward system 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 59 
 29 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 RW 
 
 
 Clore 
 GL 
 
 
 Wood 
 GA 
 
 
 
 
 Furman 
 W 
 
 
 Brown 
 BB 
 
 
 Feiring 
 C 
 
 
 1999 
 The emotions of romantic relationships: Do they wreak havoc on adolescents? 
 The Development of Romantic Relationships in Adolescence 
 19 
 49 
 Cambridge, UK 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 RW 
 
 
 Moneta 
 G 
 
 
 Richards 
 MH 
 
 
 Wilson 
 S 
 
 
 2002 
 Continuity, stability, and change in daily emotional experience across adolescence 
 Child Development 
 73 
 4 
 1151 
 1165 
 12146740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Gobbini 
 MI 
 
 
 Harrison 
 T 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 2004 
 Mothers’ neural activation in response to pictures of their children and other children 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 56 
 4 
 225 
 232 
 15312809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain development in children and adolescents: insights from anatomical magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 30 
 6 
 718 
 729 
 16887188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewinsohn 
 PM 
 
 
 Clarke 
 GN 
 
 
 Seeley 
 JR 
 
 
 Rohde 
 P 
 
 
 1994 
 Major depression in community adolescents: Age at onset, episode duration, and time to recurrence 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 33 
 6 
 809 
 818 
 7598758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lonigan 
 CJ 
 
 
 Phillips 
 BM 
 
 
 Hooe 
 ES 
 
 
 2003 
 Relations of positive and negative affectivity to anxiety and depression in children: Evidence from a latent variable longitudinal study 
 Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 
 71 
 3 
 465 
 481 
 12795571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mar 
 RA 
 
 
 2011 
 The neural bases of social cognition and story comprehension 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 62 
 103 
 134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martinez 
 AM 
 
 
 Benavente 
 R 
 
 
 1998 
 The AR-face database 
 CVC Technical Report #24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCabe 
 C 
 
 
 Woffindale 
 C 
 
 
 Harmer 
 CJ 
 
 
 Cowen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural processing of reward and punishment in young people at increased familial risk of depression 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 72 
 7 
 588 
 594 
 22704059 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McMakin 
 DL 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Shirk 
 SR 
 
 
 2011 
 Positive Affect Stimulation and Sustainment (PASS) module for depressed mood: A preliminary investigation of treatment-related effects 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 35 
 3 
 217 
 226 
 22140287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McMakin 
 DL 
 
 
 Olino 
 TM 
 
 
 Porta 
 G 
 
 
 Dietz 
 LJ 
 
 
 Emslie 
 G 
 
 
 Clarke 
 G 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Anhedonia predicts poorer recovery among youth with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment-resistant depression 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
 51 
 4 
 404 
 411 
 22449646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Klein 
 RG 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Schroth 
 EA 
 
 
 Mannuzza 
 S 
 
 
 Moulton 
 JL 
 3rd 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Amygdala and nucleus accumbens activation to emotional facial expressions in children and adolescents at risk for major depression 
 The American Journal of Psychiatry 
 165 
 1 
 90 
 98 
 17986682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morgan 
 JK 
 
 
 Shaw 
 DS 
 
 
 Musselman 
 SC 
 
 
 Kurapati 
 N 
 
 
 Olino 
 TM 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 (under review) 
 Frontostriatal functional connectivity during reward processing in adolescent boys with a history of depression 
 Unpublished manuscript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morgan 
 JK 
 
 
 Olino 
 TM 
 
 
 McMakin 
 DL 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 2013 
 Neural response to reward as a predictor of increases in depressive symptoms in adolescence 
 Neurobiology of Disease 
 52 
 66 
 74 
 22521464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mukherjee 
 P 
 
 
 Whalley 
 HC 
 
 
 McKirdy 
 JW 
 
 
 Sprengelmeyer 
 R 
 
 
 Young 
 AW 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AM 
 
 
 
 2013 
 Altered Amygdala Connectivity Within the Social Brain in Schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nusslock 
 R 
 
 
 Almeida 
 JR 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Labarbara 
 EJ 
 
 
 Klein 
 CR 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Waiting to win: elevated striatal and orbitofrontal cortical activity during reward anticipation in euthymic bipolar disorder adults 
 Bipolar Disorders 
 14 
 3 
 249 
 260 
 22548898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 JX 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Tools of the trade: Psychophysiological interactions and functional connectivity 
 Social Cognitive Affective Neuroscience 
 7 
 5 
 604 
 609 
 22569188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 Buhle 
 JT 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1251 
 1 
 E1 
 E24 
 23025352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olino 
 TM 
 
 
 McMakin 
 DL 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Silk 
 JS 
 
 
 Birmaher 
 B 
 
 
 
 2011 
 “I won, but I’m not getting my hopes up”: Depression moderates the relationship of outcomes and reward anticipation 
 Psychiatry Research 
 194 
 3 
 393 
 395 
 22079656 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olino 
 TM 
 
 
 Yu 
 L 
 
 
 McMakin 
 DL 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Seeley 
 JR 
 
 
 Lewinsohn 
 PM 
 
 
 
 2013 
 Comparisons across depression assessment instruments in adolescence: An IRT study using two linking methods 
 Journal of Abnormal Child Psychiatry 
 41 
 8 
 1267 
 1277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 2 
 331 
 348 
 12030820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 2008 
 A neural model of voluntary and automatic emotion regulation: implications for understanding the pathophysiology and neurodevelopment of bipolar disorder 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 13 
 9 
 829 
 833 
 857 
 18574483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 E 
 
 
 Cohen 
 P 
 
 
 Brook 
 J 
 
 
 1999 
 Adolescent depressive symptoms as predictors of adult depression: Moodiness or mood disorder? 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 156 
 1 
 133 
 135 
 9892310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Radloff 
 LS 
 
 
 1977 
 The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population 
 Applied Psychological Measurement 
 1 
 385 
 401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sawyer 
 MG 
 
 
 Pfeiffer 
 S 
 
 
 Spence 
 SH 
 
 
 2009 
 Life events, coping and depressive symptoms among young adolescents: a one-year prospective study 
 Journal of Affective Disorders 
 117 
 1–2 
 48 
 54 
 19168224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sears 
 DO 
 
 
 
 
 Abeles 
 RP 
 
 
 1987 
 Implications of the life-span approach for research on attitudes and social cognition 
 Life-span Perspectives and Social Psychology 
 17 
 60 
 Hillsdale, NJ 
 Lawrence Erlbaum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Servaas 
 MN 
 
 
 Riese 
 H 
 
 
 Renken 
 RJ 
 
 
 Marsman 
 JB 
 
 
 Lambregs 
 J 
 
 
 Ormel 
 J 
 
 
 
 2013 
 The effect of criticism on functional brain connectivity and associations with neuroticism 
 PLoS One 
 8 
 7 
 e69606 
 23922755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheeber 
 LB 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 Leve 
 C 
 
 
 Davis 
 B 
 
 
 Shortt 
 JW 
 
 
 Katz 
 LF 
 
 
 2009 
 Dynamics of affective experience and behavior in depressed adolescents 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 50 
 11 
 1419 
 1427 
 19702661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silk 
 JS 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Whalen 
 DJ 
 
 
 Jakubcak 
 JL 
 
 
 Thompson 
 WK 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 
 2011 
 Daily emotional dynamics in depressed youth: a cell phone ecological momentary assessment study 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 110 
 2 
 241 
 257 
 21112595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silk 
 JS 
 
 
 Stroud 
 LR 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Lee 
 KH 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 2012 
 Peer acceptance and rejection through the eyes of youth: pupillary, eyetracking and ecological data from the Chatroom Interact task 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 7 
 1 
 93 
 105 
 21775386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Jones 
 RM 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2010 
 A time of change: behavioral and neural correlates of adolescent sensitivity to appetitive and aversive environmental cues 
 Brain and Cognition 
 72 
 1 
 124 
 133 
 19695759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 2000 
 The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral manifestations 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 24 
 4 
 417 
 463 
 10817843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spijker 
 J 
 
 
 Bijl 
 RV 
 
 
 de Graaf 
 R 
 
 
 Nolen 
 WA 
 
 
 2001 
 Determinants of poor 1-year outcome of DSM-III-R major depression in the general population: results of the Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence Study (NEMESIS) 
 Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 
 103 
 2 
 122 
 30 
 11167315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2008 
 A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking 
 Developmental Review 
 28 
 1 
 78 
 106 
 18509515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 Cauffman 
 E 
 
 
 Banich 
 M 
 
 
 Graham 
 S 
 
 
 Woolard 
 J 
 
 
 2008 
 Age differences in sensation seeking and impulsivity as indexed by behavior and self-report: Evidence for a dual systems model 
 Developmental Psychology 
 44 
 6 
 1764 
 1778 
 18999337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Straube 
 B 
 
 
 Green 
 A 
 
 
 Sass 
 K 
 
 
 Kircher 
 T 
 
 
 2013 
 Superior Temporal Sulcus Disconnectivity During Processing of Metaphoric Gestures in Schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Overwalle 
 F 
 
 
 Baetens 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror and mentalizing systems: a meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 48 
 3 
 564 
 584 
 19524046 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Versace 
 A 
 
 
 Thompson 
 WK 
 
 
 Zhou 
 D 
 
 
 Almeida 
 JR 
 
 
 Hassel 
 S 
 
 
 Klein 
 CR 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Abnormal left and right amygdala-orbitofrontal cortical functional connectivity to emotional faces: state versus trait vulnerability markers of depression in bipolar disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 67 
 5 
 422 
 431 
 20159144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wacker 
 J 
 
 
 Dillon 
 DG 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 DA 
 
 
 2009 
 The role of the nucleus accumbens and rostral anterior cingulate cortex in anhedonia: integration of resting EEG, fMRI, and volumetric techniques 
 Neuroimage 
 46 
 1 
 327 
 337 
 19457367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 F 
 
 
 Bobrow 
 L 
 
 
 Liu 
 J 
 
 
 Spencer 
 L 
 
 
 Blumberg 
 HP 
 
 
 2012 
 Corticolimbic functional connectivity in adolescents with bipolar disorder 
 PLoS One 
 7 
 11 
 e50177 
 23185566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whittle 
 S 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Davey 
 CG 
 
 
 Harding 
 IH 
 
 
 Sheeber 
 L 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Adolescents’ depressive symptoms moderate neural responses to their mothers’ positive behavior 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 7 
 1 
 23 
 34 
 21917846 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilcox 
 HC 
 
 
 Anthony 
 JC 
 
 
 2004 
 Child and adolescent clinical features as forerunners of adult-onset major depressive disorder: retrospective evidence from an epidemiological sample 
 Journal of Affective Disorders 
 82 
 9 
 20 
 15465572 
 
 
 
 
 World Health Organization 
 2011 
 Depression 
 Retrieved December, 2011, from  http://www.who.int/mental_health/management/depression/definition/en/index.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yue 
 Y 
 
 
 Yuan 
 Y 
 
 
 Hou 
 Z 
 
 
 Jiang 
 W 
 
 
 Bai 
 F 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Z 
 
 
 2013 
 Abnormal functional connectivity of amygdala in late-onset depression was associated with cognitive deficits 
 PLoS One 
 8 
 9 
 e75058 
 24040385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 WN 
 
 
 Chang 
 SH 
 
 
 Guo 
 LY 
 
 
 Zhang 
 KL 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 The neural correlates of reward-related processing in major depressive disorder: A meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies 
 Journal of Affective Disorders 
 151 
 2 
 531 
 539 
 23856280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Block-design social reward fMRI task included in the current study. The task was adapted from the work of  Davey et al. (2010) . Participants rated 20 female and 20 male face stimuli on how much they imagined that they would like each person. Ratings were used to create personalized stimulus sets for the 3 block types:  mutual liking  (positive feedback, from most-liked faces),  received liking  (positive feedback, from least-liked faces), and  ambiguous  (no feedback, from neutral faces). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Late adolescents’ social anhedonia (RSAS;  Eckblad et al., 1983 ) in relation to medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) response (in arbitrary units, extracted from cluster mean) to mutual liking relative to received liking. The large cluster yielded by this analysis includes the following subregions of the mPFC: dorsal mPFC, pregenual anterior cingulate cortex, and rostral mPFC. Scatterplots depict the association between social anhedonia score and mPFC response (extracted as the mean across the entire cluster), for illustration purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Late adolescents’ social anhedonia (RSAS;  Eckblad et al., 1983 ) in relation to positive functional connectivity between the bilateral nucleus accumbens and the mPFC during mutual liking relative to received liking. Two large clusters yielded by this analysis include the following subregions of the mPFC: (1) dorsal mPFC and (2) pregenual anterior cingulate, rostral mPFC, and anterodorsal mPFC. Scatterplots depict psychophysiologic interaction (PPI) values, (extracted as the mean across the entire larger cluster), for illustration purposes. R 2  value reflects the effect size of the association between social anhedonia and the mean PPI value across the depicted cluster. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Whole-brain Results for Neural Response to Social Reward 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Number of voxels in cluster 
 t -score at peak voxel 
 Talairach coordinates of peak voxel 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mutual Liking > Received Liking 
 
 
 
 Superior Parietal Cortex 
 105 
 4.30 
 −28 
 −58 
 61 
 
 
 Temporoparietal Junction 
 125 
 3.18 
 −48 
 −55 
 16 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 258 
 2.84 
 58 
 −53 
 6 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 56 
 2.74 
 −41 
 −50 
 55 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 76 
 2.61 
 −29 
 −21 
 50 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 372 
 2.61 
 52 
 −53 
 42 
 
 
 DLPFC 
 64 
 2.60 
 −35 
 20 
 36 
 
 
 mPFC 
 40 
 2.49 
 −17 
 4 
 60 
 
 
 mPFC 
 134 
 2.47 
 −14 
 35 
 31 
 
 
 Insula 
 31 
 2.38 
 −27 
 15 
 23 
 
 
 mPFC/Supplementary Motor Area 
 78 
 2.38 
 −33 
 4 
 38 
 
 
 mPFC 
 60 
 2.35 
 −14 
 40 
 20 
 
 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 36 
 2.28 
 −44 
 −27 
 50 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 35 
 2.25 
 −5 
 8 
 16 
 
 
 Frontal Pole 
 37 
 2.14 
 −30 
 53 
 5 
 
 
 Anterior Insula 
 43 
 2.00 
 31 
 20 
 −4 
 
 
 
 All Positive Feedback > Ambiguous Feedback 
 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus/mPFC/Postcentral Gyrus/Superior Parietal Cortex 
 2228 
 4.29 
 34 
 −8 
 44 
 
 
 Cuneus/Caudate/mPFC/Putamen/Insula/Cerebellum/Posterior Cingulate/Parahippocampal Gyrus/Thalamus/Globus Pallidus/Lingual Gyrus 
 12909 
 4.15 
 −26 
 −90 
 21 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 1466 
 3.31 
 19 
 −57 
 44 
 
 
 Lateral Temporal Gyrus/Temporoparietal Junction/Superior Lateral Gyrus 
 496 
 3.04 
 −47 
 −2 
 −13 
 
 
 mPFC 
 319 
 2.98 
 −13 
 27 
 57 
 
 
 Ventrolateral PFC 
 262 
 2.98 
 49 
 31 
 13 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus/Postcentral Gyrus 
 580 
 2.93 
 −37 
 −37 
 60 
 
 
 mPFC 
 139 
 2.80 
 −18 
 41 
 33 
 
 
 Temporoparietal Junction 
 158 
 2.76 
 45 
 −36 
 21 
 
 
 Temporoparietal Junction 
 142 
 2.74 
 −55 
 −46 
 21 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 252 
 2.70 
 −31 
 −55 
 47 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 139 
 2.60 
 −16 
 −67 
 36 
 
 
 Ventrolateral PFC/Insula 
 113 
 2.52 
 −45 
 9 
 8 
 
 
 mPFC 
 291 
 2.41 
 6 
 52 
 13 
 
 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 30 
 2.40 
 −59 
 −51 
 7 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 193 
 2.35 
 52 
 5 
 27 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 104 
 2.35 
 −38 
 −55 
 11 
 
 
 mPFC 
 116 
 2.34 
 −3 
 4 
 26 
 
 
 mPFC 
 33 
 2.29 
 12 
 37 
 48 
 
 
 Insula 
 44 
 2.21 
 38 
 −19 
 23 
 
 
 mPFC 
 39 
 2.20 
 8 
 10 
 32 
 
 
 mPFC 
 37 
 2.16 
 −13 
 2 
 46 
 
 
 mPFC 
 37 
 2.11 
 −11 
 43 
 48 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 50 
 2.04 
 −11 
 −56 
 19 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 30 
 1.90 
 −3 
 −26 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note : Analyses were conducted within the entire sample ( n =27,  df =26), using the contrasts indicated. All analyses were thresholded at were  p uncorrected <.05 and cluster size>30 voxels. DLPFC: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. mPFC: medial prefrontal cortex. PFC: prefrontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Whole-brain Results for the Association of Social Anhedonia with Neural Response and Functional Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 Regions in Cluster 
 Number of voxels in cluster 
 t -score at peak voxel 
 Talairach coordinates of peak voxel 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neural Response and Social Anhedonia 
 
 
 
 mPFC/VS/OFC/Substantia Nigra/Claustrum 
 16209 
 4.34 
 −4 
 20 
 20 
 
 
 Precuneus/Angular Gyrus 
 1380 
 3.99 
 −31 
 −76 
 36 
 
 
 Thalamus/Caudate Tail/Posterior Cingulate/VS 
 1416 
 3.57 
 −1 
 −13 
 21 
 
 
 Precuneus/Superior Parietal Cortex 
 670 
 3.57 
 28 
 −75 
 44 
 
 
 DLPFC/Insula 
 984 
 3.46 
 37 
 −2 
 41 
 
 
 
 Neural Response and Depressive Symptom Severity 
 
 
 
 DLPFC 
 927 
 4.93 
 −46 
 20 
 31 
 
 
 Precuneus/Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 1021 
 4.42 
 −28 
 −77 
 43 
 
 
 mPFC 
 4404 
 3.65 
 −18 
 39 
 35 
 
 
 DLPFC 
 697 
 3.19 
 43 
 10 
 37 
 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity and Social Anhedonia 
 
 
 
 Postcentral Gyrus/VS/mPFC/OFC/Thalamus/Insula/Dorsal Striatum/Temporoparietal Junction/Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 14352 
 4.67 
 −48 
 −12 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note : Analyses involved the association of (1) neural response to reward and social anhedonia ( n =27,  df =26); (2) neural response to social reward and depressive symptom severity ( n =27,  df =26); and (3) functional connectivity with the bilateral nucleus accumbens and social anhedonia ( n =26,  df =1,24). The contrast of interest was  mutual liking  >  received liking . Social anhedonia was assessed with the Revised Social Anhedonia Scales ( Eckblad et al., 1983 ). Depressive symptoms were assessed with the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale ( Radloff, 1977 ). All analyses were thresholded at  p corrected <0.05 using extent computed with AlphaSim to adjust for Type I error. mPFC: medial prefrontal cortex. VS: ventral striatum. DLPFC: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The first region listed for each cluster is the location of the peak voxel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Higher social anhedonia in adolescents was associated with greater medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) response to social reward. 
 
 
 Adolescents’ social anhedonia was associated with stronger positive functional connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and the mPFC during social reward. 
 
 
 Anhedonia was related to brain function independently of the influence of depression. 
 
 
 Anhedonia was associated with disrupted response to mutual liking rather than social reward in general. 
 
 
 
 
