
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 24583255 
 4138049 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.02.024 
 NIHMS581443 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 An Multivariate Distance-Based Analytic Framework for Connectome-Wide
Association Studies 
 
 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Zarrar 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 Clare 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Reiss 
 Philip T. 
 
 5 
 2 
 
 
 
 Craddock 
 R. Cameron 
 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Emerson 
 John W. 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 McMahon 
 Katie 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Copland 
 David A. 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 F. Xavier 
 
 4 
 2 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 Michael P. 
 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 
 2 Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA 
 3 Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY,
USA 
 4 Phyllis Green and Randolph Cōwen Institute for Pediatric
Neuroscience, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, New York University, New York,
NY, USA 
 5 Division of Biostatistics, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
New York, NY, USA 
 6 Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 
 7 Centre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia 
 8 Centre for Clinical Research and School of Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 
 
 Corresponding Authors: Zarrar Shehzad, Department of Psychology, Yale
University, 2 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT, USA. Phone: +1 310 806 1872;
 zarrar.shehzad@gmail.com , Michael P. Milham, Center for the Developing
Brain, Child Mind Institute, 445 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10022 New York, NY, USA. Phone:
+1 646 625 4256; Fax +1 646 625 4348;
 michael.milham@childmind.org 
 
 
 22 
 5 
 2014 
 
 
 28 
 2 
 2014 
 
 
 6 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 6 
 2015 
 
 93 
 0 1 
 74 
 94 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The identification of phenotypic associations in high-dimensional brain
connectivity data represents the next frontier in the neuroimaging connectomics era.
Exploration of brain-phenotype relationships remains limited by statistical approaches
that are computationally intensive, depend on a priori hypotheses, or require stringent
correction for multiple comparisons. Here, we propose a computationally efficient,
data-driven technique for connectome-wide association studies (CWAS) that provides a
comprehensive voxel-wise survey of brain-behavior relationships across the connectome; the
approach identifies voxels whose whole-brain connectivity patterns vary significantly with
a phenotypic variable. Using resting state fMRI data, we demonstrate the utility of our
analytic framework by identifying significant connectivity-phenotype relationships for
full-scale IQ and assessing their overlap with existent neuroimaging findings, as
synthesized by openly available automated meta-analysis ( www.neurosynth.org ). The results
appeared to be robust to the removal of nuisance covariates (i.e., mean connectivity,
global signal, and motion) and varying brain resolution (i.e., voxelwise results are
highly similar to results using 800 parcellations). We show that CWAS findings can be used
to guide subsequent seed-based correlation analyses. Finally, we demonstrate the
applicability of the approach by examining CWAS for three additional datasets, each
encompassing a distinct phenotypic variable: neurotypical development,
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder diagnostic status, and L-dopa pharmacological
manipulation. For each phenotype, our approach to CWAS identified distinct connectome-wide
association profiles, not previously attainable in a single study utilizing traditional
univariate approaches. As a computationally efficient, extensible, and scalable method,
our CWAS framework can accelerate the discovery of brain-behavior relationships in the
connectome. 
 
 
 brain-behavior relationships 
 connectome 
 discovery 
 functional connectivity 
 phenotype 
 resting-state 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 The human connectome, comprising the complete set of neural interactions in the
brain, provides the framework for behavior and cognition ( Craddock et al., 2013 ;  Sporns, 2011 ;  Sporns et al., 2005 ). A key challenge for neuroscience is
to understand the relationship between inter-individual variations in the organization of
functional systems within the connectome, and environmental and phenotypic factors ( Akil et al., 2011 ;  Biswal
et al., 2010 ). Phenotypic variables such as task performance, psychological traits,
and disease states have been found to be associated with variation within and between
specific functional brain circuits ( Andrews-Hanna et al.,
2010 ;  Fornito and Bullmore, 2010 ;  Greicius, 2008 ;  Kelly et
al., 2012 ,  2008 ;  Zhu et al., 2008 ). However, connectome-wide association studies
(CWAS) permitting the exploration of brain-behavior relationships across the entire
connectome remain a challenge as they entail a massive number of comparisons ( Milham, 2012 ). For example, an investigation of
connectivity for 25,000 voxels requires considering of more than 300 million voxel
pairings. 
 As in genome-wide association studies ( Burton et
al., 2007 ;  McCarthy et al., 2008 ),
investigations of connectome-wide associations typically employ mass-univariate statistical
analyses. In the univariate approach, a phenotypic measure is related to only one functional
connection at a time (e.g., between regions of interest [ROIs], or between
voxels in a whole-brain analysis); concurrent contributions from other connections are
necessarily ignored ( Cole et al., 2010 ). The large
number of statistical tests entailed by this approach (thousands to millions) increases the
potential for false positives, requiring stringent correction for multiple comparisons
( Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ;  Chumbley and Friston, 2009 ;  Genovese et al., 2002 ;  Hu et al., 2010 ;
 Worsley et al., 2005 ;  Zalesky et al., 2010a ). In addition, visualization and
interpretation of results from such a massive number of univariate analyses in three
dimensions represent major challenges (e.g., visualization of the voxel-wise connectome)
( Margulies et al., 2013 ). 
 Multivariate learning methods have been advocated as an alternative approach for
exploring connectivity-phenotype associations ( Margulies et
al., 2010 ). In the multivariate framework, the  simultaneous 
contribution of  entire sets  of functional connections to a phenotypic
variable (e.g., age, clinical diagnosis, behavioral performance) is evaluated. This reduces
the number of connectivity-phenotype evaluations to one per set and thus reduces the scale
of the multiple comparison problem. Given that cognitive and perceptual processes are driven
by patterns of concurrent activity across distributed brain networks rather than individual
regions ( Haynes and Rees, 2006 ;  Norman et al., 2006 ), simultaneous assessment of multiple
connections may capture connectivity-phenotype relationships more accurately ( Varoquaux and Craddock, 2013 ). While a variety of
multivariate approaches can assess phenotypic associations in the connectome ( Varoquaux and Craddock, 2013 ), several factors led us to
pursue multivariate distance matrix regression (MDMR) ( Anderson, 2001 ;  McArdle and Anderson, 2001 ;
 Reiss et al., 2010 ;  Zapala and Schork, 2006 ). These include: 1) the ability to examine more than one
predictor variable at a time (i.e., covariates can be incorporated), 2) applicability for
categorical and/or continuous variables, 3) minimal requirements for parameter-specific or
analytic decision-making (e.g., a user only needs to choose the distance measure), and 4)
ease of interpretability due to regression-like analytic structure. MDMR has also been shown
to have excellent test level accuracy and good statistical power ( Schork et al., 2008 ;  Zapala and
Schork, 2012 ,  2006 , Lin and Schaid,
2009). 
 Here, we provide a whole-brain framework for identifying phenotypic associations in
the connectome. While the approach is illustrated using several examinations of functional
connectivity, it can also be applied to structural connectivity. At each node in the
connectome (defined by voxels, brain areas, or parcellation units), we test whether
inter-individual whole-brain connectivity patterns are related to differences in one or more
phenotypic variables of interest. This is accomplished using a two-step approach. First, for
each node in the connectome, we calculate a whole brain functional connectivity map, and
then calculate the similarity between the connectivity maps of all possible pairings of
participants using spatial correlation, yielding an  n  ×
 n  matrix ( n  = number of participants). Then, at
each node, we use MDMR to test whether a variable of interest (e.g., a clinical diagnosis)
is associated with the between-subject distances: significance is determined using
permutation testing ( Fig. 1 ). The end result is a
statistic for each node that indicates the strength of the relationship between a phenotypic
measure and variations in its connectivity patterns across participants. 
 Our approach attempts to lower common barriers to effective discovery science and
full-brain exploration of the connectome ( Biswal et al.,
2010 ;  Van Horn and Gazzaniga, 2002 ); in
particular, the high computational demands and resulting necessity to incorporate  a
priori  information to constrain the problem. The proposed MDMR-based framework
does not require the user to pre-specify or estimate the dimensionality of the data (as in
independent component analysis or clustering;  Beckmann,
2012 ;  Bellec et al., 2010 ;  Damoiseaux et al., 2006 ;  Hartigan,
1975 ;  Mckeown et al., 1998 ) or select
parameters for graph construction (as in network centrality-based approaches;  Buckner et al., 2009 ;  Bullmore and Sporns, 2009 ;  Bullmore and Bassett,
2011 ;  Zuo et al., 2012 ). The resolution of
brain representations (e.g., voxels) does not need to be reduced to facilitate computation,
as is common with graph theoretic analyses ( Buckner et al.,
2009 ;  Cole et al., 2010 ;  Zalesky et al., 2010b ). Finally, there is no need to select
particular seeds or networks, as in seed-based correlation analyses ( Cole et al., 2010 ). 
 Our primary demonstration and evaluation of the MDMR-based CWAS approach focuses on
the identification of connectome-wide associations for IQ using resting state data from the
publicly available Enhanced Nathan Kline Institute Rockland Sample (NKI-RS;  http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/enhanced ). Advantages of this dataset
include moderate sample size (n = 104) and multiple resting-state scans (albeit with
different imaging sequence parameters). This enabled us to evaluate the robustness of our
results, their overlap with existing meta-analyses of IQ-brain relationships, and their
utility in guiding subsequent seed-based correlation analyses. The impact of potential
confound signals (e.g., motion), preprocessing strategies (e.g., global signal regression),
and brain parcellation strategies were considered, as well as overall differences in
measured brain connectivity from one individual to the next. In addition, we provide three
other examples of MDMR-based CWAS applications using a range of phenotypes and experimental
designs (Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder [ADHD] vs. controls,
age-related developmental effects, and administration of L-DOPA vs. placebo). A summary of
our approach is provided in  Figure 1 , and an overview
of analyses is provided in  Figure 2 . Code for all
analyses and figures in the paper are available online ( https://github.com/czarrar/cwas-paper ). 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 We examined resting-state fMRI scans from four community-based datasets (see
 Table 2  for demographics). The four datasets
included: 1)  IQ : healthy adults with Full Scale IQ estimated with the
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) from the NKI-RS with ages 18 to 65
( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/enhanced ;  Nooner et al., 2012 ); 2)  Development : healthy
individuals ranging from children to young adults ( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/retro/Power2012.html ;  Power et al., 2012 ); 3)  ADHD :
typically developing children and children meeting DSM-IV criteria for ADHD sampled from
the NYU site of the ADHD200 dataset that were matched for age and sex ( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/adhd200 ;  Chabernaud et al., 2012 ;  Di
Martino et al., 2011 ;  Kelly et al., 2009 ;
 Koyama et al., 2011 ;  Mennes et al., 2012 ;  Zuo et al.,
2010 ); and 4)  L-dopa : healthy adults administered 100mg of
L-dopa or placebo double-blind on two separate scan visits ( Kelly et al., 2009 ). Datasets 1-3 and the placebo scans from
Dataset 4 are publicly available for download from the International Data-Sharing
Initiative at  http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org . 
 
 
 Data Acquisition 
 For the first dataset (IQ), imaging data were acquired using a Siemens Tim Trio
3T scanner with a 32-channel head coil at the Center for Advanced Brain Imaging, NKI.
Three different resting-state fMRI scans were collected in the following order: (i) Scan
1, a multiband echoplanar imaging (EPI) sequence ( Moeller
et al., 2010 ;  Xu et al., 2013 ) (900 time
points, repetition time [TR] = 645 ms, echo time
[TE] = 30 ms, flip angle = 60°, 40 slices, voxel
size = 3×3×3 mm), (ii) Scan 2, a higher spatial resolution
multiband EPI sequence (404 time points, TR = 1400 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip
angle = 60°, 64 slices, voxel size = 2×2×2 mm),
and (iii) Scan 3, a standard EPI sequence (120 time points, TR = 2500 ms, TE
= 30ms, flip angle = 80°, 38 slices, voxel size =
3×3×3.33 mm). Scan 3 was not included in the present study because its
duration is half that of Scans 1 and 2, decreasing detectability and comparability. A
T1-weighted magnetization prepared gradient echo sequence (MPRAGE) structural image was
also acquired (TR = 1900 ms, TE = 2.52 ms, flip angle =
9°, 176 slices, voxel size = 1×1×1 mm). Only datasets for
individuals between ages 18.0 and 65.0 years old were included in the present analyses (n
= 104; mean age = 40.3 years). 
 Dataset 2 (development;  Power et al.,
2012 ) was acquired using a Siemens Tim Trio 3T at Washington University at St.
Louis. Resting-state fMRI data were obtained using a BOLD contrast sensitive gradient EPI
sequence (133 time points, TR = 2500 ms [n = 68] or 2200
ms [n = 5] or 2000 ms [n = 4], TE
= 27 ms, flip angle = 90°, 32 slices, voxel size =
4×4×4 mm). A T1-weighted sagittal MPRAGE structural image was also
obtained (TR-partition = 2.4 s, TE = 3.06 ms, TI=1000 ms, flip
angle=8°, 176 slices, acquisition voxel size=1×1×1
mm). 
 For Dataset 3 (ADHD-200: NYU), imaging data were acquired using a Siemens
Allegra 3T (NYU Center for Brain Imaging). Resting-state fMRI data were collected with a
multi-echo EPI sequence (180 time points; repetition time [TR], 2000 ms;
effective echo time [TE] = 33ms; flip angle, 90°; 33
slices; voxel size, 3×3×4mm). A T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence was also
acquired (TR=2530ms; TE=3.25ms; TI=1100ms; flip
angle=7°; 128 slices; FOV=256mm; acquisition voxel
size=1.3×1×1.3mm). Following removal of participants with data
that failed quality assurance (as described in a later section), we selected our sample
for analysis from those remaining to group-match the ADHD and TDC groups on age and sex
(see  Table 2 ). 
 Dataset 4 (L-dopa;  Kelly et al., 2009 )
was acquired using a 4T Bruker Med Spec system (Centre for Magnetic Resonance, University
of Queensland) equipped with a transverse electromagnetic head coil. Resting-state fMRI
data comprised 200 contiguous EPI volumes (TR = 2100ms; TE = 30ms; flip
angle = 90; 36 slices; acquisition voxel size =
3.6×3.6×3mm). A high-resolution T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence was also
acquired (TR = 2500 ms; TE = 3.83ms; TI = 1500 ms; flip angle
= 8 degrees; 256 slices; acquisition voxel size = 0.9 × 0.9
× 0.9 mm). 
 
 
 Preparation of Functional Connectivity Data 
 Each resting-state fMRI scan was preprocessed via a development version of the
Configurable Pipeline for the Analysis of Connectomes (C-PAC,  http://fcp-indi.github.com/C-PAC ), which builds on AFNI ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni ), FSL ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk ), and Nipype
( Gorgolewski et al., 2011 ). Preprocessing
comprised slice time correction; motion correction; mean-based intensity normalization;
nuisance signal removal via multiple regression (described below); temporal bandpass
filtering (0.009–0.1Hz); linear registration of functional to structural images
using FSL's Flirt; and nonlinear registration of structural images to the MNI152
template (2mm isotropic) using FSL's FNIRT ( Andersson et al., 2007 ). 
 Nuisance signals were removed using two strategies. Both strategies involved
removal of linear/quadratic trends (to account for scanner drift) and six motion
parameters. The first strategy also removed 5 “nuisance” signals obtained
by means of a principal components analysis of white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) signals using the component based noise correction (CompCor) approach ( Behzadi et al., 2007 ;  Chai et al., 2012 ). This strategy was used for principal analyses, except where
indicated. The second strategy removed signals associated with mean time series extract
from CSF, WM, as well as the global signal, and was conducted for comparability with the
published literature ( Gotts et al., 2013 ;  Murphy et al., 2013 ;  Yan et al., 2013b ). As a final step, data were spatially smoothed to
FWHM=8mm using AFNI's 3dBlurFWHM, which calculates a smoothing kernel to
obtain the predetermined output smoothing from the initial smoothness level. The output of
these preprocessing steps was a 4D residual functional volume in MNI152 standard space
that was resampled to 4 mm isotropic voxels for the purpose of CWAS. 
 
 Group Level Nuisance Covariates 
 We computed two different measures to be included as nuisance covariates in
later group analyses. First, given the potential for spurious results from head
movements as small as 0.1mm, we calculated mean framewise displacement (a measure of
moment-to-moment changes in motion;  Power et al.,
2012 ). Second, to partial out effects of global connectivity when using CompCor
for preprocessing, we calculated a measure of mean global connectivity (the average
correlation across all possible connections;  Saad et
al., 2013 ;  Yan et al., 2013b ) for use as
a covariate. This approach to removing effects of global connectivity has been
recommended as an alternative to global signal regression ( Gotts et al., 2013 ) and can be contrasted with our second
preprocessing strategy that used CSF, WM, and the global signal as nuisance
covariates. 
 
 
 
 Quality Assurance 
 Given that the Development and L-DOPA datasets were previously quality
controlled and published, we did not exclude any participants ( Kelly et al., 2009 ;  Power et al.,
2012 ). In contrast, for the IQ and ADHD-200 datasets, which intentionally include
datasets of varying quality, we applied a semi-automated approach to exclude poor quality
scans. Anatomical scans (one per participant) and functional scans (one to three per
participant) were examined in MNI152 standard space (2mm). Here we explain the steps;
 Supplementary Table 1  provides
the number of participants excluded at each step per dataset. For anatomical images, we
measured the percentage of voxels (within a standard brain mask) present after skull
stripping and the spatial correlation between a given scan and the sample mean. For
functional images, we measured head motion with mean framewise displacement (FD), brain
coverage with the number of voxels present in an overlap mask (includes voxels present in
at least 90% of subjects), and mean functional signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). We
excluded participants whose anatomical or functional scans were outliers (i.e., above or
below the median by more than two times the interquartile range on the corresponding
measure [for mean FD, only the upper limit was enforced]). Manual
inspection of outlier scans confirmed that these scans were generally of poor quality,
either noisy (e.g., as a result of motion, for functional scans) or with poor grey-white
matter contrast (for anatomical scans). 
 
 
 Connectome-Wide Association Studies (CWAS) 
 Subsequent analyses were performed in R (version 2.15.3;  R Core Team, 2013 ) using up to 12 2.1-GHz AMD Opteron processors
and a maximum of 30 GB of RAM. An overview of analytic steps is given in  Figure 1 . The code for these analyses has been made publicly
available through the R package  Connectir  ( http://connectir.projects.nitrc.org ), which relies on the
 bigmemory  and related packages ( Kane et
al., 2013 ), and the python library  C-PAC  ( http://fcp-indi.github.com/C-PAC ). The following three steps were completed
separately for each of the four datasets. 
 The first step was to assess subject-level functional connectivity using
temporal Pearson correlations ( Fig. 1b ). For each
participant, we computed correlations of blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) fMRI signal
between each pair of grey matter voxels in the brain. Computations were restricted to
grey-matter voxels falling within a tissue prior mask provided with FSL (thresholded at
grey matter probability > 25%). We further restricted computations to
connections among those voxels that were present in all participants (separately for each
dataset). The result of this step was a  v  ×  v 
correlation matrix, where  v  is the number of 4mm voxels in the
group-level grey matter mask ( v  = 15,615 for the IQ dataset;
 v  = 16,154 for Development;  v  = 15,967
for ADHD;  v  = 16,092 for L-DOPA). 
 The second step was to summarize individual differences in functional
connectivity ( Fig. 1c ). For each voxel, we calculated
the distance between connectivity patterns (i.e., each voxel's correlation with
the rest of the brain) for every possible pairings of participants in a given dataset. See
the appendix for a basic definition on distances and relevant properties. As the distance
between a pair of connectivity patterns (e.g., between two participants for a given voxel)
we used  2 ∗ ( 1 − r )  where r is the Pearson correlation; this distance measure
is a metric ( Gower and Krzanowski, 1999 ;  Mardia et al., 1979 ) ranging between 0 and 2 (0
= perfectly correlated, 1 = uncorrelated, 2 = perfectly negatively
correlated). The result was an  n  ×  n  matrix of
distances among participants, for each voxel. The 1 st  row or column of the
matrix represents the dissimilarity between the 1 st  participant's
whole-brain connectivity map with all other participants' whole-brain connectivity
maps. In  supplementary materials ,
we also examine alternate distance measures including the Chebychev, Euclidean, Kendall
Tau, Lin's Concordance Correlation, Mahalanobois, and Spearman Rank
similarities/distances. 
 The third step used multivariate distance matrix regression (MDMR) to test how
well phenotypic variables explain the distances between participants obtained in step two
( Fig. 1d ). Essentially, MDMR was used to test
whether, for each voxel, whole-brain connectivity patterns tend to be more similar in
individuals with similar phenotypes (e.g., within-group) than in individuals with
dissimilar phenotypes (e.g., between-group). MDMR exhibits excellent test level accuracy
and good power ( Zapala and Schork, 2012 ). It yields
a pseudo-F statistic analogous to an F-statistic from a standard ANOVA model (see
 Calculation of Pseudo-F Statistic  for details). Since the pseudo-F
statistic does not in general have an F-distribution under the null hypothesis, its
significance is assessed with a permutation test. The null distribution was simulated by
applying a random permutation to the subject indices for the variable of interest (e.g.,
IQ) 15,000 times and re-computing the pseudo-F statistic each time. The pseudo-F statistic
from the original data was then referred to this simulated distribution to obtain a
p-value. We controlled for family-wise error rate using Gaussian Random Field (GRF) theory
(voxel threshold of Z > 1.65, cluster size threshold  p  <
0.05; note the one-tailed threshold was employed due to the unidirectional nature of the
F-test). For comparison, we also performed a more stringent multiple comparisons
correction by simulating a permutation distribution of maximum cluster sizes. For this
permutation-based cluster correction, statistical maps were thresholded at a voxel-level
pseudo-F value that corresponds to  p  < 0.05 (via a linear fit
between the  p  and  F  values across all voxels) and then
corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster size corresponding to
 p  < 0.05. The final result of this third step was a map of
brain regions whose whole-brain pattern of connectivity was significantly associated with
a phenotypic variable such as IQ. 
 
 
 Calculation of the Pseudo-F Statistic in MDMR 
 As noted above, the pseudo-F statistic forms the basis for MDMR. Here, we first
explain the standard approach to calculating the pseudo-F statistic for a single predictor
variable. Second, we present modifications to the formula that allow inclusion of multiple
predictor variables analogous to standard multiple regression. Finally, we present a
matrix algebra device for rapid simultaneous computation of multiple pseudo-F
statistics. 
 
 Pseudo-F Statistic Details 
 McArdle and Anderson (2001)  introduced
a framework for ANOVA-like hypothesis testing when the outcome data consist of a matrix
of distances  d ij  (1< i,
j < n ) among  n  data points. In our
case, this distance matrix reflects the dissimilarity of subjects  i  and
 j  with respect to the connections between one brain region and the
whole brain.  Zapala and Schork (2006)  adapted the
approach to general linear regression models for complex biomedical data, and used the
term “multivariate distance matrix regression”, which we have adopted.
The approach builds on Gower's solution to the multidimensional scaling problem,
which is based on the matrix  G  =  CAC 
where  C = ( I − 1 n 11 T ) , A = ( − 1 2 d i j 2 ) 1 ≤ i , j ≤ n ,  n  is the number of participants,
 I  is the  n  ×  n  identity matrix,
and  1  is a vector of  n  1s. Pre- and post-multiplying by
 C  has the effect of mean-centering the columns and rows of
 A . Let  X  be an  n  ×  m 
design matrix of predictor variables (including a column of all 1s for the intercept),
and let  H =
X ( X T X ) -1 X T 
be the associated  n  ×  n  “hat”
matrix.  McArdle and Anderson (2001)  propose to
assess the relationship between the predictor variables and the dissimilarities by means
of the “pseudo-F” statistic 
 
 (1) 
 
 F 
 = 
 
 
 tr 
 ( 
 H 
 G 
 ) 
 / 
 ( 
 m 
 − 
 1 
 ) 
 
 
 tr 
 [ 
 ( 
 I 
 − 
 H 
 ) 
 G 
 ] 
 / 
 ( 
 n 
 − 
 m 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
 As in a classical F-statistic, the numerator in  (1)  corresponds
to the amount of variation explained by the predictor variable(s) while the denominator
corresponds to the error or unexplained variance. Indeed, if  G  is
constructed from Euclidean distances among univariate outcomes, then  F 
in the above equation is the classical  F  statistic in standard
univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA). Thus the pseudo-F statistic is a generalization
of the classical F statistic that can be computed for any set of distances
 d ij  (not only Euclidean distances) and can thus serve as
a statistic for hypothesis testing based on between-point distances. The distances need
not be metric and can be a dissimilarity, which have non-metric properties ( Gower and Krzanowski, 1999 ;  McArdle and Anderson, 2001 ). 
 
 
 Modification to Allow Multiple Predictors 
 To incorporate multiple predictor as in standard multiple regression, we use a
more general pseudo-F statistic. Consider three “partial” design
matrices  X 0 =1 ,  X 1 , and
 X 2 , such that for  k  = 0, 1, 2,
 X k  is an  n  participant x
 m k  predictor variable matrix of rank
 m k  (<  n ). In general we are
interested in testing the null hypothesis associated with design matrix
( X 0  X 1 ) versus an alternative model with design
matrix  X =( X 0  X 1  X 2 );
for instance  X 1  comprises nuisance covariates whereas
 X 2  contains the predictor we wish to test. Let  H
=
X ( X T X ) -1 X T 
as above, and define  H 2  as  H  minus the hat matrix
arising from the null design matrix ( X 0  X 1 ). A
pseudo-F statistic extending  (1)  to this
more general setting is given by ( Reiss et al.,
2010 ) 
 
 (2) 
 
 F 
 = 
 
 
 tr 
 ( 
 
 H 
 2 
 
 G 
 ) 
 / 
 ( 
 
 m 
 2 
 
 ) 
 
 
 tr 
 [ 
 ( 
 I 
 − 
 H 
 ) 
 G 
 ] 
 / 
 ( 
 n 
 − 
 m 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Since the pseudo-F statistic has an unknown null distribution, significance is
assessed with a permutation test. We first orthogonalize  X 2  with
respect to ( X 0  X 1 ) to attain exchangeability under
the null hypothesis ( Potter, 2005 ), and then
proceed by permuting the rows within the columns of  X 2 ,
re-generating the hat matrices  H 2  and  H , and
re-computing the F-statistic  q  times. The  q 
permutations yield a simulated null distribution, and significance is declared if the
real-data pseudo-F statistic lies in the right tail of the distribution. 
 Expression  (2)  can be
interpreted as a test statistic that arises upon embedding the data into Euclidean space
(cf.  Trosset et al., 2008 ). Classical
multidimensional scaling theory ( Mardia et al.,
1979 , p. 397) implies that when  G  is non-negative definite, there
exist points  y 1 ,…, y n  in
p-dimensional Euclidean space (for some p≤n), the distances among which are
given by  D . If we then let
 F 1 ,…,F p  be F-statistics for testing the
effect of  X 2  on each component of the  y 's,
then the numerators of  F 1 ,…,F p  add up to
the numerator of (2), while the denominators sum to the denominator of (2). This implies
that (2) equals a weighted average of F-statistics for the separate
components—but with the advantage that (2) can be computed from the distances
alone, without actually performing the embedding into Euclidean space. 
 
 
 Modification to Improve Computational Efficiency 
 The above pseudo-F statistics ( Eqs
1 - 2 ) must be computed, both for
the real data and for  P  permuted data sets, separately for each of V
voxels. Here we present a rapid procedure for these computations. 
 Let  G v  be the above
matrix  G  for voxel  v , and
 H πi  be the
 i th of the  P  permuted versions for the hat matrix
 H . The  P  ×  V  matrix of
permuted-data versions of tr( HG ). 
 
 
 N 
 = 
 
 
 [ 
 tr 
 ( 
 
 H 
 
 π 
 i 
 
 
 
 G 
 v 
 
 ) 
 ] 
 
 
 i 
 = 
 1 
 , 
 … 
 , 
 P 
 ; 
 v 
 = 
 1 
 , 
 … 
 , 
 V 
 
 
 
 
 can also be obtained by a single matrix multiplication as 
 
 (3) 
 
 N 
 = 
 
 
 [ 
 
 
 
 vec 
 
 
 ( 
 
 H 
 
 π 
 1 
 
 
 ) 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 
 
 vec 
 
 
 ( 
 
 H 
 
 π 
 P 
 
 
 ) 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 ] 
 
 
 P 
 × 
 
 n 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 [ 
 vec 
 ( 
 
 G 
 1 
 
 ) 
 … 
 vec 
 ( 
 
 G 
 V 
 
 ) 
 ] 
 
 
 
 n 
 2 
 
 × 
 V 
 
 
 
 
 Similarly, the permuted versions of
tr[( I - H ) G ] can be computed
as: 
 
 (4) 
 
 D 
 = 
 
 
 [ 
 
 
 
 vec 
 
 
 ( 
 I 
 − 
 
 H 
 
 π 
 1 
 
 
 ) 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 … 
 
 
 
 
 vec 
 
 
 ( 
 I 
 − 
 
 H 
 
 π 
 P 
 
 
 ) 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 ] 
 
 
 p 
 × 
 
 n 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 [ 
 vec 
 ( 
 
 G 
 1 
 
 ) 
 … 
 vec 
 ( 
 
 G 
 V 
 
 ) 
 ] 
 
 
 
 n 
 2 
 
 × 
 V 
 
 
 
 
 Together these two results can be combined to yield pseudo-F statistics across
multiple permutations and voxels in a  P  ×  V 
matrix: 
 
 (5) 
 
 
 F 
 ∗ 
 
 = 
 
 
 N 
 / 
 ( 
 m 
 − 
 1 
 ) 
 
 
 D 
 / 
 ( 
 n 
 − 
 m 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evaluation and Application of MDMR as an Approach to CWAS 
 Our evaluation strategy for MDMR-based CWAS is summarized in  Figure 2 , and specific details are presented in combination with
results to facilitate ease of reading. In brief, the evaluation strategy aimed to:  Assess the robustness of MDMR-based CWAS by examining the false positive
rate and reproducibility of CWAS where we regressed on IQ, controlling for age, sex,
and mean FD. Determine effects of removing noise on CWAS including removal of mean
connectivity, global signal, and/or motion from analyses related to IQ or
development. Establish the utility of CWAS in guiding seed-based correlation analyses
by comparing the results from CWAS against a standard GLM at every connection. Demonstrate the applicability of CWAS across a range of predictor
variables. Specifically, we examined a continuous between-subject variable, age
(6.0-25.0 years old), while controlling for number of runs, sex, and mean FD; a
categorical between-subject variable, ADHD diagnostic status (ADHD versus control),
controlling for age, sex, scan instructions (eyes open or closed), and mean FD; and
a within-subject pharmacological manipulation (L-DOPA versus placebo), controlling
for mean FD. Resolve the optimal brain resolution(s) for CWAS. To this end, we applied
CWAS to a variety of brain parcellation resolutions for all four datasets (IQ,
Development, ADHD, and L-DOPA). For each dataset, we then examined and compared the
extent of significant results, reproducibility, and overlap with voxelwise
findings. 
 Supplementary analyses provide insights into the MDMR approach, including false
positive and negative rates using simulations and the potential impact of selecting
different distance measures. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Overview 
 In the following sections we apply MDMR, using the distance  ( 2 ∗ ( 1 − r ) )  between participants' functional connectivity maps,
to relate functional connectivity to full-scale IQ. We chose IQ as it is a
well-established cognitive phenotype with high inter-rater and test-retest reliability, as
well as substantial neuropsychological and neuroimaging literatures documenting its neural
correlates ( Deary et al., 2010 ;  Jung and Haier, 2007 ). We examine the impact of certain
pre-processing decisions (i.e., standardization approaches, parcellation strategies), and
contrast findings from MDMR with those obtained from seed-based correlation analyses.
Following this initial demonstration of the utility of MDMR for CWAS, we present several
additional applications of the approach. In  Supplementary Materials , we measure the
variation and consistency in the distance matrices for the Pearson measure, compare
alternative distance measures, and evaluate the power of the MDMR approach using
simulations. 
 We took advantage of the presence of two R-fMRI scans in each
participant's session to provide initial insights into the reproducibility of our
IQ findings. However, we note that these are likely underestimates of reproducibility, as
scans 1 and 2 systematically differ – both with respect to when they occur in the
imaging session (thus allowing for variability related to scanner fatigue/arousal) and the
specific imaging protocols (e.g., sampling rate, spatial resolution). 
 
 
 Connectome-Wide Associations for IQ 
 For our initial survey of CWAS, we identified brain voxels whose
inter-individual variation in whole-brain connectivity was related to inter-individual
variation in IQ. Overall, we found a large number of significant associations with IQ in
Scan 1 (proportion of voxels found significant: 16%;  Fig. 3a ) and Scan 2 (13%;  Fig. 3b ).
Highly similar findings were obtained using permutation-based cluster correction for
multiple comparisons (see  Supplementary
Fig. 2 ). We also performed a “meta-permutation test” by repeating
the entire MDMR permutation test procedure for each of 15000 permuted data sets. As shown
in  Supplementary Figure 3 , a
greater proportion of significant voxels was obtained on only ∼1% of
permuted instances (0.38% Scan 1; 1.02% Scan 2). 
 We categorized the regions identified across the two scans according to the 7
networks presented by  Yeo et al. (2011)  and others
( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ) ( Fig. 4 ).
IQ was significantly associated with variation in whole-brain functional connectivity
patterns in fronto-parietal areas (caudal middle frontal and pre-central cortex, frontal
operculum/anterior insula; proportion of significant voxels in this network: 8% in
Scan 1 and 8% in Scan 2), somatomotor areas (supplementary motor area (SMA),
pre-SMA and paracentral cortex; 5% Scan 1 and 22% in Scan 2), ventral
attentional network (pre-SMA and caudal anterior cingulate; 18% in Scan 1 and
17% in Scan 2), and visual network areas (lingual and pericalcarine; 34%
in Scan 1 and 14% in Scan 2) and default network areas (lateral orbitofrontal,
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, and posterior cingulate; 28% in Scan 1
and 25% in Scan 2) (see  Fig. 5 ). Overlap
between thresholded CWAS maps across Scans 1 and 2 was fair (Dice coefficient =
0.27) but highly significant (p < 0.001, based on a permutation test with 500
permutations), as was the similarity between unthresholded maps (Spearman correlation
= 0.25; p < 0.005). Consistent relationships were observed for dorso- and
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), dorsal anterior cingulate (ACC) and SMA/pre-SMA,
posterior cingulate and lingual gyrus, all regions that converge strongly with predictions
based on the fronto-parietal integration theory of intelligence ( Jung and Haier, 2007 ). 
 To further examine the reproducibility of MDMR, we conducted a bootstrap
analysis applying MDMR to different subsets of participants using 500 subsamples in total
( Figure 5 ). Overlap between pairs of thresholded
bootstrap subsamples (p < 0.05, uncorrected) was high (mean Dice coefficient
= 0.69±0.06) as was the similarity between pairs of unthresholded
subsamples (mean Spearman rho = 0.84±0.05). When examining four random
subsamples ( Figure 5b ), it's interesting to
note the consistency of the same core regions from our main analysis (e.g., anterior
cingulate and medial visual cortex) with variability between subsamples occurring around
these areas. 
 
 
 Comparison of MDMR Findings with Neurosynth Meta-Analysis Findings 
 To help validate our claim that MDMR applied to resting state data revealed key
brain regions underlying inter-individual variation in IQ, we compared the regions we
identified with a meta-analytic summary of the neuroimaging literature. The meta-analysis
was performed with Neurosynth ( Yarkoni et al.,
2011 ), using search terms highly related to or composing IQ:
“intelligence”, “reasoning”, or “WM”
( Deary et al., 2010 ;  Duncan et al., 2000 ,  1995 ;
 Kane and Engle, 2002 ). Search results included
studies with a variety of modalities such as task-based fMRI and structural MRI as well as
clinical and/or healthy populations. As depicted in  Figure
6 , our MDMR findings and the Neurosynth meta-analytic results overlapped in key
regions highlighted in the literature (Dice coefficient Scan 1 = 0.16 and Scan 2
= 0.17). Areas of overlap included or were proximal to those exhibiting the
strongest overlap between scans: dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC, frontal operculum
(including anterior insula), ACC, and adjacent SMA and pre-SMA, all areas commonly
implicated in executive control ( Dosenbach et al.,
2008 ;  Nee et al., 2007 ;  Owen et al., 2005 ;  Simmonds et
al., 2008 ). Although the Neurosynth meta-analysis found more voxels in parietal
areas than MDMR, MDMR revealed IQ-related associations in the default network that were
not obtained with Neurosynth. Several potential factors could account for differences
between text-based meta-analysis and our CWAS analysis. Disparities may reflect noise in
Neurosynth study selection (i.e., not all studies using the term
‘intelligence’ were about IQ), variability introduced by the array of
imaging modalities and cognitive probes included in Neurosynth, or fundamental differences
between regional connectivity (CWAS-MDMR) and regional activation (Neurosynth) with
respect to their relations to behavior. In addition, disparities may reflect the need for
a larger sample size for CWAS. 
 
 
 Effects of Removing Noise (Mean Connectivity, Global Signal Regression and
Motion) 
 Although global signal regression has been criticized for potentially
introducing artifactual results under some circumstances ( Gotts et al., 2013 ;  Murphy et al., 2009 ;
 Saad et al., 2013 ), standardization of this kind
has been shown to provide a simple and effective means of reducing unwanted additive
effects including head motion ( Saad et al., 2013 ;
 Yan et al., 2013a ,  2013b ). Accordingly, we examined the impact of removing global
signal (i.e., average time-series across all voxels in the brain) at the subject level
( Fig. 7a ), as well as mean connectivity across the
whole brain (i.e., the average correlation across all possible connections in the brain)
at the group level when examining connectivity-IQ associations ( Fig. 7b ; see  Supplementary Fig. 4  for associations related to mean connectivity). While the
percent of significant MDMR findings decreased overall (3 and 10% fewer
significant voxels for global signal regression and 9 and 10% fewer significant
voxels for mean connectivity covariate, for Scans 1 and 2, respectively), the patterns
obtained with both correction strategies strongly resembled those observed in our original
IQ findings (Spearman correlation of 0.79 and 0.71 for global signal regression and 0.92
and 0.85 for mean connectivity covariate for Scans 1 and 2, respectively). As potential
noise correction approaches, we might expect an increase in the reproducibility of IQ
findings between scans. However, we did not observe substantial improvements in the
similarity of results between our two scans when using either global signal or mean
connectivity correction (no correction: Spearman correlation = 0.25, global
signal: 0.21, and mean connectivity: 0.22). 
 We evaluated the effects of age – a variable that is more robustly
correlated with mean functional connectivity– with MDMR using a developmental
dataset ( Supplementary Fig. 5 ;
 Power et al., 2012 ). The pattern of findings here
was consistent with our IQ analyses: findings for the CompCor analysis path were highly
similar to those for global signal regression (Spearman correlation = 0.71) and
analysis with mean connectivity covariate (Spearman correlation = 0.85). Relative
to IQ findings, we found a greater reduction in the percent of significant associations
with age when accounting for global signal (at the subject level; from 45% to
25%) and when accounting for mean connectivity (group level; to 28%). This
more substantial reduction in age effects may reflect a greater relationship between age
and the global signal as well as age and mean connectivity, both of which are influenced
by motion among other factors. In sum, different standardization approaches did not
drastically alter the pattern of findings, although global signal regression and mean
connectivity did appear to reduce spatial extent of associations. Our supplementary
analyses demonstrate the utility of the MDMR-based CWAS framework in accounting for
variance related to motion in developmental datasets, where hyperkinetic tendencies can
induce artifacts (see  Supplementary Fig.
6  and related  supplementary
discussion ). 
 
 
 Comparison of MDMR and GLM Seed-based Connectivity Analyses 
 Next we compared MDMR results to a more standard general linear model (GLM)
relating IQ to each connection between voxels. As in our CWAS analysis, we controlled for
age, sex, and mean FD. To facilitate comparison with our CWAS maps, we summarized the GLM
results at by the percent of each voxel's connections that were significantly (at
 p <  0.05, uncorrected) related to IQ. We found a strong
positive correlation between the number of connections significantly related with IQ, per
GLM, and the log p-value of the relationship between the same voxel and IQ, per MDMR
(Spearman correlation = 0.47 [Scan 1] and 0.50 [Scan
2],  ps  < 0.001;  Fig.
8a ). In addition, we detected fair overlap between the voxels ranking among the
top 5%, 10% and 15% in terms of their significance in the CWAS,
and those ranking in the same percentiles based on the number of significant individual
connections revealed by GLM (Dice coefficient: 018, 0.28, and 0.36 for Scan 1 and 0.21,
0.29, and 0.35 for Scan 2, respectively;  Fig. 8b ).
This overlap increased when mean connectivity was included as a group-level covariate
(Dice coefficient: 0.38, 0.47, and 0.52 for Scan 1 and 0.30, 0.40, and 0.46 for Scan 2,
respectively), primarily due to changes in the GLM findings. Adding mean connectivity as a
covariate had minimal effects on the rank ordering of voxelwise results for MDMR (Spearman
correlation = 0.92 [Scan 1] and 0.85 [Scan 2]) but
led to a considerable change for the GLM analyses (Spearman correlation = 0.40
[Scan 1] and 0.27 [Scan 2]). 
 
 
 MDMR as a Guide for Seed-based Correlation Analyses 
 Given the relationship between MDMR and voxelwise seed-based correlation
analysis (SCA), we wished to test more explicitly whether results from MDMR could be used
to guide follow-up seed-based connectivity-phenotype analyses ( Fig. 9 ). In particular, since MDMR-based CWAS indicates only the
presence of an association between a phenotypic variable and connectivity patterns,
follow-up analyses like SCA are needed to understand the nature of the effect (i.e.,
direction and specific connections involved). We calculated the percent of significant
( p  < 0.05) seed-based connectivity-IQ associations for each of
a set of regions of interest (ROIs). To start, we selected 100 ROIs from Scan 1 that
covered the full range of MDMR values allowing for broad examination of the MDMR-SCA
relationship. Specifically, ROIs represented four groups of voxels: global maxima
(maximally significant voxels with  p  < 0.05), significant (random
voxels with  p < 0.05 ), non-significant (random voxels with
 p  > 0.05), and global minima (maximally non-significant voxels
with  p  > 0.05). We imposed a minimum distance within ROI groups
(20mm) and between ROI groups (10mm) to ensure that regions were well distributed across
the brain. As expected, we found that ROIs based on global maxima and significant MDMR
values in  Scan 1  had significantly more connections showing significant
associations with IQ in the massive SCA for  Scan 1  (maxima:
23.7%; significant: 14.6%; non-significant 8.3%; minima:
3.4% of seed-based connections; maxima > non-significant: t (37) 
= 5.9,  p  < 0.001; maxima > minima:
t (26)  = 8.7,  p  < 0.001; significant
> non-significant: t (43)  = 3.0,  p  <
0.01; significant > minima: t (28)  = 6.3  p 
< 0.001). A similar pattern of results was noted for the MDMR maxima in
 Scan 2  and massive SCA in  Scan 2  (maxima:
24.4%; significant: 20.8%; nonsignificant 17.1%; minima
4.3%; maxima > non-significant: t (40)  = 2.2,
 p  < 0.05; maxima > minima: t (30)  =
6.8,  p  < 0.001; significant > non-significant:
t (45)  = 1.3,  p  = 0.2; significant >
minima: t (33)  = 6.7  p  < 0.001). 
 Next, we carried out a more stringent test of the utility of MDMR in guiding SCA
analyses, by using the MDMR ROIs in Scan 1 to guide SCA in Scan 2, and vice-versa ( Fig. 9 ). In both instances, we found that the ROIs based
upon maxima and significant voxels in one scan had a higher number of connections showing
significant associations with IQ in the massive SCA in the other scan relative to
non-significant and minima voxels (Scan 1 to guide Scan 2 - maxima: 13.3%;
significant: 14.9%; non-significant 9.4%; minima 10.7%. Scan 2 to
guide Scan 1 -maxima: 12.9%; significant: 12.0%; non-significant
10.9%; minima 8.0%). However, differences were significant only for maxima
and significant voxels relative to non-significant voxels for Scan 1 guiding Scan 2
(maxima > non-significant: t (48)  = 2.0,  p 
< 0.05; significant > non-significant: t (42)  = 2.3,
 p  < 0.05) and maxima and significant voxels relative to minima
voxels for Scan 2 guiding Scan 1 (maxima > minima: t (39)  = 2.0,
 p  < 0.05; significant > minima: t (47) 
= 2.1,  p  < 0.05). Differences between ROI groups were
notably reduced relative to MDMR-SCA associations within a single scan. These reductions
in the magnitude of differences among seed types are not necessarily surprising. As
mentioned earlier, there is likely systematic variation related to factors such as the
scans being separated in time (in a fixed order) or different imaging protocols (e.g.,
sampling rate, spatial resolution). Additionally, these differences highlight the need for
larger-scale datasets when attempting to carry out replication and follow-up analyses for
discovery science; prior work has suggested several hundred participants as preferable for
functional connectivity and phenotype associations ( Biswal
et al., 2010 ;  Kelly et al., 2012 ). 
 
 
 Applicability of CWAS 
 We assessed the extensibility of MDMR-based CWAS to a broader range of
experimental designs and phenotypic variables. Specifically, we examined a between-subject
(continuous) variable, age (6-25 years old), a between-subject (categorical) variable,
childhood ADHD diagnostic status; and a within-subject variable, pharmacological
manipulation (L-DOPA versus placebo). Each of the analyses revealed a unique pattern of
associations (see  Figure 10  for cluster-correction
based on Gaussian random-field and  Supplementary Figure 2  for cluster-correction based on permutations). Some
notable findings are as follows. First, for development, nearly 60% of the
significant associations observed were in the visual, somatomotor, and ventral attention
networks – paralleling results from a support vector machine (SVM) analysis of
developmental changes in functional connectivity (Dosenbach et al., 2010). Second, for
childhood ADHD, we observed significant associations within the superior parietal cortex
– a region involved in goal-directed orienting of attention, highlighted in
meta-analyses of task-based and structural imaging studies (Kelly et al., 2007; Valera et
al., 2007). Third, the CWAS related to L-DOPA administration was consistent with the
results of the published seed-based functional connectivity analysis ( Kelly et al., 2009 ). As in that study, associations were observed
for voxels in visual areas (BA 17-19), the default network (dorsal medial PFC and
posterior cingulate), brainstem, and the anterior cerebellum and cerebellar vermis. The
distinctiveness of these patterns of findings was attested to by our observation that, for
almost all pairs of phenotypes, the similarity of MDMR findings (Spearman correlation)
approached zero (ADHD-Development = 0.01, ADHD-LDOPA = -0.02,
Development-LDOPA = 0.02). 
 As expected based upon the literature, age effects were relatively large,
whereas findings associated with ADHD were more modest. The extensive findings for the
L-DOPA administration is striking given the sample size of 20, but likely ascribable to
the within-subject design, which yields greater statistical power. 
 
 
 Resolution Considerations 
 Voxel-wise analyses entail significant redundancies of information (especially
after spatial smoothing), and can have high computational complexity. To examine the
effects of data reduction, we parcellated the brain using a variety of resolutions (i.e.,
25, 50, 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600, 3200, or 6400 units) based on spatially-constrained
spectral clustering ( Craddock et al., 2012 ), and
repeated our MDMR analyses at each resolution but transformed each parcellation result to
voxelwise space for comparisons. We found high concordance across the various
parcellations, regardless of resolution (see  Fig. 11 
and  Supplementary Fig. 6 ). To
provide insight into potential differences, we calculated the following metrics across the
various resolutions: 1) number of voxels with significant associations (local maxima: 100,
800, and voxelwise), 2) reproducibility across scans (local maxima: 200, 800 and
voxelwise), and 3) overlap with voxelwise results (local maxima: 800 and 1600). Noting
that 800 parcels emerged as a local maximum for all three metrics, we examined the effect
of using this parcellation set on the Development, ADHD, and L-DOPA MDMR results ( Fig. 12 ). We found substantial overlap between the 800
parcellations and voxelwise MDMR results for each dataset (percent of voxelwise results
observed in 800 parcellation results; ADHD: 19%, Development: 64%, IQ
[Scan 1]: 66%, and L-DOPA: 67%). 
 
 
 Computational Complexity 
 To assess feasibility for large-scale applications, we summarize the
computational complexity of each of the key steps of the framework as a function of U
(number of brain units), N (subjects), T (time points), and P (permutations) (see  Supplementary Fig. 8 ). (1) Computing
full-brain connectivity is O (U 2 TN). In practice, this may be the most
time-consuming step, as U can be much larger than N (e.g., in voxelwise analyses). (2)
Obtaining the distance matrix is O(U 2 N 2 ). (3) The MDMR step is
O(PN 2  U) if P>N and O(UN 3 ) if P<N. The overall
computational complexity is comparable to other kernel-based approaches in the imaging
literature, such as SVMs. Parallelization can be used to reduce the computation time. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The present work provides a framework for data-driven connectome-wide examination
of the neural correlates of phenotypic variation. The MDMR-based approach is representative
of a larger analytic shift in neuroimaging, from examining individual connections to
patterns of whole-brain connectivity, which rely minimally on  a priori 
assumptions and is relatively robust to common analytic decisions (e.g., brain parcellation
approach, smoothing, and global signal regression). Initial application of the analytic
framework to connectivity-IQ relationships provided compelling support for the
reproducibility and validity of the findings obtained with MDMR. Specifically, the findings
showed impressive reproducibility across first and second within-session scans, and
substantial correspondence with a priori predictions based upon the neuropsychological and
task-based neuroimaging literatures. Correspondence between MDMR-based findings and those
obtained through mass-univariate testing or SCA suggest the utility of the approach in
informing the selection of candidate brain regions for more detailed follow-up analyses.
Finally, our applications of the MDMR-based approach to a broader range of phenotypes and
experimental designs (e.g., within-subject, dimensional, categorical) demonstrate its
extensibility. 
 
 Mining Neuroscience Data 
 We believe the following aspects of the MDMR framework make it well suited to
exploratory analyses:  Computationally practical.  Typically, only a few hours are
required for one CWAS (e.g., 3 hours for the IQ dataset (N = 104) using 12
2.21-GHz AMD Opteron processors and 24 GB of RAM) when carried out at the voxel
level and less than an hour at the parcellation level. In years to come, as the
availability of data stores through initiatives such as the International
Neuroimaging Data-Sharing Initiative ( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org ), the Human Connectome Project
( http://humanconnectome.org ) and U.K. Biobank help to bring sample
sizes towards the 10,000 mark, emerging technologies for data-intensive computing
(e.g., GPUs) will help to maintain the practicality of MDMR and similar
approaches. Extensible.  The MDMR framework offers advantages of
non-parametric tests and can be applied to any brain-based measure, whether
functional or structural. In addition, akin to GLM any variable of interest can be
examined, regardless of experimental design (e.g., between- or within-subject
design), and interpreted in a regression-like context.( Zapala and Schork, 2012 ,  2006 ). Minimal decision-making or a-priori assumptions.  No arbitrary
thresholding of functional connectivity or selection of ROIs is required, and
findings do not appear to be highly dependent on regional definition methods or
spatial resolutions. Selection of a distance measure is necessary and is typically
done a-priori. In preliminary comparisons of seven distance measures, we found that
all had a similar number and pattern of MDMR results (mean Dice index =
0.63;  Supplementary Tables
1-2 ), in line with prior simulations ( Zapala and Schork, 2006 ). Larger differences were, however, found with the
Euclidean and Mahalanobois distances ( Supplementary Fig. 10 ). Further work will
be needed to determine ideal distance measures for functional connectivity maps with
an understanding that this may vary depending on the question of interest. 
 
 
 Comparisons to Other Techniques 
 The MDMR-based framework is one of a number of recent approaches to exploratory
analysis (similar to a searchlight approach) for the detection of phenotypic associations
in human connectomics. Faced with the challenge of exploring a high number of independent
variables (P) using a limited number of samples (N; P >> N), an array of
exploratory analysis approaches have emerged. This includes classification and graph
theoretical techniques. 
 Within neuroimaging, multivariate techniques are most commonly applied in the
context of predictive modeling, whereas MDMR is used to query the presence of an
association. Regions found significant with MDMR are not necessarily predictive for
classifying novel participants. Instead of being optimized for prediction accuracy, MDMR
tests the significance of specific candidate covariates (e.g., IQ) that can be readily
applied to exploratory analyses as in the present work. Future research may use
classification techniques within our CWAS framework (instead of MDMR) to identify voxels
whose whole-brain connectivity patterns are  predicted  by a phenotypic
variable. In cases where the computational demands are too high for such voxelwise
classification, our work would suggests lower-dimensional (i.e., ∼800)
parcellation units can be used. 
 Beyond classification techniques, graph theoretical measures that measure
invariant graph properties (e.g., network centrality) have become increasingly popular in
connectome-wide explorations ( Craddock et al.,
2013 ). Such graph properties can help characterize aspects of connectivity patterns
(e.g., density and sparsity) in a connectivity pattern that might be relevant for a
phenotypic variable. These metrics are often graph invariants and index properties of a
graph that are not specific to any one graph (e.g., the same node in two different graphs
can have identical degree centrality). In this regard, MDMR-based CWAS differs, as it
directly measures variation between the graphs and thus may complement graph invariant
measures for more detailed understanding of phenotypic variation in the connectome. 
 
 
 IQ-Related Variation in Frontal Cortex 
 When we examined MDMR results for IQ with respect to brain resolution, we only
found significant relationships between connectivity patterns in prefrontal areas and IQ
when using coarser brain resolutions. Similar prefrontal regions were also observed in the
Neurosynth meta-analysis. One possibility is that due to anatomical variability between
subjects, larger parcellation units may help reduce such variability and recover
underlying differences in connectivity patterns related to IQ. Complementing these
findings, supplementary analyses examining alternative distance measures found greater
sensitivity to prefrontal relationships when Euclidean or Mahalanabis distance were used
in place of the Pearson distance. Both these measures consider mean and variance
differences in connectivity, which could both be more relevant in IQ related variation for
prefrontal connectivity ( Cole et al., 2013 ,  2012 ). 
 
 
 Considerations for MDMR-Guided Seed-Based Correlation Analysis 
 Seed-based correlation analysis is perhaps the most popular approach to
R-fMRI-based functional connectivity analyses. Despite the simplicity of its
implementation and interpretation, this approach faces key challenges—in
particular, optimally selecting and specifying regions of interest for seeding.
Researchers often rely on findings from a broad array of imaging modalities and
neuropsychological studies to identify targets, and often use structural atlases of
varying resolution to define seed regions. These strategies may miss potentially valuable
seed regions due to a lack of prior work to motivate them. 
 We have shown a significant relationship between the MDMR-based log
 p -value observed for a region, and the number of connections exhibiting
significant phenotypic associations in SCA ( Figs.
8 - 9 ). As such, MDMR has the potential to
inform and guide SCA by identifying appropriate seed regions. Ideally, MDMR will be
performed on one dataset and the regions identified used as seeds in an independent
dataset. However, the field is still amassing the necessary datasets to carry out such
independent analyses with sufficient power. In the interim, SCA findings obtained in the
same dataset used for MDMR should not be interpreted as independent verification ( Kriegeskorte et al., 2009 ), but instead as a type of
post-hoc test. Post-hoc explorations are essential to understanding the direction and
specific sets of connections driving MDMR findings and valuable in generating hypotheses
for replication in future work. We also note that the MDMR log  p -value is
not perfectly correlated with the number of connections exhibiting significant
associations in SCA. 
 
 
 Future Areas for Refinement and Optimization 
 The MDMR-based CWAS framework can be applied widely depending on the question or
neural measure of interest. Here, we focused on correlation-based patterns of functional
connectivity revealed by resting-state fMRI in relation to single phenotypic measures, but
future work should assess the further extensibility of the approach. First, different
functional connectivity metrics can be used, possibly with the aim of refining the
connectivity patterns (e.g., partial correlation or inverse covariance matrix) or
including directional information (e.g., Patel's tau ( Patel et al., 2006 ) and LiNGAM ( Hyvarinen and Smith, 2013 )). Second, the approach can be extended beyond
functional connectivity. For instance, to better understand the structural connectome, we
can examine the relation between a phenotypic variable and patterns of structural
connectivity using tractography derived from diffusion-based connectivity ( Daducci et al., 2012 ). Finally, while the present work focuses on
MDMR, it is important to note that alternative approaches to hypothesis testing based on
distances among observations have been proposed in a number of disciplines, notably
ecology and genetics ( Gower and Krzanowski, 1999 ;
 Minas and Montana, 2012 ;  Rizzo and Székely, 2010 ;  Trosset et al., 2008 ;  Zakharov et al.,
2013 ). Additionally, recent work in the machine learning literature has proposed
hypothesis tests based on kernels, which can be regarded as similarities ( Gretton et al., 2008 ;  Harchaoui
et al., 2013 ). Typically, these alternative approaches do not allow the
possibility of modeling covariates and focus on modeling a single regressor, in contrast
to MDMR. 
 
 
 Limitations 
 Several limitations should be considered. First, examining whole-brain
connectivity as we have done here may decrease sensitivity to highly localized sets of
connections that relate to a phenotype. This issue can be addressed by limiting patterns
of connectivity to specific anatomical regions or networks, rather than considering the
full brain. Second, we examined IQ effects on two different resting-state scans, which
differed on a number of factors, including a fixed scan order, as well as different
imaging protocols (i.e., sampling rate and spatial resolution). Since our focus here was
to illustrate the utility of MDMR for CWAS, our results were not intended to provide a
definitive characterization of any of the phenotypes we examined. Ultimately, this method
should be applied to larger and more diverse samples with follow-up analyses using
independent samples and possibly identical scan parameters (e.g., via the Human Connectome
Project) that will permit more detailed phenotypic characterization (e.g., separation of
subtypes in ADHD) ( Fair et al., 2013 ) and
exploration of the individual connections driving connectivity-phenotype relationships.
Consequently, future investigations would be well served by applying CWAS to emerging
freely available large connectivity-phenotype datasets (e.g.,  http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org ,  http://openfmri.org ). 
 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 We have demonstrated the feasibility of conducting connectome-wide association
studies using MDMR. One CWAS captures a rich set of connectivity-phenotype relationships
that would have required several traditional functional connectivity studies and can guide
subsequent seed-based correlation analyses for more detailed analyses. Given our limited
knowledge of how phenotypic variation relates to inter- and intra-individual differences in
connectivity, data-driven approaches such as MDMR will be crucial for generating new
testable hypotheses that can facilitate our understanding of brain-behavior
relationships. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supplementary Methods 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Tables 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Figures 
 
 Supplementary Figure 1.  Power Estimation for MDMR-Based CWAS in
the Study Sample. 
 Based upon simulation data, we calculate the true positive rate (i.e.,
proportion of significant voxels) as a function of the Cohen's
 d  effect size (for group difference) and percentage of connections
exhibiting a group difference (0, 10, 25, 50, 100%). The dotted black line
indicates the proportion of individual connections associated with group when using
univariate  t -tests. 
 Supplementary Figure 2.  Summarizing Inter-Individual Differences
in Whole-Brain Connectivity 
 (a)  At each voxel, the mean-adjusted variability (coefficient of
variation [CV]) was computed for the distances between all possible
pairs of participant connectivity maps. This measure of inter-individual differences in
connectivity patterns was standardized (Z-Score) and displayed for Scans 1 and 2 where
values in orange-red reflect greater variation and green-purple reflect lower variation
in between participant connectivity patterns.  (b)  The reproducibility of
inter-individual differences is displayed at each voxel as the consistency
(Kendall's W) between the distances across participant connectivity maps for
Scan 1 and Scan 2.  (c)  Scatter-plots comparing voxelwise values for
consistency and coefficient of variation per scan. All inflated brains are rendered with
the fsaverage (MNI305) standard brain using pysurfer. 
 Supplementary Figure 3.  CWASusing Permutation-Based Cluster
Correction 
 Significant connectome-wide associations for ADHD diagnosis (children with
ADHD vs. typically developing controls), development (age), intelligence (scan 1),
intelligence (scan 2), and L-DOPA administration (placebo vs. L-DOPA) are shown with
 p < 0.05 (permutation-based cluster-correction). These results
are similar to those in  Fig 3a  and  Fig 12a , which used GRF for cluster-correction. 
 Supplementary Figure 4.  Comparison of MDMR Findings to
Permutation-based Null Distribution 
 A null distribution with the number of permutations (total 15,000) on the
y-axis with the associated percent of significant ( p  < 0.05,
uncorrected) connectome-wide associations for IQ on the x-axis is shown for Scans 1 and
2. The dotted vertical line indicates the percent of significant associations from the
real (non-permuted) data. 
 Supplementary Figure 5.  Connectome-Wide Associations for Mean
Connectivity 
 Significant connectome-wide associations for mean global connectivity (i.e.,
mean across all possible voxelwise functional connections) are shown with
 p < 0.05 (GRFcluster-corrected) for resting-state Scans 1 and
2. 
 Supplementary Figure 6.  Effects of removing mean and global
connectivity as well as motion 
 Significant connectome-wide associations related to development (age) are
shown for different nuisance removal strategies. On the y-axis, MDMR results are
displayed for the original analysis using CompCor (top), adding the mean connectivity at
the group-level (middle), and removing the global signal at the individual level
(bottom). On the x-axix, MDMR results are given for a model with age (left) and one with
age that includes motion or mean FD as a covariate (right). The percentages shown
indicate the percent of significant associations for that particular analysis. Surface
results for the left hemisphere are only displayed. 
 Supplementary Figure 7.  Connectome-Wide Associations for
Motion 
 Significant connectome-wide associations related to motion in the development
dataset are shown across the three nuisance removal strategies. Results are displayed
for the original analysis using CompCor (top), adding the mean connectivity at the
group-level (middle), and removing the global signal at the individual level (bottom).
Percentages indicate the percent of significant associations for that particular
analysis. Surface results for the left hemisphere are only displayed. 
 Supplementary Figure 8.  Optimal Brain Resolution for CWAS 
 Significant connectome-wide associations for intelligence were conducted for
several resolutions, including 25, 50, 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600, 3200, and 6400 units as
well as the original voxelwise analyses with 15,615 units or voxels (x-axis).
 (a)  Percent of significant associations with IQ was then calculated for
each resolution (y-axis) and averaged across the two resting-state scans.
 (b)  The overlap (dice coefficient) of significant associations between
the two resting-state scans is shown (y-axis).  (c)  Finally, the percent of
significant associations that overlap (dice) with the voxelwise results is shown for
each parcellation and represents the average across the two resting-state scans. 
 Supplementary Figure 9.  Theoretical Timing of the CWAS
Approach 
 Expected computational time is shown when running (a) all the steps, (b) the
initial connectivity computation, (c) the distance matrices, and (d) MDMR, while varying
the number of voxels (x-axis) and number of subjects (y-axis). 
 Supplementary Figure 10.  Comparison of Distance Measures 
 Significant connectome-wide associations related to IQ(p < 0.05,
cluster-corrected) using 800 parcellation units are shown for seven distance measures
from top to bottom: Pearson (Pear), Spearman (Spear), Kendall (Kend), Lin's
Concordance (Conc), Euclidean (Eucl), and Chebyshev(Cheb). 
 Supplementary Figure 11.  Empirical Timing of MDMR and Related
Approaches 
 Computational time is shown for five approaches: degree centrality, GLM, MDMR,
SVM with a linear kernel, and K-Means clustering (x-axis). For each approach, we
calculated the average time across 100 iterations in milliseconds (y-axis) taken to
measure the association between 10 connectivity maps (800 brain units) and a simulated
dichotomous group variable (N = 100). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The authors wish to thank Camille Chabernaud, Chao-Gan Yan, Christine Cox, Damien Fair,
Daniel Lurie, Gregory McCarthy, Jonathan Adelstein, Maarten Mennes, Xi-Nian Zuo, and Zhen
Yang for helpful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript, and Simon Zorin for
assisting in analyses. 
 Funding:  This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of
Mental Health (BRAINS R01MH094639 to M.P.M.; R03MH096321 to M.P.M), National Institute of
Health (R01MH095836-01A1 to P.T.R.), the Stavros Niarchos Foundation (M. P. M), the Child
Mind Institute (1FDN2012-1 to M. P. M.), the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation
(R.C.C.), the Leon Levy Foundation (C.K.), a gift from Joseph P. Healey to the Child Mind
Institute (M.P.M.), and endowment provided by Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen (F. X.
C.). 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has
been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early
version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the
content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Akil 
 H 
 
 
 Martone 
 ME 
 
 
 Essen 
 DCV 
 
 
 2011 
 Challenges and Opportunities in Mining Neuroscience Data 
 Science 
 331 
 708 
 712 
 21311009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MJ 
 
 
 2001 
 A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of
variance 
 Austral Ecol 
 26 
 32 
 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andersson 
 JLR 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2007 
 Non-Linear Registration, aka Spatial Normalisation (No TR07JA2), FMRIB Technical
Report 
 FMRIB Centre 
 Oxford, UK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Reidler 
 JS 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Poulin 
 R 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2010 
 Functional-Anatomic Fractionation of the Brain's Default
Network 
 Neuron 
 65 
 550 
 562 
 20188659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2012 
 Modelling with independent components 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 891 
 901 
 22369997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behzadi 
 Y 
 
 
 Restom 
 K 
 
 
 Liau 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 2007 
 A component based noise correction method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion
based fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 37 
 90 
 101 
 17560126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Rosa-Neto 
 P 
 
 
 Lyttelton 
 OC 
 
 
 Benali 
 H 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 2010 
 Multi-level bootstrap analysis of stable clusters in resting-state
fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 51 
 1126 
 1139 
 20226257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benjamini 
 Y 
 
 
 Hochberg 
 Y 
 
 
 1995 
 Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to
Multiple Testing 
 J R Stat Soc Ser B Methodol 
 57 
 289 
 300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Gohel 
 S 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Adelstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 S 
 
 
 Dogonowski 
 AM 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Fair 
 D 
 
 
 Hampson 
 M 
 
 
 Hoptman 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 Kiviniemi 
 VJ 
 
 
 Kötter 
 R 
 
 
 Li 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lin 
 CP 
 
 
 Lowe 
 MJ 
 
 
 Mackay 
 C 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Madsen 
 KH 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 McMahon 
 K 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 Nagel 
 BJ 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Peltier 
 SJ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Riedl 
 V 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Rypma 
 B 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 S 
 
 
 Seidler 
 RD 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Sorg 
 C 
 
 
 Teng 
 GJ 
 
 
 Veijola 
 J 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Walter 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Weng 
 XC 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Williamson 
 P 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 Zang 
 YF 
 
 
 Zhang 
 HY 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2010 
 Toward discovery science of human brain function 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 107 
 4734 
 4739 
 20176931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 A 
 
 
 Diaz 
 JC 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 2011 
 The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 106 
 2322 
 2345 
 21795627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Talukdar 
 T 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 2009 
 Cortical Hubs Revealed by Intrinsic Functional Connectivity: Mapping,
Assessment of Stability, and Relation to Alzheimer's Disease 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 1860 
 1873 
 19211893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 2009 
 Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and
functional systems 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 10 
 186 
 198 
 19190637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 2011 
 Brain Graphs: Graphical Models of the Human Brain
Connectome 
 Annu Rev Clin Psychol 
 7 
 113 
 140 
 21128784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burton 
 PR 
 
 
 Clayton 
 DG 
 
 
 Cardon 
 LR 
 
 
 Craddock 
 N 
 
 
 Deloukas 
 P 
 
 
 Duncanson 
 A 
 
 
 Kwiatkowski 
 DP 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 MI 
 
 
 Ouwehand 
 WH 
 
 
 Samani 
 NJ 
 
 
 Todd 
 JA 
 
 
 Donnelly 
 P 
 
 
 Barrett 
 JC 
 
 
 Davison 
 D 
 
 
 Easton 
 D 
 
 
 Evans 
 D 
 
 
 Leung 
 HT 
 
 
 Marchini 
 JL 
 
 
 Morris 
 AP 
 
 
 Spencer 
 CCA 
 
 
 Tobin 
 MD 
 
 
 Attwood 
 AP 
 
 
 Boorman 
 JP 
 
 
 Cant 
 B 
 
 
 Everson 
 U 
 
 
 Hussey 
 JM 
 
 
 Jolley 
 JD 
 
 
 Knight 
 AS 
 
 
 Koch 
 K 
 
 
 Meech 
 E 
 
 
 Nutland 
 S 
 
 
 Prowse 
 CV 
 
 
 Stevens 
 HE 
 
 
 Taylor 
 NC 
 
 
 Walters 
 GR 
 
 
 Walker 
 NM 
 
 
 Watkins 
 NA 
 
 
 Winzer 
 T 
 
 
 Jones 
 RW 
 
 
 McArdle 
 WL 
 
 
 Ring 
 SM 
 
 
 Strachan 
 DP 
 
 
 Pembrey 
 M 
 
 
 Breen 
 G 
 
 
 Clair 
 DS 
 
 
 Caesar 
 S 
 
 
 Gordon-Smith 
 K 
 
 
 Jones 
 L 
 
 
 Fraser 
 C 
 
 
 Green 
 EK 
 
 
 Grozeva 
 D 
 
 
 Hamshere 
 ML 
 
 
 Holmans 
 PA 
 
 
 Jones 
 IR 
 
 
 Kirov 
 G 
 
 
 Moskvina 
 V 
 
 
 Nikolov 
 I 
 
 
 O'Donovan 
 MC 
 
 
 Owen 
 MJ 
 
 
 Collier 
 DA 
 
 
 Elkin 
 A 
 
 
 Farmer 
 A 
 
 
 Williamson 
 R 
 
 
 McGuffin 
 P 
 
 
 Young 
 AH 
 
 
 Ferrier 
 IN 
 
 
 Ball 
 SG 
 
 
 Balmforth 
 AJ 
 
 
 Barrett 
 JH 
 
 
 Bishop 
 DT 
 
 
 Iles 
 MM 
 
 
 Maqbool 
 A 
 
 
 Yuldasheva 
 N 
 
 
 Hall 
 AS 
 
 
 Braund 
 PS 
 
 
 Dixon 
 RJ 
 
 
 Mangino 
 M 
 
 
 Stevens 
 S 
 
 
 Thompson 
 JR 
 
 
 Bredin 
 F 
 
 
 Tremelling 
 M 
 
 
 Parkes 
 M 
 
 
 Drummond 
 H 
 
 
 Lees 
 CW 
 
 
 Nimmo 
 ER 
 
 
 Satsangi 
 J 
 
 
 Fisher 
 SA 
 
 
 Forbes 
 A 
 
 
 Lewis 
 CM 
 
 
 Onnie 
 CM 
 
 
 Prescott 
 NJ 
 
 
 Sanderson 
 J 
 
 
 Mathew 
 CG 
 
 
 Barbour 
 J 
 
 
 Mohiuddin 
 MK 
 
 
 Todhunter 
 CE 
 
 
 Mansfield 
 JC 
 
 
 Ahmad 
 T 
 
 
 Cummings 
 FR 
 
 
 Jewell 
 DP 
 
 
 Webster 
 J 
 
 
 Brown 
 MJ 
 
 
 Lathrop 
 GM 
 
 
 Connell 
 J 
 
 
 Dominiczak 
 A 
 
 
 Marcano 
 CAB 
 
 
 Burke 
 B 
 
 
 Dobson 
 R 
 
 
 Gungadoo 
 J 
 
 
 Lee 
 KL 
 
 
 Munroe 
 PB 
 
 
 Newhouse 
 SJ 
 
 
 Onipinla 
 A 
 
 
 Wallace 
 C 
 
 
 Xue 
 M 
 
 
 Caulfield 
 M 
 
 
 Farrall 
 M 
 
 
 Barton 
 A 
 
 (braggs), T.B. in R.G and G. 
 
 Bruce 
 IN 
 
 
 Donovan 
 H 
 
 
 Eyre 
 S 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 PD 
 
 
 Hider 
 SL 
 
 
 Hinks 
 AM 
 
 
 John 
 SL 
 
 
 Potter 
 C 
 
 
 Silman 
 AJ 
 
 
 Symmons 
 DPM 
 
 
 Thomson 
 W 
 
 
 Worthington 
 J 
 
 
 Dunger 
 DB 
 
 
 Widmer 
 B 
 
 
 Frayling 
 TM 
 
 
 Freathy 
 RM 
 
 
 Lango 
 H 
 
 
 Perry 
 JRB 
 
 
 Shields 
 BM 
 
 
 Weedon 
 MN 
 
 
 Hattersley 
 AT 
 
 
 Hitman 
 GA 
 
 
 Walker 
 M 
 
 
 Elliott 
 KS 
 
 
 Groves 
 CJ 
 
 
 Lindgren 
 CM 
 
 
 Rayner 
 NW 
 
 
 Timpson 
 NJ 
 
 
 Zeggini 
 E 
 
 
 Newport 
 M 
 
 
 Sirugo 
 G 
 
 
 Lyons 
 E 
 
 
 Vannberg 
 F 
 
 
 Hill 
 AVS 
 
 
 Bradbury 
 LA 
 
 
 Farrar 
 C 
 
 
 Pointon 
 JJ 
 
 
 Wordsworth 
 P 
 
 
 Brown 
 MA 
 
 
 Franklyn 
 JA 
 
 
 Heward 
 JM 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 MJ 
 
 
 Gough 
 SCL 
 
 
 Seal 
 S 
 
 (uk), B.C.S.C. 
 
 Stratton 
 MR 
 
 
 Rahman 
 N 
 
 
 Ban 
 M 
 
 
 Goris 
 A 
 
 
 Sawcer 
 SJ 
 
 
 Compston 
 Alastair 
 
 
 Conway 
 D 
 
 
 Jallow 
 M 
 
 
 Rockett 
 KA 
 
 
 Bumpstead 
 SJ 
 
 
 Chaney 
 A 
 
 
 Downes 
 K 
 
 
 Ghori 
 MJR 
 
 
 Gwilliam 
 R 
 
 
 Hunt 
 SE 
 
 
 Inouye 
 M 
 
 
 Keniry 
 A 
 
 
 King 
 E 
 
 
 McGinnis 
 R 
 
 
 Potter 
 S 
 
 
 Ravindrarajah 
 R 
 
 
 Whittaker 
 P 
 
 
 Widden 
 C 
 
 
 Withers 
 D 
 
 
 Cardin 
 NJ 
 
 
 Ferreira 
 T 
 
 
 Pereira-Gale 
 J 
 
 
 Hallgrimsdóttir 
 IB 
 
 
 Howie 
 BN 
 
 
 Su 
 Z 
 
 
 Teo 
 YY 
 
 
 Vukcevic 
 D 
 
 
 Bentley 
 D 
 
 
 Compston 
 Alistair 
 
 
 2007 
 Genome-wide association study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases
and 3,000 shared controls 
 Nature 
 447 
 661 
 678 
 17554300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chabernaud 
 C 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Nooner 
 K 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Dimensional Brain-Behavior Relationships in Children with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 71 
 434 
 442 
 21974788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chai 
 XJ 
 
 
 Castañón 
 AN 
 
 
 Öngür 
 D 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 2012 
 Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal
regression 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 1420 
 1428 
 21889994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choi 
 EY 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2012 
 The organization of the human striatum estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 108 
 2242 
 2263 
 22832566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chumbley 
 JR 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2009 
 False discovery rate revisited: FDR and topological inference using
Gaussian random fields 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 62 
 70 
 18603449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 DM 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2010 
 Advances and Pitfalls in the Analysis and Interpretation of Resting-State
FMRI Data 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Pathak 
 S 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 2010 
 Identifying the brain's most globally connected
regions 
 NeuroImage 
 49 
 3132 
 3148 
 19909818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 2013 
 Multitask connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive task
control 
 Nat Neurosci 
 16 
 1348 
 1355 
 23892552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Repovš 
 G 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 2012 
 Global Connectivity of Prefrontal Cortex Predicts Cognitive Control and
Intelligence 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 8988 
 8999 
 22745498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 James 
 GA 
 
 
 Holtzheimer 
 PE 
 
 
 Hu 
 XP 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 2012 
 A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral
clustering 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 33 
 1914 
 1928 
 21769991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 Vogelstein 
 JT 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Heberlein 
 K 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 S 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013 
 Imaging human connectomes at the macroscale 
 Nat Methods 
 10 
 524 
 539 
 23722212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daducci 
 A 
 
 
 Gerhard 
 S 
 
 
 Griffa 
 A 
 
 
 Lemkaddem 
 A 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Thiran 
 JP 
 
 
 2012 
 The Connectome Mapper: An Open-Source Processing Pipeline to Map
Connectomes with MRI 
 PLoS ONE 
 7 
 e48121 
 23272041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damoiseaux 
 JS 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SaRB 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2006 
 Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 103 
 13848 
 13853 
 16945915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deary 
 IJ 
 
 
 Penke 
 L 
 
 
 Johnson 
 W 
 
 
 2010 
 The neuroscience of human intelligence differences 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 11 
 201 
 211 
 20145623 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Grzadzinski 
 R 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Mairena 
 MA 
 
 
 Lord 
 C 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2011 
 Aberrant Striatal Functional Connectivity in Children with
Autism 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 69 
 847 
 856 
 21195388 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2008 
 A dual-networks architecture of top-down control 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 12 
 99 
 105 
 18262825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Burgess 
 P 
 
 
 Emslie 
 H 
 
 
 1995 
 Fluid intelligence after frontal lobe lesions 
 Neuropsychologia 
 33 
 261 
 268 
 7791994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Seitz 
 RJ 
 
 
 Kolodny 
 J 
 
 
 Bor 
 D 
 
 
 Herzog 
 H 
 
 
 Ahmed 
 A 
 
 
 Newell 
 FN 
 
 
 Emslie 
 H 
 
 
 2000 
 A Neural Basis for General Intelligence 
 Science 
 289 
 457 
 460 
 10903207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Nigg 
 JT 
 
 
 Iyer 
 S 
 
 
 Bathula 
 D 
 
 
 Mills 
 KL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Gutman 
 D 
 
 
 Bangaru 
 S 
 
 
 Buitelaar 
 JK 
 
 
 Dickstein 
 DP 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DN 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Schweitzer 
 JB 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Wang 
 YF 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 S 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013 
 Distinct neural signatures detected for ADHD subtypes after controlling for
micro-movements in resting state functional connectivity MRI data 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2010 
 What can spontaneous fluctuations of the blood oxygenation-level-dependent
signal tell us about psychiatric disorders? 
 Curr Opin Psychiatry 
 23 
 239 
 249 
 20216219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of Statistical Maps in Functional Neuroimaging Using the False
Discovery Rate 
 NeuroImage 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gorgolewski 
 K 
 
 
 Madison 
 C 
 
 
 Clark 
 D 
 
 
 Halchenko 
 YO 
 
 
 Waskom 
 ML 
 
 
 Ghosh 
 SS 
 
 
 2011 
 Nipype: a flexible, lightweight and extensible neuroimaging data processing
framework in Python 
 Front Neuroinformatics 
 5 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotts 
 SJ 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Jo 
 HJ 
 
 
 Wallace 
 GL 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 The perils of global signal regression for group comparisons: a case study
of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gower 
 JC 
 
 
 Krzanowski 
 WJ 
 
 
 1999 
 Analysis of distance for structured multivariate data and extensions to
multivariate analysis of variance 
 J R Stat Soc Ser C Appl Stat 
 48 
 505 
 519 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric
disorders 
 Curr Opin Neurol 
 24 
 424 
 430 
 18607202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gretton 
 A 
 
 
 Borgwardt 
 K 
 
 
 Rasch 
 MJ 
 
 
 Scholkopf 
 B 
 
 
 Smola 
 AJ 
 
 
 2008 
 A Kernel Method for the Two-Sample Problem 
 ArXiv08052368 Cs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harchaoui 
 Z 
 
 
 Bach 
 F 
 
 
 Cappe 
 O 
 
 
 Moulines 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Kernel-Based Methods for Hypothesis Testing: A Unified View 
 IEEE Signal Process Mag 
 30 
 87 
 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hartigan 
 JA 
 
 
 1975 
 Clustering Algorithms 
 99th 
 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 New York, NY, USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haynes 
 JD 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 Decoding mental states from brain activity in humans 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 7 
 523 
 534 
 16791142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hu 
 JX 
 
 
 Zhao 
 H 
 
 
 Zhou 
 HH 
 
 
 2010 
 False Discovery Rate Control With Groups 
 J Am Stat Assoc 
 105 
 1215 
 1227 
 21931466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hyvarinen 
 A 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2013 
 Pairwise likelihood ratios for estimation of non-gaussian structural
equation models 
 J Mach Learn Res 
 14 
 111 
 152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jung 
 RE 
 
 
 Haier 
 RJ 
 
 
 2007 
 The Parieto-Frontal Integration Theory (P-FIT) of intelligence: Converging
neuroimaging evidence 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 30 
 135 
 154 
 17655784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kane 
 M 
 
 
 Emerson 
 JW 
 
 
 Weston 
 S 
 
 
 2013 
 Scalable Strategies for Computing with Massive Data 
 J Stat Softw 
 55 
 ?? 
 ?? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kane 
 MJ 
 
 
 Engle 
 RW 
 
 
 2002 
 The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity, executive
attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individual-differences
perspective 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 9 
 637 
 671 
 12613671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Characterizing variation in the functional connectome: promise and
pitfalls 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 16 
 181 
 188 
 22341211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMClare 
 
 
 Martino 
 AD 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of Anterior Cingulate Functional Connectivity from Late
Childhood to Early Adulthood 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 640 
 657 
 18653667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral
variability 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 527 
 537 
 17919929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMClare 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 G 
 
 
 Martino 
 AD 
 
 
 Copland 
 DA 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Klein 
 DF 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 McMahon 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 l-Dopa Modulates Functional Connectivity in Striatal Cognitive and Motor
Networks: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Study 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 7364 
 7378 
 19494158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koyama 
 MS 
 
 
 Martino 
 AD 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Jutagir 
 DR 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2011 
 Resting-State Functional Connectivity Indexes Reading Competence in
Children and Adults 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 8617 
 8624 
 21653865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 2009 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double
dipping 
 Nat Neurosci 
 12 
 535 
 540 
 19396166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mardia 
 KV 
 
 
 Kent 
 JT 
 
 
 Bibby 
 JM 
 
 
 1979 
 Multivariate analysis 
 Academic Press 
 London; New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Böttger 
 J 
 
 
 Long 
 X 
 
 
 Lv 
 Y 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Schäfer 
 A 
 
 
 Goldhahn 
 D 
 
 
 Abbushi 
 A 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 Resting developments: a review of fMRI post-processing methodologies for
spontaneous brain activity 
 Magn Reson Mater Phys Biol Med 
 23 
 289 
 307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Böttger 
 J 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 A 
 
 
 Gorgolewski 
 KJ 
 
 
 2013 
 Visualizing the human connectome 
 NeuroImage 
 80 
 445 
 461 
 23660027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McArdle 
 BH 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Fitting Multivariate Models to Community Data: A Comment on Distance-Based
Redundancy Analysis 
 Ecology 
 82 
 290 
 297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 MI 
 
 
 Abecasis 
 GR 
 
 
 Cardon 
 LR 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 DB 
 
 
 Little 
 J 
 
 
 Ioannidis 
 JPA 
 
 
 Hirschhorn 
 JN 
 
 
 2008 
 Genome-wide association studies for complex traits: consensus, uncertainty
and challenges 
 Nat Rev Genet 
 9 
 356 
 369 
 18398418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mckeown 
 MJ 
 
 
 Makeig 
 S 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Jung 
 TP 
 
 
 Kindermann 
 SS 
 
 
 Bell 
 AJ 
 
 
 Sejnowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into independent spatial
components 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 6 
 160 
 188 
 9673671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Vega Potler 
 N 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Resting State Functional Connectivity Correlates of Inhibitory Control in
Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
 Front Psychiatry 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Open Neuroscience Solutions for the Connectome-wide Association
Era 
 Neuron 
 73 
 214 
 218 
 22284177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minas 
 C 
 
 
 Montana 
 G 
 
 
 2012 
 Distance-based analysis of variance: approximate inference and an application to
genome-wide association studies 
 arXiv e-print No. 1205.2417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Olman 
 CA 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Ugurbil 
 K 
 
 
 2010 
 Multiband Multislice GE-EPI at 7 Tesla, With 16-Fold Acceleration Using
Partial Parallel Imaging With Application to High Spatial and Temporal Whole-Brain
FMRI 
 Magn Reson Med Off J Soc Magn Reson Med Soc Magn Reson Med 
 63 
 1144 
 1153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2013 
 Resting-state fMRI confounds and cleanup 
 NeuroImage 
 80 
 349 
 359 
 23571418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2009 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: Are
anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Interference resolution: Insights from a meta-analysis of neuroimaging
tasks 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 7 
 1 
 17 
 17598730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nooner 
 KB 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 SJ 
 
 
 Tobe 
 RH 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Benedict 
 MM 
 
 
 Moreno 
 AL 
 
 
 Panek 
 LJ 
 
 
 Brown 
 S 
 
 
 Zavitz 
 ST 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Sikka 
 S 
 
 
 Gutman 
 D 
 
 
 Bangaru 
 S 
 
 
 Schlachter 
 RT 
 
 
 Kamiel 
 SM 
 
 
 Anwar 
 AR 
 
 
 Hinz 
 CM 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 MS 
 
 
 Rachlin 
 AB 
 
 
 Adelsberg 
 S 
 
 
 Cheung 
 B 
 
 
 Khanuja 
 R 
 
 
 Yan 
 C 
 
 
 Craddock 
 CC 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 V 
 
 
 Courtney 
 W 
 
 
 King 
 M 
 
 
 Wood 
 D 
 
 
 Cox 
 CL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Duan 
 N 
 
 
 Thomsen 
 D 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Coffey 
 B 
 
 
 Hoptman 
 MJ 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Pomara 
 N 
 
 
 Sidtis 
 JJ 
 
 
 Koplewicz 
 HS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Leventhal 
 BL 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 The NKI-Rockland Sample: A Model for Accelerating the Pace of Discovery
Science in Psychiatry 
 Front Neurosci 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Polyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Detre 
 GJ 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 2006 
 Beyond mind-reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI
data 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 424 
 430 
 16899397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 McMillan 
 KM 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 2005 
 N-back working memory paradigm: A meta-analysis of normative functional
neuroimaging studies 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 25 
 46 
 59 
 15846822 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patel 
 RS 
 
 
 Bowman 
 FD 
 
 
 Rilling 
 JK 
 
 
 2006 
 A Bayesian approach to determining connectivity of the human
brain 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 27 
 267 
 276 
 16092131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Potter 
 DM 
 
 
 2005 
 A permutation test for inference in logistic regression with small- and
moderate-sized data sets 
 Stat Med 
 24 
 693 
 708 
 15515134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2012 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI
networks arise from subject motion 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 2142 
 2154 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 R Core Team 
 2013 
 R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing 
 R Foundation for Statistical Computing 
 Vienna, Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Stevens 
 MHH 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2010 
 On Distance-Based Permutation Tests for Between-Group
Comparisons 
 Biometrics 
 66 
 636 
 643 
 19673867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzo 
 ML 
 
 
 Székely 
 GJ 
 
 
 2010 
 DISCO analysis: A nonparametric extension of analysis of
variance 
 Ann Appl Stat 
 4 
 1034 
 1055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 RC 
 
 
 Jo 
 HJ 
 
 
 Gotts 
 SJ 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 2013 
 Correcting Brain-Wide Correlation Differences in Resting-State
FMRI 
 Brain Connect 
 3 
 339 
 352 
 23705677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schork 
 NJ 
 
 
 Wessel 
 J 
 
 
 Malo 
 N 
 
 
 2008 
 DNA Sequence- Based Phenotypic Association Analysis 
 
 
 Rao 
 DC 
 
 
 Charles Gu 
 C 
 
 
 Advances in Genetics, Genetic Dissection of Complex Traits 
 Academic Press 
 195 
 217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 2008 
 Meta-analysis of Go/No-go tasks demonstrating that fMRI activation
associated with response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 224 
 232 
 17850833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 2011 
 The human connectome: a complex network 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1224 
 109 
 125 
 21251014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Tononi 
 G 
 
 
 Kötter 
 R 
 
 
 2005 
 The Human Connectome: A Structural Description of the Human
Brain 
 PLoS Comput Biol 
 1 
 e42 
 16201007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trosset 
 MW 
 
 
 Priebe 
 CE 
 
 
 Park 
 Y 
 
 
 Miller 
 MI 
 
 
 2008 
 Semisupervised learning from dissimilarity data 
 Comput Stat Data Anal 
 52 
 4643 
 4657 
 20407600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Horn 
 JD 
 
 
 Gazzaniga 
 MS 
 
 
 2002 
 Databasing fMRI studies — towards a “discovery
science” of brain function 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 3 
 314 
 318 
 11967562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Varoquaux 
 G 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 2013 
 Learning and comparing functional connectomes across
subjects 
 NeuroImage 
 80 
 405 
 415 
 23583357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Chen 
 JI 
 
 
 Lerch 
 J 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 2005 
 Comparing functional connectivity via thresholding correlations and
singular value decomposition 
 Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 
 360 
 913 
 920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 EJ 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Uğurbil 
 K 
 
 
 2013 
 Evaluation of slice accelerations using multiband echo planar imaging at 3
T 
 NeuroImage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 Cheung 
 B 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 S 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013a 
 A comprehensive assessment of regional variation in the impact of head
micromovements on functional connectomics 
 NeuroImage 
 76 
 183 
 201 
 23499792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Zang 
 YF 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013b 
 Standardizing the intrinsic brain: Towards robust measurement of
inter-individual variation in 1000 functional connectomes 
 NeuroImage 
 80 
 246 
 262 
 23631983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 2011 
 Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging
data 
 Nat Methods 
 8 
 665 
 670 
 21706013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Hollinshead 
 M 
 
 
 Roffman 
 JL 
 
 
 Smoller 
 JW 
 
 
 Zöllei 
 L 
 
 
 Polimeni 
 JR 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2011 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic
functional connectivity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 106 
 1125 
 1165 
 21653723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zakharov 
 S 
 
 
 Salim 
 A 
 
 
 Thalamuthu 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 Comparison of similarity-based tests and pooling strategies for rare
variants 
 BMC Genomics 
 14 
 50 
 23343094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zalesky 
 A 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2010a 
 Network-based statistic: Identifying differences in brain
networks 
 NeuroImage 
 53 
 1197 
 1207 
 20600983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zalesky 
 A 
 
 
 Fornito 
 A 
 
 
 Harding 
 IH 
 
 
 Cocchi 
 L 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 Pantelis 
 C 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2010b 
 Whole-brain anatomical networks: Does the choice of nodes
matter? 
 NeuroImage 
 50 
 970 
 983 
 20035887 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zapala 
 MA 
 
 
 Schork 
 NJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Multivariate regression analysis of distance matrices for testing
associations between gene expression patterns and related variables 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 103 
 19430 
 19435 
 17146048 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zapala 
 MA 
 
 
 Schork 
 NJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Statistical Properties of Multivariate Distance Matrix Regression for
High-Dimensional Data Analysis 
 Front Genet 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 CZ 
 
 
 Zang 
 YF 
 
 
 Cao 
 QJ 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Jiang 
 TZ 
 
 
 Sui 
 MQ 
 
 
 Wang 
 YF 
 
 
 2008 
 Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 NeuroImage 
 40 
 110 
 120 
 18191584 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Ehmke 
 R 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Imperati 
 D 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Network Centrality in the Human Functional Connectome 
 Cereb Cortex 
 22 
 1862 
 1875 
 21968567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Martino 
 AD 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Bangaru 
 S 
 
 
 Grzadzinski 
 R 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Zang 
 YF 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2010 
 Growing Together and Growing Apart: Regional and Sex Differences in the
Lifespan Developmental Trajectories of Functional Homotopy 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 15034 
 15043 
 21068309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic of the CWAS Analytic Framework 
 The proposed framework is carried out for each grey matter voxel separately. Starting
with (1) a single seed voxel, (2) maps of temporal correlations (i.e., functional
connectivity) between the seed voxel and every other grey matter voxel are generated
(yellow-red = positive correlations, blue-cyan = negative correlations).
Next, (3) the distance (one minus the correlation) between every pair of
participants' connectivity maps is computed (red-white = positive
correlation or distance of 0-1, white-blue = negative correlation or distance of
1-2), and (4) an analysis of distance, analogous to an analysis of variance, is performed.
The sum of squared distances between typically developing children (TDC) and children with
ADHD is compared to the residual sum of squared distances (the error term) to produce a
pseudo- F  statistic. An accompanying p-value is obtained by permutation.
This workflow (steps 1-4) is then repeated for every grey matter voxel to produce a
whole-brain map of  p -values values, which is then thresholded at
p<0.05 and corrected for multiple comparisons by setting a minimum cluster size
( p  < 0.05) based on Monte Carlo simulations. All flat maps are
of the right hemisphere and are rendered on the PALS-B12 atlas in caret. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Overview of Analyses 
 Goals or objectives are given in the first column, followed by the particular analyses
used in the second column, the datasets examined in the third column, and the associated
figures in the final column. Supplementary analyses provide further applications and
details of MDMR-based CWAS, including false positive and negative rates using simulations
and the potential impact of selecting difference distance measures. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Connectome-Wide Associations for IQ Revealed with MDMR 
 (a)  Significant associations between whole-brain functional connectivity and
intelligence (full-scale IQ) are shown with  p  < 0.05
(cluster-corrected using Gaussian random field theory [GRF]) for
resting-state Scans 1 and 2.  (b)  Overlap of significant associations related
to IQ between the two scans is shown in red. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Large-Scale Network Membership of IQ CWAS 
 (a)  Overlap of significant associations related to IQ between two scans
(same as  Fig 3b ) is shown in red and overlaid on
seven functional networks of interest presented by  Yeo et
al. (2011) . The networks are displayed as semi-transparent and correspond to the
colored labels given in (b).  (b)  The proportion of significant associations
related to IQ in each of the seven networks is depicted graphically. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Reproducibility of IQ CWAS 
 Associations related to IQ were calculated foe each of 500 bootstrap subsamples.
 (a) , Based upon all possible pairings of boostrap subsamples, the
histograms display the overlap (Dice coefficient) between significant associations
( p  < 0.05, uncorrected) and the similarity (Spearman rho)
between unthresholded associations.  (b)  Four random subsamples were selected
and the significant associations related to IQ are shown with  p  <
0.05 (cluster-corrected using GRF). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Correspondence between CWAS and Neurosynth (Automated Meta-Analyses) 
 Using our approach, significant associations with intelligence based on MDMR are shown in
blue-white for Scans 1  (a)  and 2  (b) . Using the automated
meta-analysis provided with Neurosynth, significant brain activity associated with key
terms that were related to IQ (intelligence, reasoning, and WM) are shown in purple-white.
The overlap between our approach and the automated meta-analysis is shown in yellow.
 (c)  Only the overlap is shown between the combined MDMR results for Scans 1
and 2 compared to the neurosynth meta-analytic findings. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Effects of Global Signal and Mean Connectivity on IQ CWAS 
 Significant associations for intelligence are shown with  p  <
0.05 (GRF corrected) when  (a)  removing the global signal at the individual
level,  (b)  adding the mean connectivity (over all voxelwise functional
connections) as a covariate at the group level, or  (c)  for comparison when
using no global-based correction (same as  Figure 3a ).
All results are shown for both resting-state scans. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Comparison of MDMR analysis and GLM seed-based connectivity analysis (SCA). 
 (a)  For each scan, a voxel's significance based on the MDMR analysis
(x-axis) is plotted against the percent of individual connections exhibiting a significant
connectivity-IQ relationship for the same voxel in a GLM analysis (y-axis).
 (b)  For each scan, brain regions ranking among the top 15% based on
the MDMR analysis are shown in red, those ranking in the same percentiles based on the
number of significant GLM findings are shown in green, and the overlap between the two is
shown in yellow.  (c)  The same plot as (b) is shown except mean connectivity
is added as a covariate in the MDMR and GLM-based analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 MDMR as a Guide to SCA 
 (a)  From Scan 1, 100 regions-of-interest (individual voxels) were selected
from associations related to IQ and divided into four groups (25 each) including global
maxima significant (maximally significant voxels with  p  < 0.05;
red), significant (random voxels with  p  < 0.05; green),
non-significant (random voxels with  p  > 0.05; cyan), and global
minima (minimally significant voxels with  p  > 0.05; purple). Bar
plots show the percent of individual functional connections that significantly vary with
IQ based on a GLM analysis (y-axis), which are averaged within each ROI group (x-axis) for
resting-state Scans 1 and 2.  (b)  As in plot (a), but for 100 ROIs selected
from Scan 2. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10 
 
 Applicability of MDMR-based CWAS 
 (a)  Significant ( p  < 0.05, cluster-corrected using
GRF) connectome-wide associations for development (age), ADHD diagnosis (children with
ADHD vs. typically developing controls), and L-DOPA administration (placebo vs. L-DOPA).
 (b)  For each dataset, the percent of significant associations within each
of seven functional networks of interest ( Yeo et al.,
2011 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 11 
 
 Connectome-Wide Associations for IQ Across Different Parcellations 
 Significant connectome-wide associations for intelligence are shown using 50, 200, 800,
and 3200 parcellations as well as the original voxelwise results. All analyses use
resting-state Scan 1 and are thresholded at  p  < 0.05
(cluster-corrected using GRF). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 12 
 
 Applicability of Parcellation-Based CWAS 
 Significant connectome-wide associations for ADHD diagnosis (children with ADHD vs.
typically developing controls), development (age), full-scale intelligence (Scan 1), and
L-DOPA administration (placebo vs. L-DOPA) are shown based on voxelwise data (left) and
800 parcellation units (right). All datasets are threshold voxelwise at  p 
< 0.05, then cluster-level corrected using GRF at  p  <
0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographics. Abbreviations: N, number of participants; F, female; M, Male. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dataset 
 
 Group 
 N 
 F / M 
 Mean Age 
 Age Range 
 
 
 
 
 
 IQ 
 
 
 104 
 71 / 33 
 40.28 
 18 - 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development 
 
 
 77 
 40 / 37 
 14.8 
 6.7- 24.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ADHD 
 57 
 22 / 35 
 12.1 
 7.9 - 17.6 
 
 
 
 ADHD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TDC 
 57 
 22 / 35 
 12.4 
 7.2 - 17.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L-DOPA 
 
 
 19 
 7 / 12 
 26.2 
 20 - 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Listed are the peaks of significant connectome-wide associations related to full-scale IQ
for Scans 1 and 2. Peaks were found using AFNI's 3dExtrema by setting a
voxel-level threshold of Z > 1.65 and a minimum distance of 20mm between peaks.
Abbreviations: H, hemisphere; R, right; L, left; BA = Brodmann Area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scan 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Network 
 H 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Statistic 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cluster 1 (1,110 voxels
[4mm]) 
 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Isthmus Cingulate Gyrus 
 29 
 -4 
 -52 
 14 
 2.46 
 
 
 Default 
 R 
 Precuneus Sulcus 
 23 
 16 
 -44 
 34 
 2.29 
 
 
 Dorsal Attention 
 R 
 Inferior Parietal Gyrus 
 39 
 44 
 -76 
 18 
 3.28 
 
 
 Dorsal Attention 
 L 
 Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 -48 
 -68 
 2 
 2.26 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Cerebellum (V) 
 
 -8 
 -56 
 -10 
 3.64 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Cerebellum (VI) 
 
 -28 
 -52 
 -22 
 2.48 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Peri Calcarine Sulcus 
 17 
 12 
 -76 
 14 
 3.33 
 
 
 Visual 
 L 
 Peri Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 -12 
 -72 
 10 
 3.31 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 12 
 -52 
 -6 
 3.30 
 
 
 Visual 
 L 
 Cuneus Gyrus 
 17 
 -8 
 -96 
 18 
 3.21 
 
 
 Visual 
 L 
 Lingual Sulcus 
 19 
 -24 
 -68 
 -6 
 2.86 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Parahippocampal Sulcus 
 20 
 32 
 -40 
 -10 
 2.78 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 16 
 -80 
 -10 
 2.70 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Lingual Sulcus 
 19 
 32 
 -52 
 6 
 2.65 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Lateral Occipital Gyrus 
 17 
 20 
 -96 
 10 
 2.34 
 
 
 
 Cluster 2 (1,026 voxels) 
 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Pars Orbitalis Gyrus 
 11 
 -48 
 24 
 -10 
 3.34 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 -60 
 -40 
 -6 
 2.80 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Caudal Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 44 
 -44 
 20 
 42 
 2.37 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 32 
 -8 
 40 
 42 
 2.20 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -20 
 20 
 54 
 2.08 
 
 
 Dorsal Attention 
 L 
 Precentral Sulcus 
 6 
 -24 
 -12 
 50 
 2.90 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 R 
 Posterior Cingulate Sulcus 
 
 12 
 -16 
 34 
 3.56 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 L 
 Precentral Sulcus 
 
 -40 
 -4 
 30 
 2.79 
 
 
 Limbic 
 L 
 Lateral Orbital Frontal Gyrus 
 
 -24 
 16 
 -18 
 3.02 
 
 
 Limbic 
 R 
 Thalamus 
 
 4 
 -4 
 -2 
 1.99 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 -60 
 -4 
 -6 
 2.55 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 R 
 Paracentral Gyrus 
 6 
 4 
 -12 
 58 
 2.43 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Post Central Gyrus 
 43 
 -64 
 -20 
 18 
 1.91 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 -60 
 -4 
 34 
 1.79 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -4 
 8 
 50 
 3.03 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 20 
 -40 
 0 
 -22 
 3.02 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -16 
 0 
 70 
 2.92 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Putamen 
 
 -28 
 4 
 10 
 2.90 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Insula Gyrus 
 
 -32 
 24 
 6 
 1.99 
 
 
 
 Cluster 3 (301 voxels) 
 
 
 
 Default 
 R 
 Inferior Parietal Sulcus 
 41 
 44 
 -44 
 22 
 2.79 
 
 
 Default 
 R 
 Lateral Orbital Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 32 
 24 
 -18 
 2.59 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 R 
 Rostral Middle Frontal Sulcus 
 46 
 36 
 40 
 10 
 2.08 
 
 
 Limbic 
 R 
 Banks Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 38 
 32 
 4 
 -22 
 2.70 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 R 
 Banks Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 64 
 -40 
 10 
 3.12 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 R 
 Banks Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 64 
 -24 
 -2 
 2.32 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 R 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 
 56 
 8 
 6 
 2.88 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 R 
 Insula Sulcus 
 
 36 
 8 
 10 
 2.76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scan 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cluster 1 (1,655 voxels
[4mm]) 
 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Lateral Orbital Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 -36 
 52 
 -10 
 3.178 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 -16 
 64 
 22 
 3.167 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Medial Orbital Frontal Sulcus 
 32 
 -12 
 48 
 -2 
 3.05 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Inferior Parietal Gyrus 
 19 
 -40 
 -72 
 42 
 2.853 
 
 
 Default 
 R 
 Isthmus Cingulate Sulcus 
 23 
 8 
 -48 
 22 
 2.272 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Precuneus Gyrus 
 5 
 -4 
 -48 
 46 
 2.196 
 
 
 Default 
 R 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 12 
 64 
 22 
 2.173 
 
 
 Dorsal Attention 
 L 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 39 
 -48 
 -64 
 14 
 2.475 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 L 
 Caudal Anterior Cingulate Sulcus 
 32 
 -12 
 32 
 26 
 3.243 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 8 
 -4 
 28 
 46 
 3.067 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Sulcus 
 6 
 -16 
 8 
 62 
 2.485 
 
 
 Limbic 
 L 
 Brain Stem 
 
 -8 
 -28 
 -2 
 2.454 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Superior Frontal Sulcus 
 6 
 -12 
 -8 
 46 
 2.729 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Cerebellum (V) 
 
 -28 
 -36 
 -30 
 2.727 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 R 
 Paracentral Gyrus 
 4 
 4 
 -8 
 70 
 2.512 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Paracentral Sulcus 
 4 
 -12 
 -24 
 62 
 2.428 
 
 
 Somatomotor 
 L 
 Supra Marginal Sulcus 
 41 
 -48 
 -44 
 18 
 2.343 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 R 
 Brain Stem 
 
 8 
 -32 
 -22 
 3.152 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Cerebellum (VI) 
 
 -12 
 -68 
 -18 
 1.989 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Precuneus Sulcus 
 
 28 
 -56 
 14 
 3.173 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Peri Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 4 
 -68 
 14 
 2.066 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Precuneus Sulcus 
 7 
 20 
 -60 
 34 
 2.057 
 
 
 Visual 
 R 
 Parahippocampal Sulcus 
 37 
 28 
 -40 
 -6 
 1.774 
 
 
 
 Cluster 2 (333 voxels) 
 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Pars Orbitalis Gyrus 
 11 
 -48 
 24 
 -10 
 3.393 
 
 
 Default 
 L 
 Pars Triangularis Gyrus 
 47 
 -52 
 40 
 2 
 1.762 
 
 
 Frontoparietal 
 L 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 -48 
 12 
 34 
 2.794 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Insula Gyrus 
 38 
 -36 
 8 
 -18 
 3.057 
 
 
 Ventral Attention 
 L 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 
 -56 
 4 
 6 
 2.57 
 
 
 
 
 
