
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0100725 
 3187 
 Cortex 
 Cortex 
 
 Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior 
 
 0010-9452 
 1973-8102 
 
 
 24607883 
 4013681 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.01.003 
 NIHMS574005 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural division of labor in reading is constrained by culture: A training study of reading Chinese characters 
 
 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Jingjing 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 Xiaoyi 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 Stephen J. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Sun 
 Wan 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Fang 
 Shin-Yi 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Mencl 
 W. Einar 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 Kenneth R. 
 
 1 
 2 
 4 
 5 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 Hua 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 Jay G. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA 
 2 Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT 06511, USA 
 3 State Key Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China 
 4 Department of Linguistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA 
 5 Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA 
 
 Address correspondence to: Jingjing Zhao, Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Departement d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole Normale Superieure, 29 rue d'Ulm, 75005, Paris Cedex 05, France, Tel: +33 1 44 32 26 57, Fax: +33 1 44 32 26 30,  jingjing.jj.zhao@gmail.com 
 
 
 24 
 4 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 1 
 2014 
 
 
 4 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 4 
 2015 
 
 53 
 90 
 106 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Word reading in alphabetic language involves a cortical system with multiple components whose division of labor depends on the transparency of the writing system. To gain insight about the division of labor between phonology and semantics subserving word reading in Chinese, a deep non-alphabetic writing system, fMRI was used to investigate the effects of phonological and semantic training on the cortical circuitry for oral naming of Chinese characters. In a training study, we examined whether a training task that differentially focused readers' attention on the phonological or semantic properties of a Chinese character changes the patterns of cortical activation that was evoked by that character in a subsequent naming task. Our imaging results corroborate that the cortical regions underlying reading in Chinese largely overlaps the left-hemisphere reading system responsible for reading in alphabetic languages, with some cortical regions in the left-hemisphere uniquely recruited for reading in Chinese. However, in contrast to findings from studies of English word naming, we observed considerable overlap in the neural activation patterns associated with phonological and semantic training on naming Chinese characters, which we suggest may reflect a balanced neural division of labor between phonology and semantics in Chinese character reading. The equitable division of labor for Chinese reading might be driven by the special statistical structure of the writing system, which includes equally systematic mappings in the correspondences between written forms and their pronunciations and meanings. 
 
 
 reading 
 Chinese 
 division of labor 
 fMRI 
 learning 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Extant evidence indicates that in skilled readers of alphabetic writing systems, word reading involves a highly organized and specialized multi-component cortical system distributed primarily in left-hemisphere (LH) language areas (inferior frontal gyrus, superior, middle and inferior temporal gyri, superior and inferior parietal lobule, and fusiform gyrus, [hereafter, IFG, STG, MTG, ITG, SPL, IPL, and FG, respectively]). These cortical regions are differentiated by their contribution to orthographic, phonological, and lexical-semantic processing ( Cattinelli, Borghese, Gallucci, & Paulesu, 2013 ;  Pugh et al., 2000 ;  Taylor, Rastle, & Davis, 2013 ). The relative contribution of these cortical regions to printed word recognition also appears to vary systematically as a function of the properties of the writing system. For example,  Paulesu and colleagues (2000 ,  2001 ) found that readers of Italian, an orthography with a transparent or largely univalent mapping between letters and phonemes, show greater activation in left STG (phonological processing areas) than English readers. In contrast, readers of English, an opaque orthography with multivalent mappings between letters and phonemes (e.g., ‘I’ is pronounced differently in ‘PINT’ and ‘MINT’), showed greater activations in the left posterior ITG and anterior IFG (lexical-semantic processing areas) than Italian readers. In other words, within a common reading network, the division of labor among its component processes is differently weighted depending on specific characteristics of the orthography ( Seidenberg, 1992 ,  2011 ). 
 Although alphabetic systems vary in the structure of the mapping from spelling to sound, differences in this mapping are particularly pronounced in the contrast between alphabetic writing systems and Chinese, in which the mapping from spelling to sound is syllable-based with no constituent parts of a character corresponding to phonemes. In addition, the statistical structure of the mapping from spelling to meaning also differs substantially between Chinese and alphabetic languages. Chinese, as one of the oldest writing systems in the world, is commonly described as an ‘ideographic’ or morphosyllabic writing system with an extremely deep orthography. It is true that logographic characters, as the basic units of Chinese, are typically corresponded to morphemes. In fact, however, only a small percentage of Chinese characters (those that are most ancient, dating back more than 3,000 years) are aptly termed ideographs ( DeFrancis, 1989 ). A large percentage (80%∼90%) of modern Chinese characters are “phonograms”, semantic-phonetic compounds with one element (phonetic radical) suggesting its pronunciation and the other element (semantic radical) indicating the general category of its meaning, e.g., 湖 (/hu2/, lake) which contains a phonetic radical 胡 pronounced as /hu2/ and a semantic radical 氵 meaning water. For example, Chinese regular-consistent phonograms 1  have exactly (39%) or approximately the same (26%) pronunciations as their phonetic radicals as evaluated by  Shu and colleagues (2003)  from a total of 2,570 Chinese characters taught in Chinese elementary school. Similarly, the meanings of a large percentage (88%) of Chinese phonograms are transparently (58%) or semi-transparently (30%) related to the meanings of their semantic radicals 2 . Thus, the structure of Chinese phonograms is not “absolute-ideographic”, but includes substantial regularities (although not perfectly predictable) in the correspondences between written forms and both their pronunciations and their meanings. 
 In other words, although the differences between Chinese and alphabetic writing systems are illustrated remarkably in the structure of written forms (logographs vs. alphabets), substantial differences between the two writing systems can also be understood in terms of the statistical properties of orthography-to-phonology (O-P) and orthography-to-semantics (O-S) mappings. The statistical structure of the Chinese writing system and that of alphabetic systems might differ in two important ways. On the one hand, the O-P mapping is less systematic in Chinese than in alphabetic systems. In alphabetic systems, an alphabet of letters can correspond to individual speech sounds, although English is somewhat an “outlier” in alphabetic systems but letters or combinations of letters in English still roughly correspond to phonemes or combinations of phonemes. In contrast, in Chinese, although phonetic radicals can provide cues for the pronunciations of the characters, phonetic radicals are also logographs, per se, and the pronunciations of phonetic radicals correspond to syllables, the global phonological units for the pronunciations of the characters, not the constituent parts of the syllables. Thus, computation of pronunciation of a Chinese character is not a process of sound-by-sound assembling as in alphabetic systems in essence, but is a process of addressed direct access from logographic forms to phonology in syllables. In addition, although about two thirds of the phonograms have the same or approximately the same pronunciations as their phonetic radicals, this is far from consistent as in alphabetic systems. All together, the relations between orthography and phonology in Chinese are more arbitrary than in alphabetic scripts. One the other hand, the O-S mapping is more systematic in Chinese than in alphabetic systems. Other than the morphosyllabic characteristics of simple Chinese characters, semantic radicals in Chinese phonograms indicate general semantic categories of the characters and aid in the computation from orthography to semantics. In contrast, alphabetic systems rarely contain semantic information in the way that Chinese do by grouping characters into different semantic categories. Although there are morphological words in English (e.g., final - s  and - ed  in English), they are somewhat encoded phonologically too and hence not orthogonal to orthography-to-semantics mapping. To the end, the correspondence between orthography and semantics in Chinese is certainly less arbitrary than in alphabetic systems. In such a way, the Chinese writing system conveys a relatively symmetric statistical structure between O-P mapping and O-S mapping comparing to that of the alphabetic systems, which is substantially asymmetrical between the two mappings with highly consistent O-P mapping and arbitrary O-S mapping. 
 The relatively symmetric statistical structure of the writing system of Chinese compared to the alphabetic systems implies that the division of labor between phonology and semantics may be different for readers of Chinese than for readers of alphabetic systems, with readers of Chinese relying more on semantics than alphabetic readers ( Harm & Seidenberg, 2004 ;  Seidenberg, 2011 ; also see  R. Frost, 2012 ). For example, the arbitrariness in spelling-to-sound mapping of Chinese characters may make the computation from orthography to phonology much less efficient in Chinese and the consistency in spelling-to-meaning mapping of Chinese characters may make the computation from orthography to semantics more efficient in Chinese compared to alphabetic systems. Thus, semantics should contribute more in naming (a typical task for examining computation from orthography to phonology) Chinese characters than in naming alphabetic words. In fact, extant behavioral work have supported this hypothesis and shown that shallow alphabetic orthographies (e.g., Italian) demonstrated negligible effects of semantic variables (e.g., imageability and concreteness) in skilled reading ( Barca, Burani, & Arduino, 2002 ;  Bates, Burani, D'Amico, & Barca, 2001 ) and only in deep orthographies such as English, semantic variables play some role in naming aloud words with atypical pronunciations especially if those words are relatively infrequent ( Shibahara, Zorzi, Hill, Wydell, & Butterworth, 2003 ;  Strain, Patterson, & Seidenberg, 1995 ,  2002 ;  Woollams, 2005 ), a finding that is also borne out by computational modeling ( Harm & Seidenberg, 2004 ;  Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996 ) and neuroimaging ( S. J. Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves, Desai, Humphries, Seidenberg, & Binder, 2010 ) measures. 
 In contrast, a large corpus analysis of the naming responses of 2,423 Chinese characters indicates that semantic variables seem to play substantial role in reading aloud all Chinese characters regardless of types ( Y. Liu, Shu, & Li, 2007 ).  Yang, Shu, McCandliss, and Zevin (2012)  further provided quantitative evidence for semantic contribution in naming different types of Chinese characters in their connectionist modeling work. They specifically compared semantic and phonological effects in naming different types of characters via impairments of semantic and phonological units of the naming model. The authors found that semantics not only played substantial role in naming Chinese irregular-inconsistent (IR-IC) phonograms but also made as much contribution as phonology in naming regular-consistent (R-C) phonograms. They additionally made direct comparison of semantic and phonological effects in naming Chinese phonograms with those of naming English words using the same model architecture and training procedures. The naming results between the two writing systems contrast dramatically. For R-C words, semantics showed relatively little effects in English reading, but made substantial effects as phonology in naming Chinese R-C phonograms. For IR-IC words, semantics showed some effects in English reading but the effects were weaker than phonology and much more modest than the effects in naming Chinese IR-IC phonograms. 
 In summary, previous studies coherently suggest that semantics plays limited effects in alphabetic systems and only contributes in naming IR-IC words in relatively deeper alphabetic orthography such as English, whereas in the reading of a non-alphabetic script such as Chinese, semantics plays important role in naming all types of Chinese characters, including both IR-IC phonograms  and  R-C phonograms. Thus, investigating reading of Chinese, especially for R-C phonograms, might offer an important approach to examine if the division of labor between phonology and semantics in reading Chinese characters is different than in reading English words. Although extant behavioral and computational modeling findings have examined this issue and suggest differences in division of labor in reading between the two writing systems, few studies have explored this issue in the neural level. 
 The purpose of the present study was to provide neuroimaging evidence for the division of labor between phonology and semantics for Chinese readers. We used an adaptive learning paradigm developed by  Sandak and colleagues (2004)  that has been shown to provide a sensitive measure of the division of labor between the neural circuits underlying O-P and O-S processes in readers of English. By using a paradigm and scanning parameters previously used in this study of reading in English, the results of the present study would also allow us to compare the division of labor of Chinese reading with the findings in English reading. In the present Chinese adaptive learning experiment, native Mandarin speakers were first trained on Chinese low-frequency phonograms with regular-consistent pronunciations and transparent semantic radicals outside the fMRI scanner, half in a training condition that emphasized attention to phonological form and half in a training condition that emphasized semantics. Immediately following training, participants named aloud the trained phonograms and a comparable set of untrained phonograms in an event-related fMRI paradigm. This design allowed us to observe how the neural activation associated with naming a phonogram is modulated by recent prior exposures to that phonogram by contrasting the response to trained and untrained phonogram. Critically, the training-task manipulation allowed us to further determine whether the effects of prior exposure differ depending on the focus (phonological or semantic) of the training task. 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 A total of 18 right-handed native Mandarin speakers (7 males and 11 females) participated in the fMRI study after giving informed consent. The subjects ranged in age from 19 to 27 years with a mean of 22.8 years. All participants were undergraduate or graduate students from Beijing Normal University. None of the subjects reported a history of neurological disorders or reading impairments. All experimental protocols were approved by State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning at Beijing Normal University. 
 Because we were not able to obtain behavioral naming data during fMRI scanning, we further recruited a separate cohort (hereafter, the behavioral cohort) of 37 right-handed participants (13 males and 24 females, 19 to 28 years of age with a mean of 22.1 years) from undergraduate and graduate students of Beijing Normal University in order to collect naming latencies and accuracy outside scanner. The participants were all native Mandarin speakers. None of the participants reported a history of neurological disorders or reading impairments. Training was identical for this cohort; however, instead of receiving an fMRI scan we collected their naming latencies and accuracy for the Chinese phonograms outside scanner. 
 
 
 2.2 Materials 
 The critical items in our adaptive learning paradigm included a total of 126 Chinese low frequency phonograms that ranged in frequency from 1 to 30 occurrences per million (M = 10.99) according to the Modern Chinese frequency dictionary ( Wang, 1986 ). All critical phonograms were semantic-transparent  regular-consistent (R-C) phonograms , whose consistency ratios 3  ranged from 0.5 to 1 and averaged 0.91 ( Y. Liu, Shu, & Li, 2007 ). For regularity of pronunciation of a phonogram, tone difference between the pronunciation of a phonogram and the pronunciation of its phonetic radical was not controlled due to the limited number of possible stimuli, but each phonogram and its phonetic radical shared the same onset and rime. All phonograms were semantically transparent with explicit meaning cues from their semantic radicals 2 . 
 For counterbalancing purposes, the critical phonograms were partitioned into three lists of 42 items each. The three lists were matched on frequency (M = 10.78, 11.74, 10.46; SD = 7.24, 8.99, 7.30), consistency ratio (M = 0.92, 0.90, 0.90; SD = 0.15, 0.14, 0.13), number of strokes (M = 11, 12, 11; SD = 3, 3, 3), frequency of phonetic radical (M = 629, 596, 606; SD = 856, 923, 825), and number of characters that had different tones with their phonetic radicals (13, 12, 12). Each list was assigned to the phonological training, semantic training, and untrained conditions equally across subjects. 
 To construct the materials for the training tasks, each target phonogram (e.g., 筏 /fa2/, raft) was paired with three different higher frequency comparison characters: a phonologically related character (e.g., 乏 /fa2/, tired), a semantically related character (e.g., 舟 /zhou1/, boat), and a phonologically and semantically unrelated character (e.g., 斗 /dou4/, fight). The phonologically related characters were homophones of their corresponding targets. The semantic relationship between the targets and their semantically related and unrelated characters were rated on a 1-7 Likert scale (1- least relevant; 7- most relevant) by a group of 20 native Chinese students from Beijing Normal University, none of whom participated in the main experiments. The means of semantic relatedness scores for semantically related and unrelated characters were respectively 5.82 (SD = 0.72) and 1.54 (SD = 0.33). No obvious orthographic clues from the paired characters were able to be used to perform the training tasks. 
 In addition to the 126 R-C phonograms, the stimuli presented during the naming task also included 42 low-frequency, semantic-transparent,  irregular-inconsistent (IR-IC) phonograms . The mean consistency ratio for these items was 0.23 (SD = 0.39). They were matched with the critical phonograms in frequency (M=11.97, SD=5.83) and number of strokes (M=11, SD= 4). These  IR-IC  phonograms served for two purposes: a) equating the number of trained versus untrained items in the naming task, and b) allowing us to examine neural effects of orthographic-phonological consistency 1 , which can also be used to validate the credibility of the present fMRI results by comparing with extant neuroimaging results of regularity and consistency effects ( Lee et al., 2004 ;  Tan, Feng, Fox, & Gao, 2001 ). 
 Finally, in order to directly compare the neural circuits underlying phonological and semantic processes in reading Chinese phonograms, participants were also required to make in-scanner homophone judgments and semantic association judgments on a new set of phonograms after they completed the naming task. The stimuli included 72 low frequency R-C phonograms. The means of frequency and number of strokes were 21.72 (SD = 14.64) and 11 (SD = 3), respectively. Each phonogram was assigned to the semantic task for half the participants and to the phonological task for the remaining participants and counterbalanced across participants between the two tasks. As in the training task, the phonograms were paired with one-character comparison words such that half of the trials in each task required a ‘yes’ response. 
 
 
 2.3 Procedure 
 The experiment was performed in two phases: a behavioral training session followed by an fMRI session. During behavioral training, participants was reinforced their attention to different features for the low frequency Chinese phonograms through repeated presentations — half in a training condition that emphasized attention to the phonological form and the other half in a training condition that emphasized attending to semantics. Immediately following behavioral training, we examined transfer of training effects in an event-related fMRI session in which participants named aloud the trained phonograms as well as an additional set of untrained phonograms. Following the naming scans, participants were scanned in a block design paradigm while making phonological and semantic judgments on a new set of Chinese phonograms. A computer with Windows XP and Eprime 1.1 software (Psychology Software Tools Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA) was used for all stimulus presentation and response collection. 
 
 Behavioral training 
 Each participant was trained on two sets of phonograms with feedback. In the phonological training condition, participants made homophone judgments on targets and corresponding comparison items (e.g., “Do 筏 and 乏 sound the same?”, where 筏 (/fa2/, raft) is the target item and 乏 (/fa2/, tired) is the comparison item). In the semantic training condition, participants were asked to indicate whether targets and comparison items were semantically related (e.g., “Are 鞍 and 马 related in meaning?”, where 鞍 (/an1/, saddle) is the target item and 马 (/ma3/, horse) is the comparison item). 
 During each trial, a target item was presented in parallel with a comparison item in the middle of the computer screen. Subjects were asked to judge whether or not the target item matched the comparison item on the targeted feature by pressing one of two buttons on the keyboard. The items stayed on the screen until a response was made or elapsed after 2000 msec, followed by an inter-trial interval of 2000 msec. During the training, response feedback (“Correct” or “Incorrect”) was provided on each trial in order to encourage attention to the targeted feature. Each subject was trained on sixteen blocks with eight blocks in each training condition. Training alternated between phonological and semantic conditions every four blocks and the initial training condition was counterbalanced across participants. Each phonogram was presented only once in each block and was repeated eight times through the whole training session with either phonological training or semantic training. Within each block, phonograms were presented randomly. Across all repetitions within each condition, the number of trials with correct yes and no responses was equated and balanced across blocks. Total time for the training session was approximately 2 hours. Both reaction time (RT) and accuracy were recorded during behavioral training. 
 
 
 fMRI session 
 Immediately after the training session, participants performed an overt naming task in an event-related fMRI design in which they named the phonologically and semantically trained R-C phonograms, along with untrained R-C phonograms, and untrained IR-IC phonograms. We employed an event-related design with interleaved acquisition and “jittered” trial durations (4, 5, 6, 7 sec) with occasional longer trial durations (i.e., null trials) for the naming task. The target stimulus in each trial was presented for 1000 msec. Data was collected from seven functional runs (3 min plus 10 sec for image stabilization) consisting of 24 items each. Three different pseudorandom orders of stimuli were created and rotated equally across subjects and training sets. Due to scanning environment constrains, we were not able to obtain behavioral naming responses from this group of subjects during fMRI scanning. 
 After performing the overt naming tasks in scanner, participants were scanned in a block design with blocks of phonological judgments and blocks of semantic judgments alternating with a baseline condition consisting of a line-orientation judgment, in which participants judged whether two sets of lines with left or right orientations had the same pattern of left/right alternation (e.g., Are / / \ / and / / \ / the same?). The phonological and semantic judgment tasks were identical to those used during training, but without response feedback and with a new set of stimuli. 
 Neuroimaging data for the judgment tasks was collected from three functional MRI runs. Each functional run consisted of four 22 sec activation blocks (two phonological, two semantic) and three 22 sec baseline (line judgment) blocks. The order of activation block types was counterbalanced across runs. Each block consisted of 6 trials and was preceded by task instructions and a letter cue for 4000 msec at the bottom of the screen to indicate the upcoming task (The English letter “S” (abbreviation for Sound) was used as a cue for the homophone judgment; “M” (abbreviation for Meaning) for the semantic association judgment; “L” for the line-orientation judgment). The cues remained on the lower part of the screen throughout the entire block as a reminder of the task. The comparison pair in each trial was presented for 1500 msec. Behavioral responses for the judgment tasks (RT and accuracy) were recorded during fMRI scanning. 
 
 
 
 2.4 Image Acquisition 
 Functional images were collected on a 3 Tesla Siemens MR imaging system (Siemens MAGNETOM Trio, a TIM System) in the Imaging Center for Brain Research of Beijing Normal University. Prior to functional imaging, 32 axial-oblique anatomic images (echo time, 2.47 msec; repetition time, 300 msec; field of view, 220 mm 2 ; 4-mm-thick contiguous slices; matrix size, 256 × 256 × 2 number of excitations) were prescribed parallel to the intercommissural line based on sagittal localizer images (echo time, 6.83 msec; repetition time, 20 msec; field of view, 240/256 mm2; 4-mm-thick contiguous slices; matrix size, 240 × 256 × 1 number of excitations). The axial-oblique images were obtained at the same relative slice locations in each subject, extending from the inferior aspect of the temporal lobes to the parietal convexity. A single shot, gradient echo, echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence (flip angle, 80°; echo time, 30 msec; repetition time, 2000 msec; field of view, 220 mm 2 ; 4-mm-thick contiguous slices; matrix size, 64 × 64 × 1 number of excitations) was used to acquire activation images in the same slice locations as those used for axial-oblique anatomic images, resulting in 90 images obtained per functional run. After functional images were acquired, an additional high-resolution whole brain anatomic scan was obtained with the following parameters (flip angle, 7º; echo time, 3.66 msec; repetition time, 2530 msec; field of view, 256 mm 2 ; 1-mm-thick contiguous slices; matrix size, 256 × 256 × 1 number of excitations). The entire scanning took about 40 minutes. 
 
 
 2.5 Image Analysis 
 The imaging data were preprocessed and statistically analyzed using in-house routines written in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA). The first five images of each functional run were excluded from data processing due to image stabilization. Functional images were first sinc-interpolated to correct for slice acquisition time, corrected for motion ( Friston et al., 1995 ), and spatially smoothed with a Gaussian filter of size 3.125 mm full width at half maximum. For each subject, an affine transformation to the standardized space defined by the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) was obtained using Bio-ImageSuite ( Papademetris et al., 2003 ;  www.bioimagesuite.org ), mapping between the subject-space T1 anatomic and the MNI space “Colin” brain (available at  www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca ). Prior to across-subjects analysis, this transformation was applied to the single-subject activation maps, with trilinear interpolation, into 2-mm isotropic MNI space. 
 For single-subject event-related analysis, a regression-based method was used that allows direct estimation of the hemodynamic response for each trial type at each voxel separately ( Miezin, Maccotta, Ollinger, Petersen, & Buckner, 2000 ). Time course estimates were made for one-second intervals from −5 to +15 sec relative to trial onset. To create subject activation maps of the evoked response for each task condition, we obtained regression estimates of the mean difference in these time course estimates for an activation period (4-8 sec after trial onset) relative to a baseline period (0-3 sec prior to trial onset). For single-subject block design analysis, stimulus blocks were entered into a separate regression model as a simple boxcar function, with a 4-second lag to account for the hemodynamic delay. Contrasts for effects of interest were applied to these regression estimates to obtain contrast images for each subject. For the single-subject block analysis, linear regression was used to generate contrast images of the mean signal differences among the experimental and baseline conditions. In order to test effects across subjects for both event-related and block design sections, each voxel in these contrast images was tested versus zero with a t-test, implementing a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA;  Holmes & Friston, 1998 ;  Woods, 1996 ). 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Adaptive learning effects 
 
 Behavioral training Tasks 
 Mean RT and accuracy for the behavioral training outside fMRI scanner (the fMRI group) are presented in  Figure 1 . Two 2 × 8 × 2 × 3 (training condition × repetition × block order × stimulus list) repeated measures ANOVAs were computed with RT for correct responses and accuracy as dependent measures separately. Training condition and repetition were entered as within-subjects factors; block order and stimulus list were entered as between-subjects factors. Because block order and stimulus list were counterbalanced across subjects and not theoretically interesting; interactions involving these two factors are not reported. The main effects of training condition [F (1, 12) = 10.985, p < 0.01] and repetition [F (7, 84) = 20.009, p< 0.001] were both significant for RT, such that RT decreased reliably across repetitions in both phonological and semantic training conditions, and RT was significantly faster in the semantic training condition than phonological training condition. Planned paired-sample t-tests revealed no RT differences in the first three presentations and shorter RTs for semantic training condition than phonological training condition beginning at the fourth presentation [t (17) = 3.019, p < 0.01] and continuing to the end of training [t (17) = 3.941, p < 0.01]. For accuracy, only the main effect of repetition [F (7, 84) = 10.487, p < 0.001] was significant, indicating the accuracy increased comparably in both training conditions. Neither RT nor accuracy showed significant interactions between training condition and repetition. In sum, the behavioral performance from training tasks suggests successful training from both training tasks. 
 
 
 Training effects on behavioral naming response 
 Although we were not able to collect behavioral naming responses due to scanning constrains from the participants in the fMRI group, we collected the naming responses from a comparable behavioral cohort group. Since the two groups showed similar response pattern in the training tasks, we expected the fMRI group would show similar response pattern in the naming task as the behavioral cohort group. Naming latencies less than 200 msec and greater than 1750 msec were discarded as outliers (2.8% of all the responses). Data from one male subject were excluded due to excessive naming errors, microphone failures and naming time outliers. The mean naming latencies and accuracies for correct responses to phonologically trained R-C phonograms, semantically trained R-C phonograms, and untrained R-C phonograms for the remaining 36 subjects in the behavioral cohort group were shown in  Figure 2 . A repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant training transfer effect on naming latencies [F (2, 70) = 54.250, p < 0.001]. Post-hoc t-tests showed that both phonologically and semantically trained R-C phonograms yielded faster naming latencies relative to untrained R-C phonograms [t (35) = -9.170, p < 0.001 and t (35) = -7.731, p < 0.001, respectively], indicating that phonological and semantic training facilitated subsequent naming of the trained phonograms. No difference was observed between naming latencies for phonologically and semantically trained R-C phonograms, indicating that semantic and phonological training produced equivalent levels of behavioral training effects to naming. The observed differences between trained and untrained R-C phonograms in naming time did not reflect a speed–accuracy tradeoff. Naming accuracies of R-C phonograms were high in all conditions, with a slightly higher accuracy for phonologically trained R-C phonograms than the other two types of R-C phonograms. 
 
 
 Training effects on neural circuits of naming 
 To examine whether there were differential effects of the phonological and semantic training on brain activation, we directly contrasted the naming maps for phonologically and semantically trained phonograms ( Figure 3A  and  Table 1 ). Only the inferior aspect of LH IFG (BA47) in the well-documented reading networks were less activated for semantically trained phonograms than for phonologically trained phonograms (the region of yellow/red in  Figure 3A ).  Figure 4A  presents the mean activation (B-weights in the regression function) across all the voxels in this region when participants named aloud the phonologically trained, semantically trained, and untrained phonograms, suggesting more neural facilitation effect in this region for semantically trained phonograms than for phonologically trained phonograms. Beside the inferior aspect of LH IFG (BA47), no other regions in the major identified LH reading systems showed any differences between phonologically trained and semantically trained phonograms. Several regions outside the standard reading networks were less activated for phonologically trained than for semantically trained R-C phonograms, including LH posterior cingulate gyrus, RH cingulate gyrus, and RH superior and medial frontal gyrus (regions of blue/purple in  Figure 3A ). 
 Interestingly, when phonologically and semantically trained R-C phonograms were combined as trained R-C phonograms and compared with the activations of untrained R-C phonograms, many differences were found ( Figure 3B  and  Table 1 ). Most importantly, trained phonograms showed reduced activation at bilateral speech-articulatory areas compared with untrained phonograms (regions of blue/purple in  Figure 3B ), including LH insula/IFG (BA13/45) and right-hemisphere (RH) IFG (BA45). The reduction in activation in these regions indicates general neural training-facilitation effects. In addition, trained phonograms were more active at bilateral IPL than untrained phonograms (regions of yellow/red in  Figure 3B ).  Figure 4B-4E  present the mean activations (B-weights in the regression function) across all the voxels in each of the following regions respectively, LH insula/IFG, RH IFG, LH IPL, and RH IPL, when participants named aloud phonologically trained, semantically trained, and untrained phonograms. 
 
 
 
 3.2 Regularity-Consistency Effects 
 Both naming latency and accuracy in the behavioral cohort group confirmed the empirical behavioral regularity-consistency effects 1 . Naming responses to untrained IR-IC phonograms were significantly slower [latency: 770 msec (SD = 109),  t  (35) = -6.058,  p  < 0.001] and less accurate [accuracy: 87% (SD = 7),  t  (35) = 4.310,  p  < 0.001] than for untrained R-C phonograms. 
 Neurobiologically, the contrast between the two types of phonograms from the fMRI group revealed many differences in the well identified distributed LH Chinese reading circuitry. IR-IC phonograms showed higher activation than R-C phonograms at LH IFG/MFG (including BA 45, 46, 47, and 9), FG, MTG, and SPL extending to precuneus, IPL, and supramarginal gyrus (SMG) (see  Figure 5  and  Table 2 ). However, no regions were found with higher activation for R-C phonograms than IR-IC phonograms. The activation pattern at LH IFG/MFG, FFG, SPL, IPL, and SMG in the present data was similar to a previous study for consistency effect in reading Chinese phonograms ( Lee et al., 2004 ); however, we also found higher activation for naming IR-IC phonograms than R-C phonograms at LH MTG whereas  Lee et al. (2004)  did not. Our finding of the differential activation at LH MTG as a function of consistency squares findings in English with similar manipulations, which has typically been taken as an indication that visual word recognition involves the cooperative interaction of phonological and semantic processes, with stronger recruitment of semantic processes when the computation of phonology is difficult ( S. J. Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves et al., 2010 ). 
 
 
 3.3 Judgment Tasks 
 Behaviorally, mean RT and accuracy of the (in-scanner) phonological and semantic judgment tasks were similar. Mean RT in the phonological judgment task, semantic judgment task, and line-orientation judgment task were 951 (132) msec, 950 (134) msec, and 1155 (120) msec, respectively. Mean accuracy in the phonological judgment task, semantic judgment task, and line-orientation judgment task were 0.95 (0.1), 0.93 (0.1), and 0.88 (0.1), respectively. Repeated measures ANOVA revealed significant main effects of task for both RT [ F  (2, 34) =38.223,  p  < 0.001] and accuracy [ F  (2, 34) = 10.405,  p  < 0.001]. Post-hoc t-test revealed differences between phonological task and line-orientation task, as well as semantic task versus line-orientation task [RT:  t  (17) = -6.221,  p  < 0.001 and  t  (17) = -8.994,  p  < 0.001, respectively; accuracy:  t  (17) = 4.106,  p  < 0.001 and  t  (17) = 2.652,  p  < 0.05, respectively], but no difference between phonological task and semantic task. 
 Surprisingly, direct comparison of neural activation levels during the semantic task versus the phonological task also revealed few differences ( Figure 6A  and  Table 3 ). Only one region of LH IFG extending to MFG was activated higher for the semantic task than for the phonological task (regions of yellow/red in  Figure 6A ). The only region that showed higher activation for the phonological task was precuneus extending into the posterior cingulate gyrus (regions of blue/purple in  Figure 6A ). In contrast, combining phonological and semantic tasks revealed a number of regions that were significantly more activated for the language (phonological and semantic) tasks than for the non-language control (line-orientation) task, including LH IFG (BA 47, 44, and 45) extending to MFG, MTG, MOG extending to lingual and FG, and a focal activation in and along left collateral sulcus (regions of yellow/red in  Figure 6B  and  Table 3 ). It is worth noting that an area at RH FG, which was suggested to play an important role in Chinese reading by previous studies ( Bolger, Perfetti, & Schneider, 2005 ;  Y. Liu, Dunlap, Fiez, & Perfetti, 2007 ;  Nelson, Liu, Fiez, & Perfetti, 2009 ;  Tan, Laird, Li, & Fox, 2005 ), was found activated to a higher degree for the non-language control task compared with the language tasks. In general, the neuroimaging responses from judgment tasks indicate a multi-components neural network for reading of Chinese in widespread regions of the left hemisphere, which subserves phonology and semantics by-and-large equally. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 In this study, we examined the neural system of Chinese reading, with a particular focus on the division of labor between phonological and semantic processes of reading Chinese R-C phonograms. We employed an adaptive learning paradigm, in which participants were required to focus on different properties (phonology vs. semantics) of Chinese R-C phonograms during training. This paradigm allowed us to examine the transfer of phonological and semantic training to a subsequent naming task. Our training effects showed that prior exposure had similar effects on the naming of Chinese phonograms regardless of whether the prior exposure took place while participants were engaged in a phonological or a semantic task. Behaviorally, naming latencies were facilitated to the same extent by phonological and semantic training. Neurobiologically, the transfer effects of phonological and semantic training on subsequent naming circuits were by-and-large rather similar in the major identified LH reading system for Chinese reading. Our data suggest that the characteristics of the Chinese writing system produce a relatively equitable division of labor between phonological and semantic processes, specifically when reading Chinese R-C phonograms. 
 Beyond our main finding of division of labor between phonology and semantics in reading of Chinese R-C phonograms, our neuroimaging results from judgment tasks also shed light on the neural circuitry of the Chinese reading. In general, neural activation patterns in judgment tasks corroborated a multi-componential reading system for Chinese reading primarily in left-sided reading areas (see  Tan et al., 2005 , for reviews), including LH areas that also subserve alphabetic reading (IFG, MTG, IPL/SPL, and FG), but also MFG that is thought to play a specific role in the reading of Chinese. These regions were all engaged in component (both phonological and semantic) judgment tasks and were also activated higher in naming IR-IC phonograms compared to naming R-C phonograms, again suggesting that semantics and phonology are somewhat sharing the same neural network. 
 Our results provided the first-order neurobiological empirical evidence for cooperation of phonology and semantics to reading of Chinese R-C phonograms. More importantly, we directly contrasted phonological and semantic effects in reading of Chinese R-C phonograms in fMRI, which was rarely done in previous studies. Surprisingly, phonology and semantics not only illustrated relatively comparable behavioral effects in naming aloud, but also induced quite similar effects neurobiologically. All together, the results imply that Chinese reading might require a combination of semantic and phonological strategies that are hardly differentiated from each other. The equitable division of labor between phonological and semantic contribution to reading of Chinese R-C phonograms that we found in the current fMRI study corroborated recent computational modeling work within connectionist framework, which showed that semantics played as much important role as phonology in naming Chinese R-C phonograms ( Yang et al., 2012 ). 
 From a broader theoretical background, the current results are also consistent with findings of reading development and impairments in Chinese. Although a numerous studies have reported a strong link between phonological processing and character recognition in Chinese children ( Chow, McBride-Chang, & Burgess, 2005 ;  Ho, Law, & Ng, 2000 ;  Siok & Fletcher, 2001 ), the contribution of semantics to the development of Chinese reading is also critically important ( Chen, Hao, Geva, Zhu, & Shu, 2009 ;  McBride-Chang, Shu, Zhou, Wat, & Wagner, 2003 ;  Shu, McBride-Chang, Wu, & Liu, 2006 ). In particular,  Li, Shu, McBride-Chang, Liu, and Peng (2012)  administrated 184 kindergarteners at age 5 to 6 and 273 primary school students at age 7 to 9 from Beijing with a comprehensive battery of tasks and found both phonological and semantic skills significantly explained the performance of character recognition of these children, which underscores the importance of dimensions of both phonological and semantic processing for very early and intermediate acquisition of Chinese reading. Developmental dyslexic work by  Shu, Meng, Chen, Luan, and Cao (2005)  also implies that semantic and phonological impairments have widespread effects for Chinese character reading. They reported three cases of developmental dyslexia in Chinese, and found that one case with impairment in semantic processing (surface dyslexia) and two cases with deficit of phonological processing (deep dyslexia). However, both children with semantic and phonological deficits were impaired on naming of all characters relative to their age-matched controls. These cases were successfully simulated and confirmed by connectionist models recently ( Yang et al., 2012 ). It is also worth noting that a recent neuroimaging study observed similar alterations in brain activations for phonological and semantic processing to visual characters in a group of Chinese developmental dyslexic children ( L. Liu et al., 2012 ), again suggesting that access to phonology and semantics from the visual orthography for Chinese readers might use the same neural network. 
 Even though our neurobiological results have shown that the neural network that underlies reading in Chinese largely overlapped the network responsible for reading in English, the neural division of labor between phonology and semantics in Chinese reading contrasted tremendously from English findings. Although we did not conduct comparable experiments in an alphabetic writing system in the present study, it is still worth doing a qualitative comparison between the current study with those studies from the literature of alphabetic writing systems to illuminate how structure of the writing system drives the differences in division of labor between phonology and semantics in reading. 
 First, for the adaptive learning experiments, the most comparable study that has been done in alphabetic writing systems is the work conducted by  Sandak and her colleagues (2004)  in English reading. Although the two studies employed slightly different training procedures (phonological training: rhyming judgment in English vs. homophone judgment in Chinese; semantic training: category judgment in English vs. semantic association judgment in Chinese) necessitated by the differences in training materials (English pseudowords vs. Chinese R-C phonograms), in general both studies employed the same adaptive learning paradigm and both aimed to examine how different strategies of training change the responses of naming words. In addition, the behavioral pattern of adaptive learning in the present study was similar to that observed in readers of English. In both studies, phonological and semantic training resulted in faster naming latencies than control condition and the facilitation effects in naming latencies were comparable between phonological training and semantic training, which again suggests the comparability of the two studies. 
 However, the neurobiological patterns associated with division of labor between phonological and semantic processes in reading Chinese and English seemed quite different. In the results of  Sandak et al. (2004)  with readers of English, the neurobiological effects of phonological and semantic training differed substantially. Reinforcing different dimensions (phonological vs. semantic) facilitated naming via different neural components: phonological training resulted in decreases in left OT, SMG, and posterior IFG activation, whereas semantic training produced an increase at left MTG. In contrast, in the present study phonological and semantic training had largely similar neurobiological effects on the neural correlates of reading in Chinese characters, including increased activations in bilateral IPL and reduced activations in the well-known speech output areas at bilateral IFG (BA45), which may reflect training-related increased processing efficiency to naming at articulatory-motor circuits ( Katz et al., 2005 ;  Poldrack & Gabrieli, 2001 ;  Pugh et al., 2008 ;  Sandak et al., 2004 ). Perhaps the only meaningful difference between the two training condition was in one region of the anterior part of left IFG (BA47), which was reduced more when naming semantically trained phonograms than naming phonologically trained phonograms, suggesting that semantic training slightly induced more efficient retrieval of semantics than phonology in naming Chinese phonograms. Although our findings of IFG (BA 47) seems new compared to  Sandak et al. (2004) 's study, in which the authors didn't observe neural changes of left IFG responding to semantic training, our result did corroborate findings from our own component judgment tasks, in which we observed that the anterior part of IFG (BA47) was responsible more in semantic processing, paralleling various findings from English studies ( Gough, Nobre, & Devlin, 2005 ;  Poldrack et al., 1999 ). In sum, our results showed that phonological and semantic training have rather similar effects on the patterns of brain activation associated with naming aloud Chinese characters—in contrast to the differential effects of phonological and semantic training in English. In other words, neural O-P and O-S pathways for reading of Chinese are not as easily to differentiate by focused learning as in English. 
 Second, the effects of the task manipulation (phonological vs. semantic) observed in the judgment tasks appear to differ substantially from those previously observed in English too. We found that phonological and semantic tasks induced quite similar neural activation patterns in the reading system for Chinese, indicating that the weights for the multi-components of Chinese reading system do not change substantially according to the task demands. Although semantic judgment task did induce higher activation than phonological judgment in left IFG (BA47), most of the components in the left hemisphere (BA 45 of IFG, MFG, MTG, FFG, and IPL/SPL) were activated equivalently between phonological judgment and semantic judgment. In contrast, previous studies in readers of English revealed that phonological and semantic tasks result in substantially different patterns of neural activation. Relative to phonological tasks, semantic tasks are associated with greater activation in LH anterior IFG, angular gyrus, MTG, and anterior FFG; phonological tasks evoke greater activation in LH posterior/dorsal IFG, insula, SMG, and posterior FFG ( Booth et al., 2002a ,  2002b ;  Demonet et al., 1992 ;  Devlin, Matthews, & Rushworth, 2003 ;  McDermott, Petersen, Watson, & Ojemann, 2003 ;  Poldrack et al., 1999 ;  Price, Moore, Humphreys, & Wise, 1997 ;  Pugh et al., 1996 ). The comparison between results from our component judgment tasks and previous English findings again support our hypothesis that Chinese character reading has more equitable division of labor than English reading. The similar network for O-P and O-S processes in reading of Chinese characters suggests that even though subjects were asked to focus on phonological information, semantic processes are recruited to facilitate the computation of phonology and vice versa. In sum, the cortical regions subserving phonological and semantic processing seem to be more interdependent when reading Chinese characters than when reading English words. 
 The different neurobiological effects of training from English and Chinese adaptive learning experiments suggest that reading system of Chinese might illustrate a more equitable division of labor between phonology and semantics than that of English. The differences in the neural division of labor between readers from the two writing systems might reflect the differences in the structure of the writing systems and might be explained in the framework of connectionist models, with the assumption that different statistical regularities from print to sound and meaning drive the differences of division of labor between phonology and semantics across different writing systems ( Harm & Seidenberg, 2004 ;  Seidenberg, 1992 , 2011;  Yang et al., 2012 ). As we described in the introduction, for Chinese, the O-P and O-S mappings are relatively equally systematic, although both are not as much consistent as O-P mapping in English. In contrast, although the orthographic-phonological mapping in English is largely systematic (albeit not to the extent of ‘shallower’ orthographies such as Italian or Spanish), the O-S mapping is largely arbitrary—with the exception of morphological regularities ( Rueckl, 2010 ;  Seidenberg and Gonnerman, 2000 ) that are for the most part redundant with the structure of the phonological-semantic mapping (and hence, available to the reader in the via the phonologically mediated (orthographic-phonological-semantic) pathway). Thus, it is reasonable to conjecture that reading in Chinese should involve a more equitable division of labor between phonological and semantic processes than reading in English ( Harm & Seidenberg, 2004 ;  Yang et al., 2012 ). The comparison of the division of labor between O-P and O-S processes in the reading process of computing phonology from orthography is deciphered in  Figure 7 . As shown in the figure, the two processes (direct mapping from orthography to phonology and indirect mapping from orthography to semantics then to phonology) both contribute to the computation of phonology in the two writing systems. However, the weighting for the two mappings differ substantially between the two writing systems. In English, there is greater reliance on O-P mapping than O-S mapping, whereas in Chinese, the two mappings by-and-large equally contribute to the computation of phonology. 
 Although we have discussed in general the differences between Chinese and English reading in terms of division of labor between O-P and O-S processes under the framework of connectionist models, these differences may also partly depend on the structure of written and phonological forms themselves. The greater orthographic complexity and simpler monosyllabic phonological structure of Chinese may also contribute to the differences in reading processes between the two writing systems. 
 In terms of orthographic structure, although Chinese includes both phonological radicals and semantic radicals, the radicals may be further divided into about 600 subcomponents, which have fixed internal structures. The complex visuospatial organization of these subcomponents may make relatively greater demands on basic visual or orthographic analysis in Chinese reading than in alphabetic reading. Also, many of the radicals or components have their legal positions, thus awareness of these orthographic legalities is important in character recognition (e.g.,  Li et al., 2012 ). Studies have also found that orthographic processing deficit may also directly relate to reading disability ( Ho, Chan, Chung, Lee, & Tsang, 2007 ;  Ho, Chan, Lee, Tsang, & Luan, 2004 ). 
 With regard to phonological structure, Chinese has a relatively simpler phonological structure than English does. Chinese morphemes always correspond to monosyllables and the syllable only allows structure such as C V, CVN, V, and VN. Indeed, syllable awareness was found more important than phonemic awareness in spoken word processing in Chinese, a finding contrasted substantially with English studies ( Zhao, Guo, Zhou, & Shu, 2011 ).  Siok, Jin, Fletcher, and Tan (2003)  also observed that distinct brain regions associate with syllable and phoneme processing for Chinese readers. Thus, it is plausible to infer that the specialty of the phonological structure of Chinese might also produce some effects in Chinese reading compared to English reading too ( Siok, Perfetti, Jin, & Tan, 2004 ;  Tan et al., 2005 ). 
 Further, some brain regions have also been argued to be specifically involved in identifying Chinese characters for the increased demand on visuospatial processing (LH MFG and RH FG in  Bolger et al., 2005 ;  Y. Liu et al., 2007 ;  Nelson et al., 2009 ;  Tan et al., 2005 ) and “addressed” phonological processing at the syllable level (LH MFG in L. Liu et al., 2009;  Siok et al., 2003 ;  Siok et al., 2004 ;  Tan et al., 2005 ). In our study, we observed that LH MFG was more engaged for the linguistic judgment task as compared with the non-linguistic judgment task, indicating its role for general visuospatial analysis of Chinese characters ( Tan et al., 2001 ;  Tan et al., 2003 ). However, LH MFG was also recruited more by the semantic judgment task than the phonological judgment task as illustrated by our direct comparison map between the two tasks and more for naming IR-IC phonograms than R-C phonograms. Hence, we tend to suggest that LH MFG may broadly serve roles for orthographic, phonological, and semantic processing. In terms of RH FG, it should be noted that our results do not support a reading-specific role of it for Chinese reading as proposed by some previous studies ( Bolger et al., 2005 ;  Y. Liu et al., 2007 ;  Nelson et al., 2009 ;  Tan et al., 2005 ), because in our study, the activation of this region was higher in a non-language control task (line-orientation) than in the language (semantic association and homophone judgment) tasks. Thus, we suggest that RH FG may not be overly specialized for Chinese character processing. Our claim is consistent with a recent Chinese and English reading comparison study by  Hu et al. (2010)  with the most tightly matched participants and analyses, which did not show any RH FG activation more for Chinese readers than English readers. To sum, our data suggest that the fundamental differences in orthographic and phonological representation between Chinese and alphabetic systems seem drive differences in neural activation patterns in some brain region (e.g., LH MFG) but not others (e.g., distributed LH reading circuits and RH FG). However, additional work will be required for a complete understanding of whether these fundamental representational differences have a comparable, bigger, or smaller impact than the differential statistical structure of weighting between O-P and O-S mappings in driving differences in division of labor between the two writing systems. 
 
 
 5. Limitations 
 In the current study, we have made our primary claim (equitable division of labor between phonology and semantics for Chinese reading) based on relatively similar responses for phonological and semantic strategies. However, we believe that the results that we found in this paper were not null results but rather reflect important and specific characteristics of Chinese reading. It might be argued that the lack of large differences produced by phonological training and semantic training could likely be due to the basics of the adaptive learning paradigm and the naming task that we used in the study, which may not be sensitive to detect the differences across the two training conditions. This argument is not tenable, because of the following reasons. Firstly, we found many differences in cortical activation in the naming task between trained and untrained conditions regardless of training types. The most important neural facilitation effect for trained R-C phonograms compared to untrained R-C phonograms was reduced activation at bilateral IFG/insula, which was consistent with many previous training-related studies in English ( Katz et al., 2005 ;  Poldrack & Gabrieli, 2001 ;  Pugh et al., 2008 ;  Sandak et al., 2004 ). This suggests that neural response of the task of naming aloud is actually sensitive to training and the reason that it is not sensitive to different training conditions might be mainly driven by the inherent characteristics of the training focus rather than the naming task. 
 Secondly, we also observed robust results with regard to the regularity-consistency effects in the naming task: The less consistent (IR-IC) phonograms induced higher activation at distributed LH reading circuits than the phonograms that are more consistent (R-C phonograms). The main locus of the regularity-consistency effect at left IFG in naming Chinese phonograms was similar to the region associated with phonological consistency effects in English ( Fiez, Balota, Raichle, & Petersen, 1999 ;  S. J. Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves et al., 2010 ) and overlapped with the loci reported in two previous studies respectively for regularity effects ( Tan et al., 2001 ) and consistency effects ( Lee et al., 2004 ) in Chinese reading. We also observed the differential activation of predominately semantic regions (LH MTG) as a function of the orthographic-phonological consistency in Chinese reading, a similar neuroimaging finding as parallel manipulations in English ( S. J. Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves et al., 2010 ). The regularity-consistency effects in the current results came from the same imaging runs as the training comparison data, suggesting a lack of fundamental problems with the data and the less positive results from the training comparison might not reflect anything about statistical power of the fMRI design. 
 In addition, both  Frost et al. (2005)  and  Graves et al. (2010)  have used naming aloud as an experimental task and the neural O-P and O-S pathways were well separated by a multi-parametric design of the stimuli (e.g., consistency by imageability) in both studies of English readers. Indeed, in the previous study most closely related to ours,  Sandak et al. (2004)  also used the naming task to reveal differential effects of phonological and semantic training in English. Thus, naming aloud is certainly a task that has been proved to be sensitive to examine division of labor between phonology and semantics and our results should not be due to a problem from the task that we used but rather because of the Chinese writing system. 
 Finally, our judgment tasks also revealed that the phonological and semantic processing for R-C phonograms produced relatively little differences in ensembles of LH reading areas, which coincides with an earlier finding by  Tan et al. (2001)  (although in that study the tasks were not directly compared and the stimuli included various types of Chinese characters not specific to R-C phonograms). Using an explicit task, which specifically tapped into O-P and O-S processing of Chinese, we still failed to find any differences between phonological and semantic processes. This result again suggests that the little differences in our training comparison between phonological and semantic reinforcements may not be due to the paradigm problem, but rather reflect interdependence of phonological and semantic processes in Chinese reading, per se. It should be noted that some of the previous studies (if not all) have reported some differentiations in the neural circuits between Chinese semantic processing and phonological processing. However, the subtle differences might only be able to detect in some special circumstances, such as increasing task demands and not restricting the tasks to reading (e.g.,  Wu et al., 2012 ) or using two-character words as stimuli for reading (e.g.,  Booth et al., 2006 ). Whether the findings from Wu et al. and Booth et al. can be generalized into single character reading in Chinese seems inconclusive. 
 Nevertheless, we acknowledged that the comparison in adaptive learning that we made between Chinese and English perhaps should be taken conservative, because of the differences in terms of stimuli and procedure between the two studies. It might be valuable to conduct a future study on adaptive learning of English R-C words with similar training procedure as the current Chinese study, so that the division of labor between the two writing systems could be compared in a more matched way. It might also be interested to look at cooperative learning effects in reading Chinese pseudo-characters. Actually,  Zhao (2012)  have addressed this issue and found cooperation between phonology and semantics in learning to read Chinese pseudo-characters, which may deserve a follow-up neuroimaging study to examine the neural division of labor effects between phonology and semantics in learning Chinese pseudo-characters. 
 It is also worth highlighting that the current paper only addresses the issue related to the division of labor between phonology and semantics in reading single Chinese characters and whether division of labor between phonology and semantics in reading two or multi-character words or even sentences or texts in Chinese is beyond the scope of this paper and is still an open question which might be valuable to investigate in future studies. In addition, we have examined the division of labor between phonology and semantics to a task of reading aloud in Chinese, but a full account of the division of labor between phonology and semantics will require consideration of other tasks (e.g., silent reading with computation of meaning as the ultimate goal). Indeed,  Harm and Seidenberg (2004)  have modeled the division of labor between phonology and semantics in English with silent reading for meaning as the task. None of previous studies have conducted similar modeling or empirical research in Chinese reading yet. Future studies might be worth pursuing more in this direction too. 
 
 
 6. Conclusions 
 In sum, the present study suggests that the division of labor between phonology and semantics in Chinese reading is equitable, which may be driven by similar systematicity between O-P and O-S mappings in the writing system of Chinese. Even though the neural network that underlies reading in Chinese largely overlaps the network responsible for reading in English, the neural division of labor between phonology and semantics in Chinese reading contrasts tremendously from English findings. Phonological and semantic processes for English readers induced great neural differentiations in brain circuits, whereas the two processes for Chinese readers have largely similar neurobiological effects. This culture-constrained difference may be caused by language-specific statistical regularities embodied in the writing system. 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (grant number P01 HD 001994) to Haskins Laboratories, the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing (grant number 7092051) to Hua Shu, and the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant number 30870758) to Hua Shu. 
 
 
 
 Authorship Notes:  The first author of this paper is currently affiliated with Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Departement d'Etudes Cognitives of Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris 75005, France (email correspondence:  jingjing.jj.zhao@gmail.com ). Address also correspondence to Jay G. Rueckl, Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA (email:  jay.rueckl@uconn.edu ), and Hua Shu, State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China (email:  shuh@bnu.edu.cn ). 
 
 
 1 
 A regular-consistent (R-C) phonogram has the same pronunciation to its phonetic radical and all other phonograms containing the same phonetic radical. An irregular-inconsistent (IR-IC) phonogram has different pronunciation to its phonetic radical and other phonograms containing the same phonetic radical. Naming latency and accuracy were found longer and less accurate for naming IR-IC phonograms than for R-C phonograms, which termed as regularity-consistency effects (e.g.,  Lee et al., 2005 ), similar to the regularity-consistency effects found in reading alphabetic languages such as English (e.g.,  Jared, 2002 ). 
 
 
 2 
 Phonograms also vary in semantic transparency—the degree to which the meaning of a phonogram is related to the ‘core’ meaning of the radical. The more semantic information a semantic radical contributes to the meaning of the phonogram that contains it, the more transparent is the phonogram. 
 
 
 3 
 A consistency ratio is the number of phonograms with the same pronunciation divided by the total number of phonograms with the same phonetic radical. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barca 
 L 
 
 
 Burani 
 C 
 
 
 Arduino 
 LS 
 
 
 2002 
 Word naming times and psycholinguistic norms for Italian nouns 
 Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 
 34 
 3 
 424 
 434 
 12395559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bates 
 E 
 
 
 Burani 
 C 
 
 
 D'Amico 
 S 
 
 
 Barca 
 L 
 
 
 2001 
 Word reading and picture naming in Italian 
 Mem Cognit 
 29 
 7 
 986 
 999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 2005 
 Cross-cultural effect on the brain revisited: universal structures plus writing system variation 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 25 
 1 
 92 
 104 
 15846818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Meyer 
 JR 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2002a 
 Functional anatomy of intra- and cross-modal lexical tasks 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 1 
 7 
 22 
 11969313 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Meyer 
 JR 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2002b 
 Modality independence of word comprehension 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 16 
 4 
 251 
 261 
 12112766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Lu 
 D 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Chou 
 TL 
 
 
 Jin 
 Z 
 
 
 Peng 
 DL 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Specialization of phonological and semantic processing in Chinese word reading 
 Brain Res 
 1071 
 1 
 197 
 207 
 16427033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cattinelli 
 I 
 
 
 Borghese 
 NA 
 
 
 Gallucci 
 M 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Reading the reading brain: a new meta-analysis of functional imaging data on reading 
 J Neurolinguist 
 26 
 214 
 238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 X 
 
 
 Hao 
 ML 
 
 
 Geva 
 E 
 
 
 Zhu 
 J 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 2009 
 The role of compound awareness in Chinese children's vocabulary acquisition and character reading 
 Reading and Writing 
 22 
 5 
 615 
 631 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chow 
 BWY 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Burgess 
 S 
 
 
 2005 
 Phonological processing skills and early reading abilities in Hong Kong Chinese kindergarteners learning to read English as a second language 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 97 
 1 
 81 
 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeFrancis 
 J 
 
 
 1989 
 Visible speech: The diverse oneness of writing systems 
 Honolulu, HI 
 University of Hawaii Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Chollet 
 F 
 
 
 Ramsay 
 S 
 
 
 Cardebat 
 D 
 
 
 Nespoulous 
 JL 
 
 
 Wise 
 R 
 
 
 
 1992 
 The anatomy of phonological and semantic processing in normal subjects 
 Brain 
 115 
 Pt 6 
 1753 
 1768 
 1486459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 2003 
 Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: a combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 15 
 1 
 71 
 84 
 12590844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 1999 
 Effects of lexicality, frequency, and spelling-to-sound consistency on the functional anatomy of reading 
 Neuron 
 24 
 1 
 205 
 218 
 10677038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Heather 
 JD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 1995 
 Spatial registration and normalization of images 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 3 
 3 
 165 
 189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 R 
 
 
 2012 
 Towards a universal model of reading 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 35 
 5 
 263 
 279 
 22929057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Moore 
 DL 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 
 2005 
 A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of the tradeoff between semantics and phonology in reading aloud 
 Neuroreport 
 16 
 6 
 621 
 624 
 15812320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 4 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gough 
 PM 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 2005 
 Dissociating linguistic processes in the left inferior frontal cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 35 
 8010 
 8016 
 16135758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural systems for reading aloud: a multiparametric approach 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 8 
 1799 
 1815 
 19920057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harm 
 MW 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 2004 
 Computing the meanings of words in reading: cooperative division of labor between visual and phonological processes 
 Psychol Rev 
 111 
 3 
 662 
 720 
 15250780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ho 
 CSH 
 
 
 Chan 
 DW 
 
 
 Chung 
 KKH 
 
 
 Lee 
 SH 
 
 
 Tsang 
 SM 
 
 
 2007 
 In search of subtypes of Chinese developmental dyslexia 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 97 
 1 
 61 
 83 
 17320097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ho 
 CSH 
 
 
 Chan 
 DWO 
 
 
 Lee 
 SH 
 
 
 Tsang 
 SM 
 
 
 Luan 
 VVH 
 
 
 2004 
 Cognitive profiling and preliminary subtyping in Chinese developmental dyslexia 
 Cognition 
 91 
 1 
 43 
 75 
 14711491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ho 
 CSH 
 
 
 Law 
 TPS 
 
 
 Ng 
 PM 
 
 
 2000 
 The phonological deficit hypothesis in Chinese developmental dyslexia 
 Reading and Writing 
 13 
 1-2 
 57 
 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Generalizability, random effects, and population inference 
 Neuroimage 
 7 
 S34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hu 
 W 
 
 
 Lee 
 HL 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Q 
 
 
 Liu 
 T 
 
 
 Geng 
 LB 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Developmental dyslexia in Chinese and English populations: dissociating the effect of dyslexia from language differences 
 Brain 
 133 
 Pt 6 
 1694 
 1706 
 20488886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jared 
 D 
 
 
 2002 
 Spelling-sound consistency and regularity effects in word naming 
 J Mem Lang 
 46 
 4 
 723 
 750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Lee 
 CH 
 
 
 Tabor 
 W 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Behavioral and neurobiological effects of printed word repetition in lexical decision and naming 
 Neuropsychologia 
 43 
 14 
 2068 
 2083 
 16243052 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 CY 
 
 
 Tsai 
 JL 
 
 
 Kuo 
 WJ 
 
 
 Yeh 
 TC 
 
 
 Wu 
 YT 
 
 
 Ho 
 LT 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Neuronal correlates of consistency and frequency effects on Chinese character naming: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 4 
 1235 
 1245 
 15589089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 CY 
 
 
 Tsai 
 JL 
 
 
 Su 
 ECI 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 OJL 
 
 
 Hung 
 DJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Consistency, regularity, and frequency effects in naming Chinese characters 
 Language and Linguistics 
 6 
 1 
 75 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Liu 
 HY 
 
 
 Peng 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Chinese children's character recognition: Visuo-orthographic, phonological processing and morphological skills 
 Journal of Research in Reading 
 35 
 3 
 287 
 307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 L 
 
 
 Wang 
 WJ 
 
 
 You 
 WP 
 
 
 Li 
 Y 
 
 
 Awati 
 N 
 
 
 Zhao 
 X 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Similar alterations in brain function for phonological and semantic processing to visual characters in Chinese dyslexia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 9 
 2224 
 2232 
 22698991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Dunlap 
 S 
 
 
 Fiez 
 J 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Evidence for neural accommodation to a writing system following learning 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 11 
 1223 
 1234 
 17274024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Li 
 P 
 
 
 2007 
 Word naming and psycholinguistic norms: Chinese 
 Behav Res Methods 
 39 
 2 
 192 
 198 
 17695344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Zhou 
 AB 
 
 
 Wat 
 CP 
 
 
 Wagner 
 RK 
 
 
 2003 
 Morphological awareness uniquely predicts young children's Chinese character recognition 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 95 
 4 
 743 
 751 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Watson 
 JM 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 JG 
 
 
 2003 
 A procedure for identifying regions preferentially activated by attention to semantic and phonological relations using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 3 
 293 
 303 
 12457755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 L 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Characterizing the hemodynamic response: effects of presentation rate, sampling procedure, and the possibility of ordering brain activity based on relative timing 
 Neuroimage 
 11 
 6 Pt 1 
 735 
 759 
 10860799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 JR 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Fiez 
 J 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 2009 
 Assimilation and accommodation patterns in ventral occipitotemporal cortex in learning a second writing system 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 3 
 810 
 820 
 18381767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Fazio 
 F 
 
 
 McCrory 
 E 
 
 
 Chanoine 
 V 
 
 
 Brunswick 
 N 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Dyslexia: cultural diversity and biological unity 
 Science 
 291 
 5511 
 2165 
 2167 
 11251124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 McCrory 
 E 
 
 
 Fazio 
 F 
 
 
 Menoncello 
 L 
 
 
 Brunswick 
 N 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 
 2000 
 A cultural effect on brain function 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 1 
 91 
 96 
 10607401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papademetris 
 X 
 
 
 Jackowski 
 AP 
 
 
 Schultz 
 RT 
 
 
 Staib 
 LH 
 
 
 Duncan 
 JS 
 
 
 2003 
 Computing 3D non-rigid brain registrations using extended robust point matching for composite multisubject fMRI analysis 
 
 
 Ellis 
 RE 
 
 
 Peters 
 TM 
 
 
 Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention 
 788 
 795 
 Berlin, Germany 
 Springer-Verlag 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plaut 
 DC 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 1996 
 Understanding normal and impaired word reading: computational principles in quasi-regular domains 
 Psychol Rev 
 103 
 1 
 56 
 115 
 8650300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Characterizing the neural mechanisms of skill learning and repetition priming: evidence from mirror reading 
 Brain 
 124 
 Pt 1 
 67 
 82 
 11133788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 1999 
 Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 1 
 15 
 35 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 CJ 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GW 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJS 
 
 
 1997 
 Segregating semantic from phonological processes during reading 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 9 
 6 
 727 
 733 
 23964595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Effects of stimulus difficulty and repetition on printed word identification: an fMRI comparison of nonimpaired and reading-disabled adolescent cohorts 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 20 
 7 
 1146 
 1160 
 18284344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Jenner 
 AR 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 JR 
 
 
 
 2000 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability (developmental dyslexia) 
 Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev 
 6 
 3 
 207 
 213 
 10982498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 
 1996 
 Cerebral organization of component processes in reading 
 Brain 
 119 
 Pt 4 
 1221 
 1238 
 8813285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 2010 
 Connectionism and the role of morphology in visual word recognition 
 The Mental Lexicon 
 5 
 3 
 371 
 400 
 22934123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Moore 
 DL 
 
 
 
 2004 
 The neurobiology of adaptive learning in reading: a contrast of different training conditions 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 4 
 1 
 67 
 88 
 15259890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 1992 
 Beyond orthographic depth in reading: Equitable division of labor 
 
 
 Frost 
 R 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Orthography, Phonology, Morphology, and Meaning 
 85 
 118 
 Oxford, England 
 North-Holland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 2011 
 Reading in Different Writing Systems: One Architecture, Multiple Solutions 
 
 
 McCardle 
 P 
 
 
 Miller 
 B 
 
 
 Lee 
 JR 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 O 
 
 
 Dyslexia across Languages: Orthography and the Gene-Brain-Behavior Link 
 149 
 174 
 Paul Brookes Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 Gonnerman 
 LM 
 
 
 2000 
 Explaining derivational morphology as the convergence of codes 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 4 
 9 
 353 
 361 
 10962617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shibahara 
 N 
 
 
 Zorzi 
 M 
 
 
 Hill 
 MP 
 
 
 Wydell 
 T 
 
 
 Butterworth 
 B 
 
 
 2003 
 Semantic effects in word naming: evidence from English and Japanese Kanji 
 Q J Exp Psychol A 
 56 
 2 
 263 
 286 
 12613564 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Chen 
 X 
 
 
 Anderson 
 RC 
 
 
 Wu 
 N 
 
 
 Xuan 
 Y 
 
 
 2003 
 Properties of school Chinese: implications for learning to read 
 Child Dev 
 74 
 1 
 27 
 47 
 12625434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Wu 
 S 
 
 
 Liu 
 HY 
 
 
 2006 
 Understanding Chinese developmental dyslexia: Morphological awareness as a core cognitive construct 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 98 
 1 
 122 
 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Meng 
 XZ 
 
 
 Chen 
 X 
 
 
 Luan 
 H 
 
 
 Cao 
 F 
 
 
 2005 
 The subtypes of developmental dyslexia in Chinese: Evidence from three cases 
 Dyslexia 
 11 
 4 
 311 
 329 
 16355750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 2001 
 The role of phonological awareness and visual-orthographic skills in Chinese reading acquisition 
 Developmental Psychology 
 37 
 6 
 886 
 899 
 11699761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Jin 
 Z 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 2003 
 Distinct brain regions associated with syllable and phoneme 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 18 
 3 
 201 
 207 
 12599278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Jin 
 Z 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 2004 
 Biological abnormality of impaired reading is constrained by culture 
 Nature 
 431 
 7004 
 71 
 76 
 15343334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strain 
 E 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 1995 
 Semantic effects in single-word naming 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 21 
 5 
 1140 
 1154 
 8744959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strain 
 E 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 2002 
 Theories of word naming interact with spelling-sound consistency 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 28 
 1 
 207 
 214 
 11827081 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Feng 
 CM 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Gao 
 JH 
 
 
 2001 
 An fMRI study with written Chinese 
 Neuroreport 
 12 
 1 
 83 
 88 
 11201097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2005 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of phonological processing of Chinese characters and alphabetic words: a meta-analysis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 25 
 1 
 83 
 91 
 15846817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Liu 
 HL 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Spinks 
 JA 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Gao 
 JH 
 
 
 2001 
 The neural system underlying Chinese logograph reading 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 5 
 836 
 846 
 11304080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Spinks 
 JA 
 
 
 Feng 
 CM 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Xiong 
 J 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural systems of second language reading are shaped by native language 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 18 
 3 
 158 
 166 
 12599273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JS 
 
 
 Rastle 
 K 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 2013 
 Can cognitive models explain brain activation during word and pseudoword reading? A meta-analysis of 36 neuroimaging studies 
 Psychol Bull 
 139 
 4 
 766 
 791 
 23046391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 H 
 
 
 1986 
 Modern Chinese frequency dictionary 
 Beijing 
 Beijing Language Institute Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 1996 
 Modeling for intergroup comparisons of imaging data 
 Neuroimage 
 4 
 3 Pt 3 
 S84 
 94 
 9345532 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woollams 
 AM 
 
 
 2005 
 Imageability and ambiguity effects in speeded naming: convergence and divergence 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 31 
 5 
 878 
 890 
 16248739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 CY 
 
 
 Ho 
 MHR 
 
 
 Chen 
 SHA 
 
 
 2012 
 A meta-analysis of fMRI studies on Chinese orthographic, phonological, and semantic processing 
 Neuroimage 
 63 
 1 
 381 
 391 
 22759996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yang 
 J 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Zevin 
 JD 
 
 
 2012 
 Orthographic influences on division of labor in learning to read Chinese and English: Insights from computational modeling 
 Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 
 16 
 2 
 354 
 366 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhao 
 J 
 
 
 2012 
 The Influence of Statistical Systematicities on Learning to Read: Studies with Artificial Orthographies(Doctoral dissertation) 
 Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database 
 UMI 3533881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhao 
 J 
 
 
 Guo 
 J 
 
 
 Zhou 
 F 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 2011 
 Time course of Chinese monosyllabic spoken word recognition: Evidence from ERP analyses 
 Neuropsychologia 
 49 
 7 
 1761 
 1770 
 21382389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Mean RT and accuracy by training conditions and presentation numbers in the behavioral training tasks from the fMRI group before fMRI scanning. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Naming latency and accuracy for phonologically trained, semantically trained, and untrained R-C phonograms from the behavioral cohort group. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Brain activations where semantic-trained phonograms were less activated than phonological-trained phonograms (yellow/red) and where phonological-trained phonograms were less activated than semantic-trained phonograms (blue/purple) (A). Brain activations where trained phonograms were less activated than untrained phonograms (blue/purple) and where trained phonograms were more active than untrained phonograms (yellow/red) (B). Images were presented at a univariate threshold of p < .01, corrected for mapwise false discovery rate (FDR;  Genovese, Lazar, & Nichols, 2002 ). Images from top to bottom correspond to the following position along the z-axis in MNI space: +52, +42, +22, +8, +2, and -6, respectively, with the LH on the right side of the images. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Activation values for naming phonologically trained, semantically trained, and untrained R-C phonograms in the regions showed specific training effects: LH IFG (A) and general training effects: LH insula (B), RH IFG (C), LH IPL (D), and RH IPL (E). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Brain activations where untrained IR-IC phonograms were greater than untrained R-C phonograms. Images were presented at a univariate threshold of p < .01, corrected FDR. Images from top to bottom correspond to the following position along the z-axis in MNI space: +52, +42, +32, +22, +8, +2, -6, and -12, respectively, with the LH on the right side of the images. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Brain activations greater in the semantic judgment task than in the phonological judgment task (yellow/red) and greater in the phonological judgment task than in the semantic judgment task (blue/purple) (A). Brain activations greater in the linguistic judgment task (collapsed across the phonological judgment and the semantic judgment) than in the line-orientation judgment task (yellow/red) and greater in the line-orientation judgment task than in the linguistic judgment task (blue/purple) (B). Images were presented at a univariate threshold of p < .0001, corrected FDR. Images from top to bottom correspond to the following position along the z-axis in MNI space: +42, +28, +20, +12, +4, -4, -12, and -18, respectively, with the LH on the right side of the images. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Division of labor between O-P and O-S processes in the reading process of computing phonology from orthography in English and Chinese. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brain activation regions for training effects. Specific training effects: direct comparison between phonologically trained R-C phonograms and semantically trained R-C phonograms. General training effects: direct comparison between trained phonograms (collapsed of phonologically trained and semantically trained R-C phonograms) and untrained R-C phonograms. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm 3 ) 
 p Value (at peak) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Semantic-trained < Phonological-trained 
 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 -26 
 34 
 -6 
 528 
 .0006 
 
 
 
 
 Phonological-trained < Semantic-trained 
 
 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 32 
 22 
 6 
 51 
 2824 
 .0001 
 
 
 L. Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 23 
 -4 
 -32 
 22 
 1472 
 .0004 
 
 
 R. Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 6 
 -18 
 44 
 1296 
 .0001 
 
 
 R. Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 22 
 48 
 42 
 960 
 .0002 
 
 
 R. Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 8 
 -2 
 34 
 832 
 .0002 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 35 
 20 
 -36 
 -44 
 320 
 .0006 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 19 
 -18 
 -64 
 -42 
 248 
 .0018 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 19 
 -24 
 -70 
 -46 
 240 
 .0031 
 
 
 L. Thalamus 
 - 
 -16 
 -26 
 16 
 216 
 .0024 
 
 
 L. Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -16 
 0 
 74 
 216 
 .0014 
 
 
 
 
 Trained < Untrained 
 
 
 
 
 R. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 46 
 22 
 8 
 656 
 .0008 
 
 
 L. Insula 
 13 
 -42 
 16 
 2 
 312 
 .0034 
 
 
 
 
 Trained > Untrained 
 
 
 
 
 R. Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 19 
 44 
 -72 
 42 
 2288 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 19 
 -42 
 -76 
 42 
 2240 
 .0010 
 
 
 L. Putamen 
 - 
 -10 
 4 
 -8 
 640 
 .0007 
 
 
 L. Cuneus 
 7 
 -8 
 -68 
 32 
 632 
 .0033 
 
 
 R. Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 4 
 -72 
 -1 
 448 
 .0049 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 37 
 -32 
 -48 
 -44 
 432 
 .0007 
 
 
 L. Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -34 
 12 
 60 
 432 
 .0016 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 14 
 -16 
 56 
 352 
 .0007 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 20 
 60 
 6 
 296 
 .0038 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain activation regions for regularity-consistency effects: direct comparison between naming untrained IR-IC phonograms and untrained R-C phonograms. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm 3 ) 
 p Value (at peak) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irregular-Inconsistent > Regular-Consistent 
 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 -56 
 14 
 30 
 13296 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 37 
 38 
 -70 
 -48 
 5216 
 .0002 
 
 
 L. Superior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 -30 
 -56 
 50 
 4928 
 .0001 
 
 
 L. Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 -52 
 -72 
 -12 
 4248 
 .0003 
 
 
 L. Cingulate Gyrus 
 8 
 -8 
 16 
 56 
 1448 
 .0001 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 19 
 34 
 -82 
 -21 
 1120 
 .0004 
 
 
 L. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -32 
 -4 
 62 
 720 
 .0005 
 
 
 L. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -20 
 -4 
 52 
 472 
 .0007 
 
 
 R. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 34 
 26 
 -2 
 312 
 .0014 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain activation regions for judgment tasks. Specific linguistic effects: direct comparison between phonological judgment and semantic judgment. General linguistic effects: direct comparison between linguistic judgment (collapsed of phonological and semantic judgments) and line-orientation judgment. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm 3 ) 
 p Value (at peak) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Semantic judgment > Phonological judgment 
 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 -40 
 41 
 -6 
 4232 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 Phonological judgment > Semantic judgment 
 
 
 
 
 R. Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 20 
 -52 
 24 
 7128 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 Linguistic judgment > Line judgment 
 
 
 
 
 L. Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 47 
 -38 
 38 
 -4 
 12984 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 18 
 14 
 -88 
 -30 
 6816 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 -58 
 -42 
 0 
 3496 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 -26 
 -84 
 -6 
 3120 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Cuneus 
 18 
 -10 
 -98 
 18 
 2840 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Parahippocampus 
 20 
 -38 
 -13 
 -22 
 1880 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Collateral Sulcus 
 37 
 -30 
 -36 
 -18 
 872 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Cuneus 
 18 
 38 
 -96 
 0 
 720 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 -38 
 10 
 52 
 712 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 8 
 -8 
 34 
 47 
 600 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 13 
 36 
 -18 
 22 
 520 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Cuneus 
 18C 
 16T 
 -100 
 18 
 384 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 13 
 -36 
 -26 
 24 
 304 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 Line judgment > Linguistic judgment 
 
 
 
 
 R. Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 26 
 -64 
 34 
 24200 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 32 
 -2 
 50 
 7504 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Superior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 -22 
 -60 
 56 
 5528 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 37 
 -36 
 -46 
 -28 
 3136 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 54 
 -62 
 -14 
 3072 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 37 
 -30 
 -60 
 -42 
 1536 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 -22 
 -6 
 50 
 1336 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 19 
 38 
 -78 
 18 
 1320 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 51 
 6 
 28 
 912 
 <.0001 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 37 
 40 
 -46 
 -32 
 568 
 <.0001 
 
 
 L. Superior Parietal Lobule 
 19 
 -36 
 -80 
 14 
 328 
 <.0001 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footnotes for Tables:  For clusters with multiple anatomical locations, only the peaks of activations are labeled. Volumes bigger than 200 mm3 are reported. Thresholds for the training effects and regularity-consistency effects in the naming task are set at p < 0.01 FDR corrected; thresholds for the specific and general linguistic effects in the judgment task are set at p < 0.0001 FDR corrected. Coordinates are MNI space at activation peaks. 
 
 
 
 
