
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 24662579 
 4305511 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.038 
 NIHMS579652 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The Development of Human Amygdala Functional Connectivity at Rest from 4 to 23 Years: a cross-sectional study 
 
 
 
 
 Gabard-Durnam 
 Laurel J. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Flannery 
 Jessica 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Goff 
 Bonnie 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Gee 
 Dylan G. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 Kathryn L. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Telzer 
 Eva 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 Todd 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 Nim 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Psychology, Los Angeles, CA 90095 
 2 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Department of Psychology, Champaign, Il 61820 
 3 University of Zurich, Department of Economics, Zurich, CH 8006 
 
 Corresponding Author: Laurel Gabard-Durnam, M.A., University of California, Los Angeles, 1285 Franz Hall, Room 1354, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563, (310) 825-7612,  ljgabarddurnam@ucla.edu 
 
 
 22 
 5 
 2014 
 
 
 21 
 3 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 7 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 7 
 2015 
 
 95 
 193 
 207 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Functional connections (FC) between the amygdala and cortical and subcortical regions underlie a range of affective and cognitive processes. Despite the central role amygdala networks have in these functions, the normative developmental emergence of FC between the amygdala and the rest of the brain is still largely undefined. This study employed amygdala subregion maps and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging to characterize the typical development of human amygdala FC from age 4 to 23 years old (n = 58). Amygdala FC with subcortical and limbic regions was largely stable across this developmental period. However, three cortical regions exhibited age-dependent changes in FC: amygdala FC with the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) increased with age, while amygdala FC with a region including the insula and superior temporal sulcus decreased with age, and amygdala FC with a region encompassing the parahippocampal gyrus and posterior cingulate also decreased with age. The transition from childhood to adolescence (around age 10 years) marked an important change-point in the nature of amygdala-cortical FC. We distinguished unique developmental patterns of coupling for three amygdala subregions and found particularly robust convergence of FC for all subregions with the mPFC. These findings suggest that there are extensive changes in amygdala-cortical functional connectivity that emerge between childhood and adolescence. 
 
 
 amygdala 
 amygdala subnuclei 
 development 
 medial pre-frontal cortex 
 resting-state 
 
 
 
 Activity of the amygdala and the associated cortex underlie emotional attention, learning, and regulation ( Phillips et al. 2003 ;  Adolphs and Spezio 2006 ;  Ochsner et al. 2012 ). A robust human neuroimaging literature has shown that it is the functional connections between regions in these networks that underlie these affective and cognitive processes ( Hariri et al. 2003 ;  Kim et al. 2011 ;  Ochsner et al. 2012 ), and the strength of these functional connections has predicted emotional behaviors of healthy adults ( Banks et al. 2007 ;  Lee et al. 2012 ). Furthermore, atypical functional connectivity patterns within these networks have been implicated in disrupted affective and cognitive processes in a range of clinical populations, including those with anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder ( Anand et al. 2005 ;  Das et al. 2007 ;  Henry et al. 2008 ;  Wang et al. 2009 ;  Berking and Wupperman 2012 ;  Cisler and Olatunji 2012 ). Intrinsic, “resting” activity is critical for maintaining the integrity of functional connections, accounting for the vast majority of the brain's energy expenditure, so resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) indexing these connections is a powerful approach for understanding composition and stability of these functional networks ( Raichle 2010 ;  Tomasi et al. 2013 ). 
 Importantly, studies assessing amygdala-cortical functional connectivity through both resting-state and task analyses have focused on mature networks in adults, while the development of these functional connections is yet largely uncharacterized. Dramatic changes occur across childhood and adolescence in emotional behaviors that have been associated with amygdala-mediated cortical functional connections (e.g., emotion processing tasks:  Hare et al. 2008 ;  Perlman and Pelphrey 2011 ;  Gee et al. 2013 ; emotion reappraisal:  McRae et al., 2012 ). Notably, the human amygdala's early maturation and functionality in childhood, ( Thomas et al. 2001 ; Ulfig et al. 2006; Gilmore et al. 2011;  Gee et al. 2013 ;  Swartz et al. 2013 ) along with the late maturation and functional development of cortical regions that can extend into adulthood together delineate a vast age-range during which amygdala-cortical functional connections may develop ( Giedd et al. 1996 ;  Casey et al. 1997 ;  Casey et al. 2000 ;  Bunge et al. 2002 ;  Gogtay et al. 2004 ;  Killgore and Yurgelun-Todd 2004 ;  Sowell et al. 2007 ).  Qin and colleagues (2012)  have recently noted weaker amygdala-cortical resting-state connectivity strengths in children (ages 7-9) compared to adults (ages 19-22). This paper was important because it showed that resting-state amygdala-cortical connectivity was different between children and adults. In the current study, we aimed to extend these findings by characterizing the timing and extent of changes in functional connectivity during development within the framework of a cross-sectional design. Characterizing the changes between early childhood and adulthood in these cortical and subcortical networks' construction can begin to inform how and when functional connections with the amygdala appear, delineate developmental transitions in these networks' construction, and identify periods of plasticity when these connections are sensitive to environmental influences ( Sporns et al. 2004 ). 
 We therefore assessed amygdala-cortical and subcortical functional connectivity development cross-sectionally from age 4-23 years using resting-state fMRI, which is ideal for participants spanning such a wide age-range ( Uddin et al. 2010 ;  Van Dijk et al. 2010 ;  Pizoli et al. 2011 ). Specifically, we distinguished between age-controlled and age-dependent connectivity patterns with the amygdala. We anticipated that some regions would show mature connectivity with the amygdala by childhood, and sought to identify those regions that showed developmental change as well as quantify the timing, nature, and duration of these changes. 
 Secondly, while human studies have largely assessed connectivity with the amygdala as a homogenous structure, it is a complex of structurally and functionally distinct nuclei ( Price 2003 ;  LeDoux 2003 ;  Amunts et al. 2005 ). Initial studies using anatomical maps demonstrate the utility in differentiating these subregions in humans, finding both distinct activations and functional networks across subregions ( Ball et al. 2007 ;  Roy et al. 2009 ). Weaker segregation in functional connectivity to several target networks has been noted across amygdala subregions in a sample of children compared with adults ( Qin et al., 2012 ), but the age-related changes in functional connectivity specific to each subregion and shared across subregions remain unknown. We characterized both the connectivity patterns differentiating each subregion in age-controlled and age-dependent analyses and assessed how these patterns converged across development to comprehensively examine the construction of amygdala networks from early childhood through adulthood. 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Fifty-eight children, adolescents, and adults ages 4 to 23 years (mean age (S.D.) = 13.4 (4.8)); 29 females, 29 males) contributed usable resting-state MRI data for this study (for participant age distribution, see  Figure 1 ). Handedness assessments using the Physical and Neurological Examination for Subtle Signs (PANESS) were available for 55 participants, such that 51 participants were right-handed, 3 were left-handed, and 1 reported using both hands for daily tasks (neither the left-handed nor the ambidextrous participants were outliers in any analysis and so were included in the sample). Participants identified their ethnicity as European American (48.3%), Asian American (27.6%), African American (27.6%), American Indian (5.2%), and other (3.4%). Nineteen percent (19.0%) of participants identified as Hispanic/Latino. All participants were physically and psychiatrically healthy as confirmed by a telephone screening during recruitment. Cognitive ability was assessed using the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence for participants ages 6-17 years old, and the average full-scale intelligence quotient of this sample was within the average range (mean (S.D.) = 112.8 (17.2)). Data on household income were obtained from the families of child and adolescent participants, with a mean income range of $70,000-85,000. Adults in this study were matriculated undergraduate students. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of California, Los Angeles and the state of California. All participants provided informed consent or assent (in the case of minors) for this study. 
 
 
 2.2 Data acquisition 
 All participants were given the opportunity to acclimate to an MRI scanner environment with an MRI replica prior to the scanning session. To further avoid capturing any patterns of functional connectivity attributable to differences in initial MRI acclimation between the younger and older participants, all participants completed the resting-state scan at the end of a forty-five minute-long session that included fMRI tasks. To preclude potential carry-over effects from the fMRI tasks, the resting-state scan was directly preceded by a buffer of approximately fifteen minutes of anatomical scans during which participants passively viewed a film. Participants were then instructed to lie still with their eyes closed (but not sleep), but were also presented with a black screen that had a white fixation cross at the center, which they viewed through video goggles (Resonance Technology, Inc., model: VisuaStim Digital, software version 8). Participant alertness was assessed through direct observation at the end of the scan as well as self-report of sleepiness. Notably, only one older participant's data were discarded due to sleep during the resting-state scan. In accordance with recent recommendations for optimal resting-state parameters, the duration of the scan was 6 minutes ( Van Dijk et al. 2010 ). To comfortably stabilize participants' heads and reduce motion during the scan, cloth pads were layered underneath an air vacuum pillow (Siemens Comfort Pack) that was molded around their heads. 
 All participants were scanned with a Siemens Trio 3.0-Tesla MRI scanner using a standard radiofrequency head coil. We collected 180 T2*-weighted echoplanar images (33 slices, slice thickness 4 mm, skip 0mm, field of view [FOV] 220 mm, matrix 64 × 64, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 75 degrees) at an oblique angle of approximately 20 degrees to 30 degrees to minimize signal drop-out. A whole brain, high resolution, T1-weighted anatomical scan (MP-RAGE; 192 × 192 inplane resolution, 256 mm FOV; 192 mm × 1 mm sagittal slices) was acquired for each subject for registration and localization of functional data to Talairach space (Talairach and Tournoux 1988). 
 
 
 2.3 Data pre-processing 
 
 2.3.1 Motion corrections 
 All included data were free of movement greater than 2.5 mm or degrees in any direction (mean length of retained data = 5.73 minutes). Given this motion restriction, two participants could only contribute between 3.5 and 4 minutes of usable data (ages 4 and 8 years); however, because neither of these subjects were outliers in any analysis, and because resting-state correlation strengths have been shown to stabilize very rapidly ( Van Dijk et al. 2010 ), these participants' data were included in analyses. Importantly, several recent reports have demonstrated that resting-state functional connectivity analyses are especially sensitive to motion artifacts (e.g.  Van Dijk et al. 2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al. 2012 ;  Power et al. 2012 ;  Hallquist, et al. 2013 ), thus several further steps were taken in the processing stream to thoroughly address this potential confound. First, high-frequency signals have been shown to be most susceptible to motion confounds so all data were temporally bandpass-filtered with a more conservative cutoff of 0.08Hz (compared to the 0.1Hz cutoff often used for resting-state data) as recommended by  Satterthwaite et al. (2012) . At the within-subject level of analysis, 6 rigid body motion regressors (3 translational and 3 rotational), the 6 backwards temporal derivatives of those regressors, and a global signal regressor that has been shown to ameliorate sub-millimeter motion confounds as well as white-matter and ventricle regressors were included (for a total of 15 nuissance regressors) in all regressions to correct for head motion artifacts ( Van Dijk et al. 2010 ,  Yan et al. 2013 ). Furthermore, at the between-subjects level, the mean absolute displacement value was calculated for each subject as described in  Van Dijk et al. (2012)  and used as a covariate in the regressions to control for different levels of head motion between subjects. Control analyses were conducted at the group level with the mean absolute displacement values entered as the regressor of interest to check that significant motion-related effects did not overlap with the results from the primary analyses. Lastly, to again verify that motion effects were not confounding the present results, a control analysis was run employing the simultaneous regression method recently reported by Hallquist and colleagues ( Hallquist et al. 2013 ) as a robust correction for such potential motion effects. Results from this control analysis were consistent with the reported analyses with respect to both the significant regions identified and the valence of this connectivity with the amygdala. 
 
 
 2.3.2 Pre-processing stream 
 The functional imaging data were preprocessed and analyzed with the Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) software package ( Cox 1996 ). For each participant's images, preprocessing included discarding the first 4 functional volumes to allow for BOLD signal stabilization, correction for slice acquisition dependent time shifts per volume, rigid body translation and rotation from each volume to the first volume to generate 6 within-subject motion regressors, and spatial smoothing with an isotropic 6-mm Gaussian kernel (FWHM) as has been standard in previous studies with amygdala subregions regions of interest ( Ball et al. 2007 ;  Roy et al. 2009 ;  Qin et al. 2012 ). Volumes exhibiting motion greater than 2.5 mm or 2.5 degrees in any direction as compared to the first functional volume were then discarded using censor files. 
 To allow for comparisons across individuals, timecourses were then normalized to percent signal change and transformed to the standard coordinate space of Talairach and Tournoux (Talairach and Tournoux 1988) using parameters obtained from the transformation of each individual's high-resolution anatomical scan. Talairached transformed images had a resampled resolution of 1mm 3  (see Appendix A for validation of young children's image registration to standard coordinate space). 
 A temporal band-pass filter (0.009 Hz < f < 0.08 Hz) was applied to the data to isolate the relevant signal fluctuations contributing to functional networks. Timecourses for the right ventricle, white matter, and the global signal were then extracted as nuisance covariates to account for external contamination of the remaining resting-state frequencies. 
 
 
 2.3.3 Region of interest timecourse extraction 
 As in  Roy et al. (2009) , amygdala and amygdalar subregion regions of interest (ROIs) were determined in standard space using the stereotaxic, probabilistic maps of cytoarchitectonic boundaries generated by  Amunts et al. (2005)  that are available in FSL's Juelich histological atlas. Maps exist for the amygdala's laterobasal (LB) subregion, centromedial (CM) subregion, and the superficial (SF) subregions for each hemisphere. Only voxels with at least a 50% probability of belonging in one of these subregions were included in an ROI, and each voxel was assigned to only one subregion. Subregion maps for the two hemispheres were combined to create bilateral ROIs for the LB, CM and SF subregions. A bilateral amygdala ROI was created by combining the bilateral LB, CM, and SF maps (See  Figure 2  inset). Average timecourses were then calculated for the bilateral amygdala and the bilateral LB, CM, and SF subregions from the band-pass filtered data. 
 
 
 2.3.4 Primary statistical analysis 
 For each subject, a separate regression was performed for each amygdala ROI seed region (bilateral whole amygdala, LB, CM or SF subregion). Because timecourse data violates the GLM assumption of independent residuals, AFNI's 3dREMLfit program was used to fit generalized Least Squares ARMA (1,1) regression models that correct for (prewhiten) temporal autocorrelation. Each regression model included the ROI timecourse, 12 motion regressors (6 motion files and their 6 backwards temporal derivatives), and the 3 ventricle, whitematter, and global signal nuisance regressors (for a total of 16 regressors). These regressions generated subject-level maps of the correlations between the ROI average timecourse and every other voxel's timecourse. 
 
 
 
 2.4 Group-level analysis 
 
 2.4.1 Age-controlled analysis 
 To determine significant correlations between each of the four amygdala ROIs and all other brain voxels controlling for age, we conducted a group-level mixed-effects analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with AFNI's 3dttest++ program to identify correlations that were significantly different from zero. To control for different motion levels across subjects, each subject's mean absolute displacement value was calculated and entered along with subject age as mean-centered covariates into the group-level ANCOVA. To control the type I error rate given the multiple comparisons in each ANCOVA, whole-brain cluster-based corrections were performed using thresholds generated from Monte Carlo simulations in AFNI's 3dClustSim program (uncorrected p-value .025, corrected alpha rate of .01 for primary analyses with cluster size minimum of 3073 mm 3 . Although these analyses could potentially bias results towards large clusters, secondary analyses with uncorrected p-values at .005 and cluster size minimum of 955mm 3  revealed highly consistent results (not reported)). 
 
 
 2.4.2 Age-dependent analysis 
 A mixed-effects group-level linear regression using AFNI's 3dRegAna program was then conducted with these individual subject maps for each of the four amygdala ROIs to assess how correlations between the amygdala ROI and all other brain voxels change continuously with age. Pubertal stage as measured by the Peterson Pubertal Development Scale ( Petersen et al. 1988 ) was unfortunately only collected for a subset of the participants (only those over 10 years old) but was not a significant covariate for this subsample. Sex was also evaluated as a potential covariate but no significant effects or interactions with age were identified for the regions that showed significant age-dependent change in connectivity in these analyses. Each subject's motion level (i.e. subject mean absolute displacement value) was entered into the regression as a covariate and whole-brain cluster-based corrections were performed as above. 
 Post-hoc piecewise non-linear least squares regressions were conducted using the “nl” procedure in STATA (version 12.1) for the regions of age-dependent changes in connectivity that did not show any significant connectivity in childhood to identify the age at which connectivity first began to appear. That is, we modeled and assessed the potential presence of a cut-point in age, measured continuously in months, after which the slope of the connectivity was different from the slope before the cut-point. The cut-points (inflection points) were thus empirically derived. These non-linear regressions were not used to evaluate the overall significance of any period of connectivity change as that had already been assessed by the age-dependent analysis. 
 
 
 2.4.3 Subregion Analyses 
 Two different analyses were performed for the amygdala subregions to distinguish age-related changes in connectivity unique to each subregion that provided overlapping as well as unique information about these three subregions. 
 
 2.4.3.1 Orthogonal (Masking Approach) 
 First, masking analyses between the amygdala subregion ROI group-level cluster-corrected maps were then performed as in the corresponding report with adults ( Roy et al. 2009 ) to isolate brain regions with correlation changes unique to each subregion (i.e. the areas where only that single subregion shows age-related changes in correlation): CM orthogonal to the LB and SF, LB orthogonal to the CM and SF, and SF orthogonal to the CM and LB. For example, to attain the region-unique LB connectivity changes in this analysis, the complete LB age-dependent connectivity map had all regions where either the SF or CM showed significant connectivity masked out, leaving only regions with age-dependent connectivity changes for the LB. Although this analysis indirectly tests age-related changes in connectivity between subregions (e.g. voxels are first statistically tested against 0 for each subregion after which these maps are then compared across subregions), this analysis allowed for subregions' age-related changes to be compared with the mature subregion segregation patterns previously reported using this same approach ( Roy et al. 2009 ). 
 
 2.4.3.1.1 Conjunction (Masking Approach) 
 The single subregion regression cluster-corrected ROI maps from the group-level were also subjected to a conjunction analysis to determine regions where correlation changes converged for multiple subregions. The group-level cluster-corrected subregion maps were overlaid such that voxels with significant correlation change for two or three subregions were preserved in the analysis. This approach uniquely identified areas where multiple subregions showed the same age-related changes in connectivity. 
 
 
 
 2.4.3.2 Orthogonal (Contrast Approach) 
 Direct tests of age-related changes in connectivity between subregions were also performed using contrast regressions to identify areas where one subregion's change in connectivity was significantly different from that of the other two subregions (e.g. LB age-related changes > CM + SF age-related changes). For these analyses, single-subject regressions were run with all three contrasts of interest (an LB contrast, CM contrast, and SF contrast) as well as the typical 15 nuisance regressors previously described and then submitted to group-level regression to identify age-related changes for each contrast separately. These analyses also confirmed the lack of differences between amygdala subregion connectivity changes across age for the mPFC region of interest, the single region that showed uniform convergence in the conjunction analyses. 
 
 
 
 2.4.4 Secondary Statistical Analyses 
 A global regressor was included in the primary analyses in this study for several reasons. Although it has been clearly shown that global signal regression can induce spurious negative correlations between regions' signals ( Saad et al. 2012 ;  Weissenbacher et al. 2009 ;  Murphy et al. 2009 ), this regression provides several important advantages. Foremost, including a global signal facilitates comparison and continuity with the results of the recent adult resting-state amygdala connectivity analyses performed by  Roy et al. (2009) , which included a global signal regressor. In addition, including the global signal has the advantage of modeling physiological noise that requires removal from the data, but whose sources (heart rate and respiration) were not possible to measure directly in this study or parse out with programs like PESTICA (designed to model adult physiological noise) ( Chang and Glover 2009 ;  Fox et al. 2009 ). This signal has also been shown to reduce the effects of insidious sub-millimeter motion confounds ( Van Dijk et al. 2010 ,  Yan et al. 2013 ). As both the physiological noise and sub-millimeter motion levels may differ between children and young adults, including this global signal provided a way to minimize the age-related differences in these confounds. Because the use of global signal regression in resting-state analyses is currently a matter of debate for the field (e.g.  Chen et al. 2012 ;  Saad et al. 2012 ;  He and Liu 2012 ), parallel regression analyses were conducted without global signal regressors to corroborate the results from the primary analyses. 
 In these secondary analyses, the average correlation between the amygdala ROI and every other brain voxel was calculated (as in  Hampson et al. 2010 ) for each subject and entered as an additional covariate in the group-level regression model to account for whole-brain signal correlation without inducing spurious negative correlations. Notably, we did not find significant differences between the youngest and oldest participants' average whole-brain correlations (p = 0.15), suggesting that a “global” shift with age in correlation strength between the amygdala and the rest of the brain is not responsible for the age-related effects observed in the primary analyses. Importantly, in these secondary analyses without global signal, physiological differences are no longer accounted for in any capacity and the resulting group level results display evidence of these artifacts, hindering whole-brain interpretation of the data and appearing in the insula/STS/G region of interest identified in the primary analyses. Still, results from these secondary analyses for the regions of interest identified in the global-signal regression analyses were consistent with the primary analyses that included global signal regression, especially for the mPFC and posterior cerebellum regions free of physiological artifact, where both the positive and negative correlations and their respective age-related shifts were replicated. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 3.1 Whole Bilateral Amygdala 
 
 3.1.1 Age-controlled functional coupling with the amygdala 
 We used ANCOVA to identify functional coupling with the amygdala (coupling parameters that were significantly different from zero), controlling for age and subject motion effects (whole-brain corrected p <0.05). This analysis revealed that there was functional connectivity between the amygdala and the ventral/limbic and dorsal/posterior regions that was constant across this age-range. Specifically, the amygdala showed positive coupling with ventral and limbic regions including the bilateral insula, striatum, thalamus, and parahippocampal gyrus that did not change with age ( Figure 2A ,  Table 1 ). Conversely, the amygdala showed negative coupling with dorsal and posterior regions including the bilateral middle frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, dorsal parietal lobes, and occipital lobes that did not change with age ( Figure 2A ,  Table 1 ). This analysis controlling for age effects replicated the amygdala coupling patterns previously identified in adults except for coupling with three regions: the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the superior temporal sulcus/insula, and the region including the posterior cingulate and parahippocampal gyrus ( Roy et al. 2009 ). 
 
 
 3.1.2 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the amygdala 
 In order to examine age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the amygdala, we used regression analysis with age as an independent variable of interest, controlling for subject motion (whole-brain corrected to a stricter threshold of p <0.01). Importantly, although our primary analysis presented here included a global signal regressor at the subject level (for reasons detailed in the methods section above), we also conducted a parallel regression analysis without this subject-level global signal regressor and obtained consistent results. Therefore, we are confident that functional regions and their age-related changes in coupling with the amygdala were not observed due to the inclusion of the global signal regressor. This analysis revealed three functional regions that showed linear age-dependent changes in connectivity. Notably, these were the regions absent from the age- controlled  findings. These regions included an mPFC region, and two broadly defined functional regions: one region composed of right insula and temporal-parietal regions, and the other composed of posterior regions (largely the posterior cingulate and parahippocampal gyrus) ( Figure 2B ,  Table 2 ). These three regions differed in the valence of functional coupling at both younger and older ages. We discuss each of these regions in turn below. 
 
 3.1.2.1 Age-dependent mPFC-amygdala coupling 
 The amygdala coupling with the mPFC (comprised of medial frontal gyrus and ventral anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)) became increasingly positive with increasing age ( Figure 2B ,  Table 2 ). A post-hoc piecewise regression analysis controlling for subject motion revealed that positive coupling between these regions first appeared at age 10.5 years (cutpoint at 10.5 years, p = .036), after which this positive coupling increased with age ( Figure 2C ). That is, younger age was associated with no initial coupling between the amygdala and the mPFC, while older age was associated with strong positive coupling. 
 
 
 3.1.2.2 Age-dependent Insula/temporal/parietal-amygdala coupling 
 The amygdala coupling with the region including the right insula, right superior temporal gyrus/sulcus (STG/S, and the right inferior parietal lobe became increasingly negative with increasing age ( Figure 2B ,  Table 2 ). Post-hoc t-tests, controlling for subject motion, confirmed that children exhibited significantly positive coupling (ages 4 to 9, n = 13, p < .05, corrected) while adults had significantly negative coupling between this functional region and the amygdala (ages 17 to 23, n = 13, p < .05, corrected). That is, younger age was associated with significant positive coupling between these regions, whereas older age showed significant negative coupling between these regions ( Figure 2D ). 
 
 
 3.1.2.3 Age-dependent posterior cingulate/parahippocampal-amygdala coupling 
 The amygdala coupling with a bilateral functional cluster of regions including the posterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus, and cerebellum became increasingly negative with increasing age ( Figure 2B ,  Table 2 ). Post-hoc piecewise regression controlling for subject motion confirmed that children had no significant coupling between the amygdala and these regions, and revealed that negative coupling first appeared at age 11.25 years (cutpoint at 11.25 years, p = .01), after which this negative coupling significantly increased with age ( Figure 2E ). That is, younger age was associated with no initial coupling between the amygdala and this region cluster, while older age was associated with negative coupling between these regions. 
 
 
 
 
 3.2 Amygdala Subregions 
 
 3.2.1 Laterobasal subregion 
 
 3.2.1.1 Age-controlled functional coupling with the laterobasal subregion 
 The ANCOVA controlling for age and subject motion effects (whole-brain corrected p <0.05 for this and all other subregions) revealed that functional connectivity between the laterobasal (LB) amygdala subregion and primarily posterior and dorsal regions was constant across this age-range ( Figure 3A ,  Table 3 ). Although the LB showed positive connectivity with ventral regions including bilateral amygdala, bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, and bilateral fusiform gyrus, the LB was predominantly negatively coupled with regions after controlling for age, including bilateral dorsal cingulate gyrus, bilateral occipital lobes, and the left parietal lobe ( Figure 3A ,  Table 3 ). 
 
 
 3.2.1.2 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the laterobasal subregion 
 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the LB subregion (whole-brain corrected p <0.05 for this and all other subregions) were observed primarily in frontal, dorsal, and posterior regions ( Table 4 ). The LB coupling with a prefrontal cortex region comprised of medial frontal gyrus, Brodmann Area 10, and anterior cingulate cortex became increasingly positive with increasing age ( Figure 3B ). Conversely, the LB coupling with exclusively dorsal and posterior regions, especially in the parietal and occipital lobes, became increasingly negative with increasing age ( Figure 3B ). 
 
 
 3.2.1.3 Orthogonal analyses 
 Two orthogonal analyses were performed to address age-related changes in amygdala subregion connectivity. Using the orthogonal (masking approach) analyses (as in  Roy et al. 2009 ), age-dependent changes in functional coupling unique to the LB (orthogonal to the coupling of the other two subregions) were determined by simultaneously comparing the significant coupling patterns for all three regions (whole-brain corrected p <0.05 for all subregions) and identifying regions showing coupling changes with only the LB subregion. Age-dependent coupling changes unique to the LB occurred in two functional regions: a dorsal region and a posterior region. The dorsal region included bilateral precuneus, pre and postcentral gyri, dorsal cingulate gyrus, left inferior parietal lobe and left insula. The posterior region included bilateral cerebellum, posterior cingulate gyri, and occipital lobes ( Table 4  starred entries). For both the dorsal and posterior functional regions, younger age was associated with no significant coupling between these regions and the LB, whereas older age was associated with significant negative coupling between these regions and the LB ( Table 4  starred entries). Orthogonal (contrast approach) analyses revealed highly consistent results with this orthogonal masking approach as shown in  Figure 5  and  Table 9 . 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Centromedial subregion 
 
 3.2.2.1 Age-controlled functional coupling with the centromedial subregion 
 The ANCOVA controlling for age and subject motion effects revealed that functional connectivity between the centromedial (CM) amygdala subregion and posterior, ventral, and anterior dorsal regions was constant across this age-range ( Figure 3C ,  Table 5 ). While the CM had negative coupling with a posterior occipital/parietal region, the CM showed primarily positive connectivity with ventral, sensory/motor regions such as the amygdala, thalamus, and cerebellum as well as anterior dorsal regions including the anterior cingulate cortex and medial frontal gyrus after controlling for age ( Figure 3C ,  Table 5 ). 
 
 
 3.2.2.2 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the centromedial subregion 
 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the CM amygdala subregion were observed mostly in anterior and ventral regions ( Table 6 ). The CM coupling with medial and left dorso-lateral frontal gyrus regions became increasingly positive with increasing age, while coupling with ventral sensory/motor regions became decreasingly positive with increasing age (although this coupling remained significantly positive in adults) ( Figure 3D ). 
 
 
 3.2.2.3 Orthogonal analyses 
 Using the orthogonal (masking approach) analyses (as in  Roy et al. 2009 ), age-dependent changes in functional coupling unique to the CM (when simultaneously compared with patterns for the laterobasal and superficial subregions) occurred in two functional regions: a left dorsolateral PFC region and a ventral sensory/motor region. 
 Specifically, a change in CM coupling with the left dorsolateral PFC was observed where younger age was associated with no significant coupling, and older age was associated with significant positive coupling ( Table 6  starred entries). Conversely, a change in CM coupling with the ventral sensory/motor region that included bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, red nucleus, and right amygdala and insula was found where younger age was associated with strong positive connectivity, while older age was associated with weaker positive connectivity ( Table 6  starred entries). Orthogonal (contrast approach) analyses revealed highly consistent results with this orthogonal masking approach as shown in  Figure 5  and  Table 10 . 
 
 
 
 3.2.3 Superficial subregion 
 
 3.2.3.1 Age-controlled functional coupling with the superficial subregion 
 The ANCOVA controlling for age and subject motion effects revealed that functional connectivity between the superficial (SF) amygdala subregion and extensive ventral, dorsal, and posterior regions was constant across this age-range ( Figure 3E ,  Table 7 ). The SF showed positive connectivity with ventral regions including the amygdala, thalamus, lentiform nucleus, and caudate, controlling for age. In contrast, the SF showed negative coupling with a dorsal region including bilateral dorsal cingulate gyri, medial frontal gyri, superior frontal gyri, and precentral gyri ( Figure 3E ,  Table 7 ). Negative coupling was also observed between the SF and a posterior region including the cerebellum and the occipital lobes ( Figure 3E ,  Table 7 ). 
 
 
 3.2.3.2 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the superficial subregion 
 Age-dependent changes in functional coupling with the SF amygdala subregion were observed mostly in anterior and right-lateralized ventral regions ( Figure 3F ,  Table 8 ). The SF coupling with a medial PFC and ventral anterior cingulate cortex region became increasingly positive with increasing age ( Figure 3F ). The SF coupling with ventral regions primarily in the right hemisphere, including the right lentiform nucleus, insula, and caudate became decreasingly positive with increasing age, and SF coupling with the cerebellum and right-lateralized parahippocampal gyrus and posterior cingulate gyrus became increasingly negative with increasing age ( Figure 3F ,  Table 8 ). 
 
 
 3.2.3.3 Orthogonal analyses 
 Using the orthogonal (masking approach) analyses (as in  Roy et al. 2009 ), age-dependent changes in functional coupling unique to the SF (when simultaneously compared with patterns for the laterobasal and centromedial subregions) occurred in a ventral limbic region, including the bilateral thalamus, right globus pallidus, insula, caudate, and STG/S, such that younger age was associated with positive coupling with the SF, while older age was associated with no significant coupling with the SF ( Table 8  starred entries). Orthogonal (contrast approach) analyses revealed highly consistent results with this orthogonal masking approach as shown in  Figure 5  and  Table 11 . 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Comparison of conjunction and orthogonal analyses across subregions 
 The patterns of age-dependent changes in functional coupling for the LB, CM, and SF subregions were also compared simultaneously in contrast regressions and a conjunction analysis to identify regions whose coupling significantly changed across age with multiple amygdala subregions. Changes in coupling across all three subregions spatially overlapped for a mPFC region including medial frontal gyrus and ventral ACC, the right insula, the right STG/S, the right posterior cingulate, and the right parahippocampal gyrus, ( Figure 4 ). 
 Notably, the only region that showed uniform (that is, converged with the same valence and spatial loci) age-related changes in coupling with all three subregions was the mPFC region, such that younger age was associated with no significant coupling while older age was associated with positive coupling for all three subregions ( Figure 4  panels A, B). This convergence was confirmed with all three subregion analyses (orthogonal (masking approach), orthogonal (contrast approach), and conjunction analysis). For all other regions of convergence opposite changes in coupling were observed across the three subregions. For example, in both the right insula and STS/G regions of convergence, older age was associated with positive coupling with the CM and SB subregions while older age was associated with negative coupling with the LB subregion ( Figure 4  panels C, D and  Figure 5 ). Moreover, in the right posterior cingulate and right parahippocampal gyrus regions of convergence, older age was associated with positive coupling with the SF subregion, negative coupling with the LB subregion, and no coupling with the CM subregion ( Figure 4  panel C and  Figure 5 ). 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 We used resting-state fMRI across an extensive developmental period from age 4 to 23 years old in a cross-sectional design to map the whole-brain patterns of functional coupling with the bilateral amygdala that were stable across this period as well as to characterize the trajectories and patterns of age-related changes in coupling. Resting-state fMRI has been shown to index the stability and integrity of connections in functional networks, possibly reflecting the development of synaptic connections and maintenance of synaptic homeostasis at the physiological level, and was therefore an ideal approach for assessing the trajectories of construction and stabilization of amygdala functional connections across development ( Raichle 2010 ;  Uddin et al. 2010 ;  Van den Heuvel and Hulshoff Pol 2010 ;  Pizoli et al. 2011 ). We found that: 1. amygdala connectivity with subcortical and limbic regions was largely stable across this developmental period, 2. amygdala functional coupling with the mPFC, insula/STS, and a posterior region including posterior cingulate and parahippocampal gyrus exhibited changes from early childhood through adulthood characterized by the appearance of both positively and negatively correlated coupling patterns, 3. the transition from childhood to adolescence around 10 and 11 years old (depending on the cortical region) marked an important point of change in the nature of amygdala-cortical functional connectivity, 4. anatomical subregions of the amygdala demonstrated changes in functional connectivity from early childhood through adulthood with unique patterns of functional network construction, and 5. Age-related changes in functional connectivity for these amygdala subregions also converged on several target cortical regions, largely characterized by different connectivity valences across subregions, with the exception of universally increasing positive coupling across age with an mPFC region. Below we discuss the implications of these findings for understanding the nature of amygdala functional connectivity trajectories supporting affective and cognitive development. 
 
 4.1 Age-Constant Connections 
 We first identified functional networks whose connectivity with the amygdala was present and stable at rest in young childhood and remained constant with age. We found that subcortical and limbic regions associated with generating affective states, such as the ventral striatum and anterior insula, were positively coupled with the amygdala during this developmental period, consistent with the mature positive coupling pattern identified in adults and in animal models ( Pitkanen 2000 ;  Roy et al. 2009 ). This result suggests that the functional connections of this amygdala network stabilize extremely early in human development, largely before childhood. Future studies should directly assess the early formation of this subcortical and limbic functional network during infancy and assess how these developing connections interact with the precocious structural and functional development of the amygdala that occurs during this period ( Ulfig et al. 2003 ; Gilmore et al. 2011). Moreover, we identified patterns of negative coupling with the amygdala that remained stable across age in this sample that were largely consistent with the dorsal and posterior regions previously found in adults, although such negative coupling is presently difficult to interpret given the use of global signal regression for this analysis ( Roy et al. 2009 ). In sum, our analysis of functional connectivity that was stable across age for our developmental sample replicated the amygdala coupling patterns with each region identified in the previous study with adults  except for  three significant regions discussed below that demonstrated linear age-related changes in coupling with the amygdala. 
 
 
 4.2 Age-Dependent Connectivity 
 We found that amygdala-cortical functional connections with three regions were characterized by age-related changes that continued through adulthood. First, an age-related increase in connectivity between the amygdala and the mPFC continued through the upper bound of our developmental sample at age 23, an extended change that supports both behavioral and fMRI-task literature indicating an extensive developmental period for these regions (e.g.  Hare et al. 2008 ;  Perlman and Pelphrey 2011 ; McCrae et al. 2012;  Gee et al. 2013 ). This amygdala-mPFC circuit has been shown to be the primary neural substrate of emotion processing and regulation and has a critical role in arousal regulation with causal influence on physiological signals like skin conductance responses (e.g.  Phelps et al., 2001 ;  Hariri et al. 2003 ;  Phan et al., 2005 ;  Etkin et al. 2006 ;  Banks et al. 2007 ;  Goldin et al. 2008 ;  Hare et al. 2008 ;  Fisher et al. 2009 ;  Etkin et al. 2011 ;  Kim et al. 2011 ;  Perlman and Pelphrey 2011 ;  Gross et al. 2012 ;  Linnman et al. 2012 ;  Gee et al. 2013 ;  Zhang et al. 2013 ). The strong positive coupling in these adult participants is consistent with the mature pattern found in previous adult studies ( Roy et al. 2009 ; Kim et al. 2010;  Qin et al. 2012 ). Secondly, we found that coupling between the amygdala and a cluster of regions including right posterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus, precuneus, and cerebellum became increasingly negative through adulthood (seen both with and without global signal regression), replicating negative coupling in adulthood and consistent with the trajectories of functional development of these regions that in adulthood have been associated with episodic memory, emotion, and self-related processing in concert with the amygdala ( Luna et al. 2001 ; Maddock et al. 2002;  Lou et al. 2004 ;  Roy et al. 2009 ;  Tottenham and Sheridan 2009 ; ventral precuneus:  Zhang and Li 2012 ). Lastly, the amygdala demonstrated a reversal in coupling valence across age with a right-lateralized region of insula, STS/G, and inferior parietal lobe (observed more robustly in the primary global signal regression analyses), an area whose connectivity with the amygdala has been implicated broadly in emotion and face-processing paradigms, such that positive coupling in childhood switched to negative coupling by adulthood ( Pessoa and Adolphs 2010 ;  Baseler et al. 2012 ;  Sarkheil et al. 2012 ). This negative coupling was largely consistent with mature coupling patterns reported previously ( Roy et al. 2009 ,  Zhang and Li 2013 ). These age-related changes in both the nature and strength of amygdala-cortical functional connectivity suggest a steady refinement of coupling patterns across childhood and adolescence. 
 Importantly, we identified preliminary age-related change-points in amygdala-cortical functional connectivity that occur at the transition between childhood and adolescence. Specifically, we found no significant mPFC-amygdala coupling in early childhood, and adultlike connectivity first emerged in those older than 10 years of age. Similarly, this transition from late childhood to early adolescence marked a change-point in resting functional coupling for the amygdala-posterior cortical network including posterior cingulate and parahippocampal gyrus as well. Amygdala coupling with this posterior cluster of regions was not present in childhood, but negative coupling appeared after age 11 years. Although the participants in this sample were well-distributed across the age-range for these change-point analyses, we note the somewhat limited power of the present sample and the cross-sectional design of this study as limitations. Still, the transition between childhood and adolescence that we have identified tentatively marks a specific, significant point of change in the nature of functional connections between the amygdala and the cortex. Future studies with greater power from larger samples of developing youth and longitudinal designs should be pursued to better quantify or corroborate this initial report of developmental change-points in connectivity. 
 Notably, several potential mechanisms may underlie these functional network developmental shifts. First, changes in pubertal hormone dynamics occurring around this time may play a mechanistic role in this connectivity shift, although we did not find that scores on our pubertal questionnaire measure were related to these network changes. It is possible that a more sensitive pubertal measure (e.g. hormonal levels in blood samples) could detect such a relation. It is also possible that the social and environmental changes that also mark this transition between childhood and adolescence (e.g. moving to middle school, increased peer socialization and increased time spent away from the family) may elicit these connectivity shifts within the brain. Moreover, a shift in anatomical connectivity metrics across the whole brain has also recently been identified during the late childhood to early adolescence period suggesting anatomical network re-organization occurs during these years that may interact with the amygdala's functional network shifts we have observed ( Khundrakpam et al. 2013 ). Future studies targeting these developmental shifts in pubertal and social contexts that combine functional and structural network approaches could distinguish between the roles of these potential mechanisms. 
 Given previous evidence that the presence of resting-state connectivity reflects stable network connections, the absence of amygdala-cortical connectivity at rest before adolescence suggests that childhood may be a period of unstable, dynamic amygdala-cortical connectivity that then stabilizes gradually during adolescence. Support for such an interpretation comes from a recent developmental clinical case study in which functional networks known to be unstable were also marked by the absence or significant reduction in coupling at rest, and typical resting coupling was recovered only by surgical intervention stabilizing these networks ( Pizoli et al. 2011 ). Notably, task based studies have shown late development of amygdala-prefrontal functional connections ( Perlman and Pelphrey 2011 ), and we have previously shown that emotional stimuli can elicit an immature amygdala-mPFC connectivity phenotype during childhood, demonstrating there is not simply a complete absence of functional coupling early in development for this network ( Gee et al. 2013 ). These resting-state results suggest the possibility that childhood demarcates an important, malleable period in the construction of the amygdala-cortical networks, perhaps accompanied by increased sensitivity to environmental influences, whose functional significance for behaviors and interventions merits further investigation. 
 Further empirical investigation is needed to determine how the accompanying age-related segregation of amygdala-cortical functional connections into both positive and negative coupling patterns that we observed may be interpreted. The increase in amygdala-mPFC functional connectivity with age is consistent with graph theory approaches generalizing across functional networks that have characterized the development of positive resting-state connectivity as shifts from anatomically-local to more-distant but functionally relevant cortical connections as coupling within a network become better integrated ( Fair et al. 2009 ;  Supekar et al. 2009 ;  Uddin et al. 2010 ). However, the meaning of shifts to negative coupling across development that we identified for both the insular/STS/G and posterior cingulate/parahippocampal regions is presently unresolved. While these developmental graph theory approaches have yet to be robustly applied to negative connectivity, developmental shifts from positive to negative resting-state connectivity have recently been reported for another functional network ( Chai et al. 2014 ), and a recent sophisticated simulation of neural activity patterns at rest coupled with empirically-measured structural connectivity suggest that such negative connectivity is biologically meaningful and may represent complex patterns between regions within a network ( Cabral et al. 2011 ). The segregation into positive and negatively valenced connectivity with the amygdala may thus reflect increasing sophistication of functional coupling between the regions as the network matures and merits future exploration. 
 It is possible that the age-related change in patterns of amygdala connectivity across these three cortical regions reflects a rostral shift in the appearance of positive coupling across the cortex with age. That is, we observed positive amygdala coupling with subcortical regions present by early childhood, in the insula/STS region during childhood, and positive PFC-amygdala coupling with mPFC later during adolescence and adulthood. The pattern observed across these regions is in line with previous work that has established a developmental rostral shift from the posterior to inferior direction in cortical structural ontogeny and in the development of synaptic density and dendritic length, grey matter volume, and white matter volume ( Huttenlocher 1990 ;  Gogtay et al. 2004 ;  Sowell et al. 2007 ). The rostral shift in positive coupling across the cortical regions we identified may reflect these developmental trends in the underlying neurobiology, although the interaction between these processes of neural network maturation and the resulting resting-state functional coupling requires further empirical investigation. 
 Extending prior work identifying connectivity with BL and CM amygdala subregions, we observed developmental differences in whole-brain functional coupling between anatomical subregions of LB, CM, and SF amygdala, in accord with preliminary imaging studies that distinguish mature functions and networks for these subregions in adult humans ( Ball et al. 2007 ;  Roy et al. 2009 ;  Davis et al. 2010 ). In this study, the developmentally-constant functional coupling patterns unique to each subregion were largely consistent with the mature patterns previously identified among adults ( Roy et al. 2009 ;  Qin et al. 2012 ). As a recent report comparing LB and CM functional connections to several target networks in late childhood found reduced segregation of connectivity across these two subregions compared to adults ( Qin et al. 2012 ), we sought to characterize the age-related patterns of connectivity segregation from early childhood through adulthood for the LB, CM, and SF subregions. Importantly, we observed age-related patterns of coupling changes unique to each subregion with respect to both connectivity valence and target locations. Specifically, the LB subregion became increasingly negatively coupled with broad dorsal-parietal and posterior regions across development, supporting the widespread negative coupling with these areas observed among adults at rest ( Roy et al. 2009 ). The CM subregion became positively coupled with anterior and dorsal regions, consistent with its role in cortical attention (Davis 1997), while the SF subregion showed a loss of diffuse positive coupling around ventral/limbic structures, supporting animal literature suggesting the SF is involved specifically in affective processing ( Price 2003 ). That is, with increasing age, the LB functional network spread broadly across the cortex, the CM became coupled with specific new target regions, and a diffuse SF ventral network became focused specifically to limbic regions. As with the connectivity changes observed for the whole amygdala, these subregions' patterns of connectivity change occurred across the extensive developmental period from early childhood to adulthood. 
 Importantly, a conjunction analysis revealed that developmental changes in coupling between all three subregions also converged for several target regions, suggesting integration across subregion networks occurs as well as segregation during development. Notably, the only region of convergence for which the LB, CM, and SB subregions all became increasingly positively coupled across development was the mPFC region. This coupling reveals that amygdala-mPFC connections are particularly robust and pervasive across amygdala subregions, supporting the idea that mPFC coupling is central to amygdala function, since coupling is observed for all subregions despite their distinct functionalities ( Ball et al. 2007 ;  Kim et al. 2011 ;  Davis et al. 2010 ). Lastly, the remaining insula, STS, posterior cingulate, and parahippocampal regions of convergence were characterized by shifts to opposite coupling valences across the subregions (negative coupling with the LB and positive coupling with the SF and CM across development). Consistent opposing patterns of coupling noted in adults thus appear to show protracted developmental changes as amygdala functional networks are refined across childhood and adolescence ( Roy et al. 2009 ;  Tottenham et al. 2009 ). Further task-based assessment of subregion functions should be performed to determine how the development of opposing coupling patterns at rest inform the development of opposing functional roles across subregions, and can help delineate the unique functional contributions of each subregion to specific affective and cognitive processes that emerge across development. 
 Importantly, future longitudinal assessments of amygdala-cortical networks as well as future studies distinguishing between amygdala anatomical subregions are necessary to build on these results and robustly characterize true developmental trajectories of functional coupling with the amygdala in terms of duration and precise timing of coupling changes, which cross- sectional designs are unable to address. Additionally, the functional connectivity methods we employed in this study provide correlational relations only between regions, and therefore cannot detail causal influences in the development of these networks. Effective connectivity approaches assessing directionality could address these very pertinent questions in functional connectivity development in the future. It should also be noted that these resting-state data were collected at the end of scanning sessions for all participants, as some regions of interest have shown task-influenced alterations in another resting-state measure (Wang et al. 2012), although other studies have not found such ordering effects on amygdala resting-state connectivity (e.g.  Kim et al. 2011 ) and the concordance between our age-constant analyses and the findings of  Roy et al. (2009)  whose study was conducted without tasks beforehand suggests that such ordering limitations have not insidiously impacted our data. 
 In conclusion, we have shown that the extent and nature of developmental changes in resting functional coupling with the amygdala vary across the brain with consequences for our search to understand how the stabilization of networks occurs across development. Functional connectivity between the amygdala and several cortical regions displayed lengthy and complex trajectories of change. The period between 4-10 years old was characterized by a different connectivity quality as compared to older ages, suggesting that childhood may represent a unique period of potential malleability in amygdala-cortical connectivity development and revealing the transition from childhood to adolescence as an important point of change for this amygdala-cortical functional network underlying complex emotion processing and regulation. In contrast, functional coupling between the amygdala and limbic, subcortical regions appears to undergo an early and rapid stabilization largely before childhood to support affect generation processes (although the noted exception is the parahippocampal gyrus, which demonstrated changes in coupling with the amygdala across development). Thus, the timing when amygdala functional connections may be malleable and sensitive to environmental influences depends on the location of the coupling region within the brain. Furthermore, each of the amygdala anatomical subregions demonstrated unique developmental changes in coupling that were differentiated across subregions both by the patterns of network segregation and the coupling valence with several regions of convergence that occured across development. Together, these results demonstrate that extensive, specific changes in amygdala functional coupling from early childhood through adolescence are required to achieve mature, stable functional networks in adulthood. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 01 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding: This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R01MH091864 to N.T.) and the National Science Foundation (DGE-1144087 to L.J.G-D). 
 
 
 
 Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Spezio 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Role of the amygdala in processing visual social stimuli 
 Prog Brain Res 
 156 
 363 
 78 
 17015091 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amaral 
 DG 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Pitkanen 
 A 
 
 
 Carmichael 
 ST 
 
 
 1992 
 Anatomical organization of the primate amygdaloid complex 
 
 
 Aggleton 
 JP 
 
 
 The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory, and Mental Dysfunction 
 New York 
 Wiley-Liss 
 1 
 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Kedo 
 O 
 
 
 Kindler 
 M 
 
 
 Pieperhoff 
 P 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Shah 
 NJ 
 
 
 Habel 
 U 
 
 
 Schneider 
 F 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 2005 
 Cytoarchitectonic mapping of the human amygdala, hippocampal region and entorhinal cortex: intersubject variability and probability maps 
 Anat Embryol 
 210 
 343 
 52 
 16208455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anand 
 A 
 
 
 Li 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wu 
 J 
 
 
 Gao 
 S 
 
 
 Bukhari 
 L 
 
 
 Mathews 
 VP 
 
 
 Kalnin 
 A 
 
 
 Lowe 
 MJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Activity and connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in depression: a functional magnetic resonance study 
 Biol Psych 
 57 
 1079 
 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ball 
 T 
 
 
 Rahm 
 B 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Schulze-Bonhage 
 A 
 
 
 Speck 
 O 
 
 
 Mutschler 
 I 
 
 
 2007 
 Response properties of human amygdala subregions: evidence based on functional MRI combined with probabilistic anatomical maps 
 PloS One 
 2 
 e307 
 17375193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Banks 
 SJ 
 
 
 Eddy 
 KT 
 
 
 Angstadt 
 M 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 2007 
 Amygdala-frontal connectivity during emotion regulation 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2 
 303 
 12 
 18985136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baseler 
 HA 
 
 
 Harris 
 RJ 
 
 
 Young 
 AW 
 
 
 Andrews 
 TJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural Responses to Expression and Gaze in the Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus Interact with Facial Identity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 bhs360– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berking 
 M 
 
 
 Wupperman 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Emotion regulation and mental health: recent findings, current challenges, and future directions 
 Curr Opin Psychiatr 
 25 
 128 
 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Dudukovic 
 NM 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Gabrielli 
 JD 
 
 
 2002 
 Immature frontal lobe contributions to cognitive control in children: evidence from f 
 MRI Neuron 
 33 
 301 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burgund 
 ED 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2002 
 The Feasibility of a Common Stereotactic Space for Children and Adults in fMRI Studies of Development 
 NeuroImage 
 17 
 184 
 200 
 12482076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabral 
 J 
 
 
 Hugues 
 E 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Deco 
 G 
 
 
 2011 
 Role of local network oscillations in resting-state functional connectivity 
 NeuroImage 
 57 
 130 
 139 
 21511044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Trainor 
 R 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 Vauss 
 Y 
 
 
 Vaituzis 
 CK 
 
 
 Hamburger 
 S 
 
 
 Kozuch 
 P 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 1997 
 The role of the anterior cingulate in automatic and controlled processes: a developmental neuroanatomical study 
 Dev Psychobiol 
 30 
 61 
 9 
 8989533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 2000 
 Structural and functional brain development and its relation to cognitive development 
 Biol Psychol 
 54 
 241 
 57 
 11035225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chai 
 XJ 
 
 
 Ofen 
 N 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 2014 
 Selective Development of Anticorrelated Networks in the Intrinsic Functional Organization of the Human Brain 
 J Cog Neurosci 
 26 
 501 
 513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations 
 NeuroImage 
 47 
 1448 
 59 
 19446646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Xie 
 C 
 
 
 Ward 
 BD 
 
 
 Li 
 W 
 
 
 Antuono 
 P 
 
 
 Li 
 SJ 
 
 
 2012 
 A method to determine the necessity for global signal regression in resting-state fMRI studies 
 Magn Reson Med 
 68 
 1828 
 35 
 22334332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cisler 
 JM 
 
 
 Olatunji 
 BO 
 
 
 2012 
 Emotion Regulation and Anxiety Disorders 
 Current Psychiatry Reports 
 14 
 182 
 7 
 22392595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for Analysis and Visualization of Functional Magnetic Resonance Neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 Grabowski 
 TJ 
 
 
 Bechara 
 A 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Ponto 
 LL 
 
 
 Parvizi 
 J 
 
 
 Hichwa 
 RD 
 
 
 2000 
 Subcortical and cortical brain activity during the feeling of self-generated emotions 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 1049 
 56 
 11017179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Das 
 P 
 
 
 Kemp 
 AH 
 
 
 Flynn 
 G 
 
 
 Harris 
 AW 
 
 
 Liddell 
 BJ 
 
 
 Whitford 
 TJ 
 
 
 Peduto 
 A 
 
 
 Gordon 
 E 
 
 
 Williams 
 LM 
 
 
 2007 
 Functional disconnections in the direct and indirect amygdala pathways for fear processing in schizophrenia 
 Schizophr Res 
 90 
 284 
 294 
 17222539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 FC 
 
 
 Johnstone 
 T 
 
 
 Mazzulla 
 EC 
 
 
 Oler 
 JA 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Regional response differences across the human amygdaloid complex during social conditioning 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 612 
 21 
 19556348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Peraza 
 DM 
 
 
 Kandel 
 ER 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Resolving emotional conflict: a role for the rostral anterior cingulate cortex in modulating activity in the amygdala 
 Neuron 
 51 
 871 
 82 
 16982430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Kalisch 
 R 
 
 
 2011 
 Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 15 
 85 
 93 
 21167765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional brain networks develop from a “local to distributed” organization 
 PLoS computational biology 
 5 
 e1000381 
 19412534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fisher 
 PM 
 
 
 Meltzer 
 CC 
 
 
 Price 
 JC 
 
 
 Coleman 
 RL 
 
 
 Ziolko 
 SK 
 
 
 Becker 
 C 
 
 
 Moses-Kolko 
 EL 
 
 
 Berga 
 SL 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 2009 
 Medial prefrontal cortex 5-HT(2A) density is correlated with amygdala reactivity, response habituation, and functional coupling 
 Cerebral cortex 
 19 
 2499 
 2507 
 19321655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2009 
 The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks 
 J Neurophysiol 
 101 
 3270 
 83 
 19339462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 Flannery 
 J 
 
 
 Goff 
 B 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 M 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2013 
 A developmental shift from positive to negative connectivity in human amygdala-prefrontal circuitry 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 4584 
 4593 
 23467374 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Vaituzis 
 AC 
 
 
 Hamburger 
 SD 
 
 
 Lange 
 N 
 
 
 Rajapakse 
 JC 
 
 
 Kaysen 
 D 
 
 
 Vauss 
 YC 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 1996 
 Quantitative MRI of the temporal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus in normal human development: ages 4-18 years 
 J Comp Neurol 
 366 
 223 
 30 
 8698883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Shi 
 F 
 
 
 Woolson 
 SL 
 
 
 Knickmeyer 
 RC 
 
 
 Short 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 Zhu 
 H 
 
 
 Hamer 
 RM 
 
 
 Styner 
 M 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 2012 
 Longitudinal development of cortical and subcortical gray matter from birth to 2 years 
 Cereb Cortex 
 22 
 2478 
 85 
 22109543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gogtay 
 N 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Lusk 
 L 
 
 
 Hayashi 
 KM 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 D 
 
 
 Vaituzis 
 AC 
 
 
 Nugent 
 TF 
 3rd 
 
 
 Herman 
 DH 
 
 
 Clasen 
 LS 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood through early adulthood 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 101 
 8174 
 9 
 15148381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldin 
 PR 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Ramel 
 W 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 2008 
 The neural bases of emotion regulation: reappraisal and suppression of negative emotion 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 63 
 577 
 86 
 17888411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hallquist 
 MN 
 
 
 Hwang 
 K 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 2013 
 The Nuisance of Nuisance Regression: Spectral Misspecification in a Common Approach to Resting-State fMRI Preprocessing Reintroduces Noise and Obscures Functional Connectivity 
 NeuroImage 
 82 
 208 
 225 
 23747457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampson 
 M 
 
 
 Driesen 
 N 
 
 
 Roth 
 JK 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 2010 
 Functional connectivity between task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance 
 Magn Reson Imaging 
 28 
 1051 
 7 
 20409665 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Voss 
 HU 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Biological substrates of emotional reactivity and regulation in adolescence during an emotional go-nogo task 
 Biol Psychiatr 
 63 
 927 
 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Mattay 
 VS 
 
 
 Tessitore 
 A 
 
 
 Fera 
 F 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 James 
 W 
 
 
 2003 
 Neocortical Modulation of the Amygdala Response to Fearful Stimuli 
 Biol Psychiatr 
 53 
 494 
 501 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 H 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 2012 
 A geometric view of global signal confounds in resting-state functional MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 2339 
 48 
 21982929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henry 
 JD 
 
 
 Rendell 
 PG 
 
 
 Green 
 MJ 
 
 
 McDonald 
 S 
 
 
 O'Donnell 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Emotion regulation in schizophrenia: affective, social, and clinical correlates of suppression and reappraisal 
 J Abnormal Psychol 
 117 
 473 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huttenlocher 
 PR 
 
 
 1990 
 Morphometric study of human cerebral cortex development 
 Neuropsychologia 
 28 
 517 
 527 
 2203993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 Burgund 
 ED 
 
 
 Lugar 
 HM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2003 
 Comparison of functional activation foci in children and adults using a common stereotactic space 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 16 
 28 
 12781724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khundrakpam 
 BS 
 
 
 Reid 
 A 
 
 
 Brauer 
 J 
 
 
 Carbonell 
 F 
 
 
 Lewis 
 J 
 
 
 Ameis 
 S 
 
 
 
 2013 
 Developmental changes in organization of structural brain networks 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 2072 
 2085 
 22784607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Killgore 
 WD 
 
 
 Yurgelun-Todd 
 DA 
 
 
 2004 
 Sex-related developmental differences in the lateralized activation of the prefrontal cortex and amygdala during perception of facial affect 
 Percept Motor Skill 
 99 
 371 
 391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 MJ 
 
 
 Loucks 
 RA 
 
 
 Palmer 
 AL 
 
 
 Brown 
 AC 
 
 
 Solomon 
 KM 
 
 
 Marchante 
 AN 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2011 
 The structural and functional connectivity of the amygdala: from normal emotion to pathological anxiety 
 Behav Brain Res 
 223 
 403 
 410 
 21536077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 The emotional brain, fear, and the amygdala 
 Cell Mol Neurobiol 
 23 
 727 
 38 
 14514027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 H 
 
 
 Heller 
 AS 
 
 
 van Reekum 
 CM 
 
 
 Nelson 
 B 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Amygdala-prefrontal coupling underlies individual differences in emotion regulation 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 1575 
 1581 
 22634856 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linnman 
 C 
 
 
 Zeidan 
 MA 
 
 
 Furtak 
 SC 
 
 
 Pitman 
 RK 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Milad 
 MR 
 
 
 2012 
 Resting amygdala and medial prefrontal metabolism predicts functional activation of the fear extinction circuit 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 169 
 415 
 423 
 22318762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lou 
 HC 
 
 
 Luber 
 B 
 
 
 Crupain 
 M 
 
 
 Keenan 
 JP 
 
 
 Nowak 
 M 
 
 
 Kjaer 
 TW 
 
 
 Sackeim 
 HA 
 
 
 Lisanby 
 SH 
 
 
 2004 
 Parietal cortex and representation of the mental Self 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 101 
 6827 
 6832 
 15096584 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Munoz 
 DP 
 
 
 Merriam 
 EP 
 
 
 Garver 
 KE 
 
 
 Minshew 
 NJ 
 
 
 Keshavan 
 MS 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Sweeney 
 JA 
 
 
 2001 
 Maturation of widely distributed brain function subserves cognitive development 
 NeuroImage 
 13 
 786 
 793 
 11304075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maddock 
 RJ 
 
 
 Garrett 
 AS 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 2003 
 Posterior cingulate cortex activation by emotional words: fMRI evidence from a valence decision task 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 18 
 30 
 41 
 12454910 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Weber 
 J 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Sokol-Hessner 
 P 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2012 
 The development of emotion regulation: an fMRI study of cognitive reappraisal in children, adolescents and young adults 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 7 
 11 
 22 
 22228751 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2009 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: are anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 NeuroImage 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 Buhle 
 JT 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion 
 Ann NY Acad Sci 
 1251 
 E1 
 24 
 23025352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perlman 
 SB 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2011 
 Developing connections for affective regulation:age-related changes in emotional brain connectivity 
 J Exp Child Psych 
 108 
 607 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 Emotion processing and the amygdala: from a “low road” to “many roads” of evaluating biological significance 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 11 
 773 
 83 
 20959860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 AC 
 
 
 Crockett 
 L 
 
 
 Richards 
 M 
 
 
 Boxer 
 A 
 
 
 1988 
 A self-report measure of pubertal status: Reliability, validity, and initial norms 
 J Youth Adolesc 
 17 
 117 
 133 
 24277579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 GJ 
 
 
 Uhde 
 TW 
 
 
 Tancer 
 ME 
 
 
 2005 
 Neural substrates for voluntary suppression of negative affect: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 57 
 210 
 19 
 15691521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 O'Connor 
 KJ 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 JC 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Grillon 
 C 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Activation of the left amygdala to a cognitive representation of fear 
 Nat Neurosci 
 4 
 437 
 441 
 11276236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Rauch 
 SL 
 
 
 Lane 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 Neurobiology of emotion perception I: the neural basis of normal emotion perception 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 54 
 504 
 514 
 12946879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pitkänen 
 A 
 
 
 2000 
 Connectivity of the rat amygdaloid complex 
 The amygdala: A functional analysis 
 2 
 31 
 115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizoli 
 CE 
 
 
 Shah 
 MN 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 Limbrick 
 DD 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Smyth 
 MD 
 
 
 2011 
 Resting-state activity in development and maintenance of normal brain function 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 108 
 11638 
 43 
 21709227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2012 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 2142 
 54 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 2003 
 Comparative Aspects of Amygdala Connectivity 
 Ann NY Acad Sci 
 985 
 50 
 58 
 12724147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Qin 
 S 
 
 
 Young 
 CB 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2012 
 Immature integration and segregation of emotion-related brain circuitry in young children 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 109 
 7941 
 7946 
 22547826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2010 
 Two views of brain function 
 Trends Cog Sci 
 14 
 180 
 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roy 
 AK 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Gotimer 
 K 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 45 
 614 
 26 
 19110061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Gotts 
 SJ 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Jo 
 HJ 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 2012 
 Trouble at rest: how correlation patterns and group differences become distorted after global signal regression 
 Brain Connect 
 2 
 25 
 32 
 22432927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sarkheil 
 P 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Schneider 
 F 
 
 
 Mathiak 
 K 
 
 
 2012 
 Emotion unfolded by motion: a role for parietal lobe in decoding dynamic facial expressions 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 nss092– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Wolf 
 DH 
 
 
 Loughead 
 J 
 
 
 Ruparel 
 K 
 
 
 Elliott 
 MA 
 
 
 Hakonarson 
 H 
 
 
 Gur 
 RC 
 
 
 Gur 
 RE 
 
 
 2012 
 Impact of in-scanner head motion on multiple measures of functional connectivity: relevance for studies of neurodevelopment in youth 
 NeuroImage 
 60 
 623 
 32 
 22233733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sowell 
 ER 
 
 
 Trauner 
 DA 
 
 
 Gamst 
 A 
 
 
 Jernigan 
 TL 
 
 
 2007 
 Development of cortical and subcortical brain structures in childhood and adolescence: a structural MRI study 
 Dev Med Child Neurol 
 44 
 4 
 16 
 11811649 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Zwi 
 JD 
 
 
 2004 
 The small world of the cerebral cortex 
 Neuroinformatics 
 2 
 145 
 62 
 15319512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Musen 
 M 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children 
 PLoS biology 
 7 
 e1000157 
 19621066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swartz 
 JR 
 
 
 Carrasco 
 M 
 
 
 Wiggins 
 JL 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 2013 
 Age-related changes in the structure and function of prefrontal cortex-amygdala circuitry in children and adolescents: a multimodal imaging study 
 Neuroimage 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Eccard 
 CH 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Amygdala response to facial expressions in children and adults 
 Biol Psychiatr 
 49 
 309 
 316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomasi 
 D 
 
 
 Wang 
 GJ 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 2013 
 Energetic cost of brain functional connectivity 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
 110 
 13642 
 7 
 23898179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Sheridan 
 MA 
 
 
 2009 
 A review of adversity, the amygdala and the hippocampus: a consideration of developmental timing 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 3 
 68 
 20161700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Typical and atypical development of functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state 
 FMRI Front Sys Neurosci 
 4 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ulfig 
 N 
 
 
 Setzer 
 M 
 
 
 Bohl 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Ontogeny of the Human Amygdala 
 Ann NY Acad Sci 
 985 
 22 
 33 
 12724145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van den Heuvel 
 MP 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 2010 
 Exploring the brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity 
 Euro Neuropsychopharma 
 20 
 519 
 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KR 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Venkataraman 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 KC 
 
 
 Lazar 
 SW 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2010 
 Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization 
 J neurophysiol 
 103 
 297 
 321 
 19889849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KR 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2012 
 The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 431 
 8 
 21810475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 F 
 
 
 Kalmar 
 JH 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Jackowski 
 M 
 
 
 Chepenik 
 LG 
 
 
 Edmiston 
 EE 
 
 
 Tie 
 K 
 
 
 Gong 
 G 
 
 
 Shah 
 MP 
 
 
 Jones 
 M 
 
 
 Uderman 
 J 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Blumberg 
 HP 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional and structural connectivity between the perigenual anterior cingulate and amygdala in bipolar disorder 
 Biol psychiat 
 66 
 516 
 21 
 19427632 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissenbacher 
 A 
 
 
 Kasess 
 C 
 
 
 Gerstl 
 F 
 
 
 Lanzenberger 
 R 
 
 
 Moser 
 E 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies 
 NeuroImage 
 47 
 1408 
 16 
 19442749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 Cheung 
 B 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 S 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013 
 A Comprehensive Assessment of Regional Variation in the Impact of Head Micromovements on Functional Connectomics 
 NeuroImage 
 76 
 183 
 201 
 23499792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 S 
 
 
 Li 
 CR 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional connectivity mapping of the human precuneus by resting state fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 3548 
 3562 
 22116037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 S 
 
 
 Hu 
 S 
 
 
 Chao 
 HH 
 
 
 Ide 
 JS 
 
 
 Luo 
 X 
 
 
 Farr 
 OM 
 
 
 Li 
 CSR 
 
 
 2013 
 Ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the regulation of physiological arousal 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 10.1093/scan/nst064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 S 
 
 
 Li 
 CSR 
 
 
 2013 
 Functional clustering of the human inferior parietal lobule by whole brain connectivity mapping of resting state fMRI signals 
 Brain connectivity 
 10.1089/brain.2013.0191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Participants' age distribution 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Functional connectivity of the bilateral amygdala. Left corner inset 
 Bilateral anatomical amygdala seed region of interest comprised of the basolateral subregion (orange regions), centromedial subregion (turquoise regions) and superficial subregion (red regions) as used by  Roy et al., (2009) .  A:  Age-controlled functional connectivity, p < .05 whole brain corrected. Significant positive connectivity with the amygdala is shown in warm colors. Significant negative coupling with the amygdala is shown in cool colors.  B:  Age-dependent functional connectivity, p < .01 whole brain corrected. Significant changes in amygdala coupling with age were observed for a medial prefrontal cortex region (left panel), a right insula/temporal/parietal functional region (middle panel), and a cerebellar/occipital/parahippocampal functional region (right panel).  C, D, E:  Parameter estimates (beta weights) for functional regions with significant age-related changes in amygdala connectivity. Observed parameter estimates for the sample are indicated by blue markers. Fitted parameter estimates from post-hoc piecewise regressions are indicated by red markers. Regions of interest identified in the age-dependent analysis are traced in black on images of coupling at youngest (ages 4 to 9, n = 16) and oldest (ages 16 to 23, n = 16) ages for illustrative purposes only.  C:  connectivity with the medial prefrontal cortex region changes from zero to positive coupling. The black arrow marks the age 10.5 identified in post-hoc piecewise regression as the age when this positive connectivity first appears.  D:  connectivity with the insula/temporal/parietal region across age changes from positive to negative coupling.  E:  connectivity with the cerebellar/occipital/parahippocampal region changes from zero to negative coupling. The black arrow marks the age 11.25 years that post-hoc piecewise regression identified as the age when this negative connectivity first appears. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Functional connectivity of amygdala subregions 
 For each age-controlled panel, (A, C, E), significant positive connectivity is shown in warm colors and significant negative coupling is shown in cool colors, p <0.05 whole brain corrected. For each age-dependent panel (B, D, F), coupling that becomes increasingly positive with increasing age is shown in warm colors, and coupling that becomes increasingly negative with increasing age is shown in cool colors, p < 0.05 whole brain corrected.  A:  Age-controlled functional connectivity with the laterobasal (LB) subregion,  B:  age-dependent functional connectivity with the LB subregion. Coupling with a medial prefrontal cortex region became increasingly positive with increasing age, and coupling with dorsal and posterior regions became increasingly negative with increasing age.  C:  Age-controlled functional connectivity with the centromedial (CM) subregion,  D:  Age-dependent functional connectivity with the CM subregion. Coupling with a medial prefrontal region and a left dorso-lateral prefrontal region became increasingly positive with increasing age. Coupling with ventral regions became decreasingly positive with increasing age such that positive connectivity became weaker, but remained significantly positive with older age.  E:  Age-controlled functional connectivity with the superficial (SF) subregion,  F:  Age-dependent functional connectivity with the SF subregion. Coupling with a medial prefrontal cortex region became increasingly positive with increasing age. Coupling with primarily ventral and limbic regions became increasingly negative with increasing age. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Conjunction (masking approach) analysis regions of convergence for all three subregions 
 Functional regions that demonstrated the same nature of age-dependent functional connectivity changes across all three subregions are indicated in red. Functional regions that demonstrated different age-dependent functional connectivity changes across all three subregions are indicated in orange. Regions with age-dependent connectivity changes with two of the three subregions are indicated in blue. Regions with age-dependent connectivity changes with any one of the subregions are indicated in green. All functional regions are significant at p < .05 whole brain corrected.  A:  Anterior cingulate cortex region of convergence.  B:  medial frontal gyrus region of convergence.  C:  Right superior temporal gyrus/sulcus and right posterior cingulate/parahippocampal regions of convergence.  D:  Right insula region of convergence. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Orthogonal (contrast approach) analysis regions of distinct connectivity between amygdala subregions 
 Functional regions where one amygdala subregion's age-related change in functional connectivity was significantly different from that of the other two subregions, as directly assessed with contrast regressions (e.g. regions where LB subregion age-related change in connectivity is significantly different from that of CM subregion and SF subregion is shown for the LB > CM + SF contrast, and likewise for CM and SF specific contrasts). All functional regions are significant at p < .05, whole brain corrected. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Age-controlled functional connectivity with the whole bilateral amygdala 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 
 
 
 
 Positive Connectivity 
 
 
 
 uncus-L,R 
 
 85,123 
 -22, -11, -15 
 
 
 amygdala-L,R 
 
 
 
 hippocampus-L,R 
 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 27, 34 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum tonsil-L,R 
 
 
 
 thalamus-L,R 
 
 
 
 globus pallidus-L,R 
 
 
 
 putamen-L,R 
 
 
 
 ventral superior temporal gyrus-L,R 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 insula-L,R 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 claustrum-L,R 
 
 
 
 inferior frontal gyrus-L,R 
 47 
 
 
 
 
 Negative Connectivity 
 
 
 
 Paracentral gyrus-L,R 
 5 
 88,684 
 -1, -71, 40 
 
 
 inferior parietal lobe-L,R 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 19, 7 
 
 
 
 
 cuneus-L,R 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 lingual gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 middle occipital gyrus-L,R 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 inferior occipital gyrus-L 
 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 31, 23, 30 
 
 
 
 
 Middle frontal gyrus-L,R 
 8, 9 
 52,078 
 -23, 55, 12 
 
 
 superior frontal gyrus-L,R 
 6, 8, 9 
 
 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus 
 6, 8 
 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-L,R 
 4, 6 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate-R 
 
 3,282 
 1, -18, 18 
 
 
 thalamus-L, R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the whole bilateral amygdala 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 Child FC 
 Adult FC 
 
 
 
 
 medial prefrontal cortex 
 
 3819 
 4, 51, -4 
 ↑ 
 0 
 + 
 
 
 region 
 10, 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  medial frontal gyrus 
 332, 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ventral anterior 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Insula/temporal/parietal 
 
 2104 
 52, -38, 11 
 ↓ 
 + 
 - 
 
 
 region 
 13 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  posterior insula -R 
 22, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  superior temporal 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus/sulcus-R 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  inferior parietal lobe -R 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  claustrum/anterior 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 insula-R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior cingulate/ 
 
 1804 
 20, -38, -10 
 ↓ 
 0 
 - 
 
 
 parahippocampal region 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  posterior cingulate-R 
 30, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  parahippocampal 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus –L,R 
 35, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  cuneus-L,R 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  culmenL,R 
 17, 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Age-controlled functional connectivity with the bilateral laterobasal subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 
 
 
 
 Positive Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 uncus-L,R 
 
 73,149 
 -55, -1, -4 
 
 
 amygdala-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 hippocampus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 34, 35 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 culmen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 ventral superior temporal 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus/sulcus-L,R 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 ventral middle temporal 
 47 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus/sulcus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 ventral inferior frontal gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 Negative Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum-L,R 
 
 34,878 
 -1, -71, 36 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 occipital lobe-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
  lingual 
 18,19 
 
 
 
 
  cuneus 
 17,18,19 
 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 inferior parietal lobe-L 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 transverse temporal 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus/sulcus-L 
 32, 24 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 postcentral gyrus-L 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-L 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 supramarginal gyrus-L 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 insula-L 
 
 
 
 
 
 paracentral lobule-L,R 
 
 14,395 
 -5, 50, 14 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 31, 24 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal medial anterior cingulate 
 32, 24 
 
 
 
 
 cortex-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus-L,R 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal medial frontal gyrus-R 
 9, 8, 6 
 7,336 
 52, 19, 26 
 
 
 superior frontal gyrus-R 
 9, 8 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal middle frontal gyrus-R 
 9, 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the bilateral laterobasal subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 Child FC 
 Adult FC 
 
 
 
 
 *cerebellum-L,R 
 
 32,489 
 4, -73, 38 
 ↓ 
 no 
 - 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 *posterior cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 30,31,23 
 
 
 
 occipital lobe-L,R 
 
 
 
 
  (* L) lingual gyrus 
 18 
 
 
 
  *cuneus 
 17, 18 
 
 
 
 *precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 41,285 
 -48, -20, 50 
 ↓ 
 no 
 - 
 
 
 *inferior parietal lobe-L 
 40 
 
 
 
 superior temporal gyrus/sulcus-L 
 22 
 
 
 
 *insula-L 
 13 
 
 
 
 (* L) postcentral gyrus-L,R 
 3 
 
 
 
 *paracentral lobule-L,R 
 5 
 
 
 
 *precentral gyrus-L,R 
 4, 6 
 
 
 
 * dorsal cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 24, 31 
 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus-L,R 
 6 
 
 
 
 *middle frontal gyrus-R 
 6, 8 
 
 
 
 *inferior parietal lobe-R 
 40 
 13,721 
 42, -38, 47 
 ↓ 
 no 
 - 
 
 
 *superior parietal lobe-R 
 
 
 
 
 *precuneus-R 
 7 
 
 
 
 *post-central gyrus-R 
 3 
 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus –L 
 10, 32 
 7,457 
 0, 52, 36 
 ↑ 
 no 
 + 
 
 
 anterior cingulate cortex-L,R 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Age-controlled functional connectivity with the bilateral centromedial subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 
 
 
 
 Positive Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 uncus-L,R 
 
 158,729 
 20, -12, 70 
 
 
 amygdala-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 34, 27 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 30, 23, 29 
 
 
 
 
 thalamus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 globus pallidus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 putamen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 superior temporal gyrus/sulcus-L,R 
 22, 41, 42 
 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-L,R 
 4, 6 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal inferior frontal gyrus-L 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 claustrum-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 insula-L,R 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 caudate-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 24, 32, 31 
 14,930 
 2, 30, 10 
 
 
 dorsal anterior cingulate cortex-L,R 
 24, 32 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal medial fronal gyrus-L,R 
 9, 6 
 
 
 
 
 Negative Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 posterior cerebellum-L,R 
 
 166,224 
 -1, -45, 64 
 
 
 occipital gyrus-L,R 
 17, 18, 19 
 
 
 
 
 cuneus-L,R 
 17, 18 
 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 angular gyrus-L,R 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 superior parietal lobe-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal middle frontal gyrus-L,R 
 6, 8, 9 10, 46 
 
 
 
 
 ventral anterior cingulate cortex-L,R 
 32, 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the bilateral centromedial subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 Child FC 
 Adult FC 
 
 
 
 
 (* R) amygdala-L,R 
 
 23,803 
 17, -10, -17 
 ↓ 
 + 
 + 
 
 
 * red nucleus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 * culmen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 * parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 34 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate-L,R 
 30 
 
 
 
 (* L) thalamus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 globus pallidus/putamen-L,R 
 
 11,648 
 45, 10, -19 
 ↑ 
 + 
 + 
 
 
 superior temporal gyrus/sulcus-R 
 38, 41 
 
 
 
 * insula-R 
 13 
 
 
 
 claustrum-R 
 
 
 
 
 * dorsolateral superior frontal gyrus-L 
 
 11,577 
 -4, 49, 1 
 ↑ 
 no 
 + 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus-L,R 
 10 
 
 
 
 ventral anterior cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 10, 32 
 
 
 
 
 32, 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 7 
 
 Age-controlled functional connectivity with the bilateral superficial subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 Positive Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 uncus-L,R 
 
 85,524 
 -14, -5, -13 
 
 
 amygdala-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 hippocampus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36, 37 
 
 
 
 
 thalamus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 globus pallidus/putamen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 ventral superior-temporal 
 38, 41 
 
 
 
 
 gyrus-L,R 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 insula-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 claustrum-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 caudate head-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 Negative Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-L,R 
 
 69,812 
 31, -75, 39 
 
 
 lingual gyrus –L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 cuneus-L,R 
 17, 18, 19 
 
 
 
 
 middle temporal gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate-R 
 31, 23 
 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 angular gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 inferior parietal lobe-L,R 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 dorsal cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 23, 24, 31 
 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-R 
 6 
 24,391 
 24, 57, 19 
 
 
 dorsal medial frontal gyrus-R 
 6, 8, 9 
 
 
 
 
 superior frontal gyrus-R 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 dorso-lateral middle frontal 
 6, 8, 9, 10 
 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-L 
 6 
 15,975 
 -25, 56, 11 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus-L 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 superior frontal gyrus-L 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 dorso-lateral middle frontal 
 6, 8, 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 8 
 
 Age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the bilateral superficial subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 Child FC 
 Adult FC 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-L,R 
 
 8,623 
 21, -38, -9 
 ↓ 
 no 
 - 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 lingual gyrus-R 
 18 
 
 
 
 * middle occipital gyrus-R 
 18 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-R 
 30 
 
 
 
 * thalamus-L,R 
 
 30,015 
 21, 11, -5 
 ↓ 
 + 
 no 
 
 
 * globus pallidus-R 
 
 
 
 putamen-R 
 
 
 
 * superior temporal sulcus/gyrus-R 
 22,38,42,41 
 
 
 
 * inferior parietal lobe-R 
 40 
 
 
 
 post-central gyrus-R 
 2, 3 
 
 
 
 pre-central gyrus-R 
 4, 6 
 
 
 
 * insula-R 
 13 
 
 
 
 * caudate-R 
 
 
 
 dorso-lateral inferior frontal gyrus-R 
 44, 47 
 
 
 
 medial frontal gyrus 
 10, 32 
 7,888 
 3, 55, -1 
 ↑ 
 no 
 + 
 
 
 ventral anterior cingulate cortex 
 32, 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 9 
 
 Orthogonal (contrast approach) age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the laterobasal amygdala subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 
 
 
 
 thalamus 
 
 57830 
 1, -18, -2 
 ↑ 
 
 
 lentiform nucleus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 parahippocampal gyrus-R 
 34 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36, 37 
 
 
 
 inferior occipital gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 middle occipital gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 culmen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 cuneus-L 
 17, 18, 19 
 34799 
 1, -34, 14 
 ↓ 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-L,R 
 30, 23 
 
 
 
 insula-L 
 13 
 
 
 
 superior temporal gyrus-L 
 36, 37 
 
 
 
 middle temporal gyrus-L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 10 
 
 Orthogonal (contrast approach) age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the centromedial amygdala subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y,z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum-LR 
 
 25274 
 22, -82, 32 
 ↓ 
 
 
 culmen-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L 
 36, 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 lingual gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 inferior occipital gyrus-L,R 
 
 
 
 
 middle occipital gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 cuneus-R 
 17,18,19 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-L 
 30, 31, 23 
 11104 
 -3, -51, 60 
 ↑ 
 
 
 precuneus-L 
 7 
 
 
 
 postcentral gyrus-L 
 2, 3 
 
 
 
 precentral gyrus-L 
 4, 6 
 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-L 
 24, 31 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-L 
 30, 31, 23 
 8209 
 -3,-76, 29 
 ↑ 
 
 
 cuneus-L 
 17,18,19 
 
 
 
 precuneus-L 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 11 
 
 Orthogonal (contrast approach) age-dependent changes in functional connectivity (FC) with the superficial amygdala subregion 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 BA 
 Voxels (mm 3 ) 
 Peak Coordinates (x, y, z) 
 Direction of Change with increasing age 
 
 
 
 
 cerebellum 
 
 41645 
 -51, -59, -3 
 □↓ 
 
 
 cuneus-L,R 
 17, 18, 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 fusiform gyrus-L,R 
 36, 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 inferior occipital gyrus-R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 middle occipital gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 lingual gyrus-L,R 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate gyrus-R 
 30,31,23 
 20656 
 -6, -78, 29 
 □↑ 
 
 
 precuneus-L,R 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 cuneus-L 
 17, 18, 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-L 
 24, 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 thalamus-L,R 
 
 18968 
 1, -18, -2 
 ↓ 
 
 
 lentiform nucleus-L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 caudate-R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 posterior cingulate-R 
 30, 31, 23 
 11565 
 1, -30, 17 
 □↑ 
 
 
 middle temporal gyrus-R 
 38, 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 cingulate gyrus-R 
 24, 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 insula-R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
