
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 25067812 
 4167780 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.029 
 NIHMS617006 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of language and non-language visuospatial processing in
adolescents with reading disability 
 
 
 
 
 Diehl 
 Joshua J. 
 
 a 
 b 
 joshua.diehl@nd.edu 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 Stephen J. 
 
 b 
 frosts@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Sherman 
 Gordon 
 
 c 
 info@thenewgrange.org 
 
 
 
 Mencl 
 W. Einar 
 
 b 
 einar@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Kurian 
 Anish 
 
 b 
 d 
 anish.kurian@uconn.edu 
 
 
 
 Molfese 
 Peter 
 
 b 
 pmolfese@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Landi 
 Nicole 
 
 b 
 landi@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Preston 
 Jonathan 
 
 b 
 preston@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Soldan 
 Anja 
 
 e 
 asoldan1@jhmi.edu 
 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 Robert K. 
 
 b 
 f 
 Robert.fulbright@yale.edu 
 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 Jay G. 
 
 b 
 d 
 jay.rueckl@uconn.edu 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 Mark S. 
 
 b 
 g 
 Seidenberg@wisc.edu 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 Fumiko 
 
 b 
 h 
 fumiko.hoeft@ucsf.edu 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 Kenneth R. 
 
 b 
 d 
 pugh@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 a Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame, IN, USA 46556 
 b Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St., Suite 900, New Haven, CT, USA,
06511 
 c Newgrange School, 407 Nassau St., Princeton, NJ, USA, 08540 
 d Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 06269-1020 
 e Department of Neurology, Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA 
 f Department of Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, MRRC, The
Anlyan Center N137, P.O. Box 208043, New Haven, CT, USA, 06520-8043 
 g Department of Psychology, Brogden Hall, 1202 W. Johnsons St., University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA, 53706-1969 
 h Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, Langley
Porter Psychiatry Institute (LPPI), Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital and Clinics (LPPHC),
401 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143 
 
 Corresponding author: Joshua John Diehl, Ph.D., Department of Psychology,
118 Haggar Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA 46556. Phone: 1 (574)
631-1371.  joshua.diehl@nd.edu . Fax: (574) 631-8883 
 
 
 8 
 8 
 2014 
 
 
 24 
 7 
 2014 
 
 
 1 
 11 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 11 
 2015 
 
 101 
 653 
 666 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Despite anecdotal evidence of relative visuospatial processing strengths in
individuals with reading disability (RD), only a few studies have assessed the presence or
the extent of these putative strengths. The current study examined the cognitive and
neural bases of visuospatial processing abilities in adolescents with RD relative to
typically developing (TD) peers. Using both cognitive tasks and functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) we contrasted printed word recognition with non-language
visuospatial processing tasks. Behaviorally, lower reading skill was related to a
visuospatial processing advantage (shorter latencies and equivalent accuracy) on a
geometric figure processing task, similar to findings shown in two published studies. FMRI
analyses revealed key group by task interactions in patterns of cortical and subcortical
activation, particularly in frontostriatal networks, and in the distributions of right and
left hemisphere activation on the two tasks. The results are discussed in terms of a
possible neural tradeoff in visuospatial processing in RD. 
 
 
 Reading 
 Dyslexia 
 fMRI 
 Visuospatial processing 
 Impossible Figures 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Reading Disability (RD) has been characterized as a brain-based neurodevelopmental
disorder associated with a failure to acquire fluent reading skills (e.g.,  Landi, Frost, Mencl, Sandak, & Pugh, 2013 ;  Vellutino, Fletcher, Snowling, & Scanlon, 2004 ). There is a
large body of research indicating that language deficits, particularly at the phonological
level, underlie many reading difficulties ( Lyon, Shaywitz,
& Shaywitz, 2003 ;  Shankweiler et al.,
1995 ). Moreover, evidence from studies of the neurobiology of reading supports the
foundational role of left hemisphere language networks for the development of fluent reading
skills ( Diehl, Frost, Mencl, & Pugh, 2011 ;  Pugh, Sandak, Frost, Moore, & Mencl, 2005 ) with
relative anomaly in RD in comparison to typically-developing (TD) readers across these
networks ( Pugh et al., 2010 ). 
 Although much of the previous research on RD has focused on the neurocognitive
basis of phonological deficits ( Vellutino et al.,
2004 ), there remains interest in the potential contributions of visual processing
abilities to reading and its disorders ( Demb, Boynton, Best,
& Heeger, 1998 ;  Eden, Van Meter, Rumsey, Maisog
& Zeffiro, 1996 ;  Stein 2001 ,  2003 ;  Vidyasagar,
2013 ). With regard to visual processing and RD, difficulties with some aspects of
visuospatial processing have been reported, including: 1) visuospatial attention ( Facoetti et al., 2010 ;  Vidyasagar & Pammar, 2010 ;  Vidyasagar,
2013 ); 2) motion processing, thought to arise from an abnormal magnocellular system
( Demb et al., 1998 ;  Eden et al., 1996 ;  Stein, 2001 ); and 3)
perceptual signal-to-noise attentional mechanisms that impact the quality of sensory
processing not only for vision, but for auditory processing as well (e.g.,  Sperling, Lu, & Manis, 2004 ;  Sperling, Lu, Manis & Seidenberg, 2006 ). While deficits have been the general
focus, paradoxically there have been several reports suggesting relative strengths in RD for
certain non-language visuospatial processing tasks including configural processing and
visuospatial cue learning ( Howard et al., 2006 ;  Schneps, Brockmole, Sonnert, & Pomplun, 2012 ;  von Károlyi 2001 ,  von Károlyi et al., 2003 ). If such advantages do indeed
exist for some tasks, this might be taken to argue against a global visual processing
deficit in RD and could reflect a type of tradeoff between reading and other visual
processes. At present this issue has received very little attention in neurocognitive
studies (but see  Gilger, Salvage, & Olulade,
2013 ;  Gilger, & Hynd, 2008 ;  Olulade, Gilger, Talavage, Hynd, & McAteer,
2012 ). 
 Current neurocognitive theories are generally aimed at accounting for patterns of
deficits that present in RD children, whether phonological (e.g.,  Fowler, & Swainson, 2004 ;  Goswami & Zeigler, 2006 ), visual (e.g.,  Stein, 2001 ), auditory ( Gaab et al., 2007 ;
 Goswami et al., 2002 ), attentional ( Facoetti et al., 2010 ;  Ziegler et
al., 2009 ), or involving domain general procedural learning mechanisms ( Nicolson & Fawcett, 2007 ). No current theory, to our
knowledge, directly predicts RD processing advantages in any domain, visuospatial or
otherwise; though, at a more general level, we note that  Geschwind and Galuburda (1987)  did propose the existence of a “pathology
of superiority,” where a predisposition to the neural deficits specific to reading
could lead other areas of the brain to compensate for these deficits. Recent neurobiological
studies have also suggested that individuals with RD use different neural networks to
process visual stimuli ( Olulade et al., 2012 ) and
that strengths could be related to compensation for reading difficulties ( Gilger et al., 2013 ). In any event, if relative advantages are
found, all current major theories would be challenged to provide an account of these
advantages. 
 
 1.1 Cognitive Research on Enhanced Visuospatial Processing in Individuals with
RD 
 Anecdotal reports and historical characterizations of RD have long been taken to
suggest that some individuals with RD appear to have pronounced strengths in some kinds of
visuospatial processing tasks. Prevalence estimates of children who are both gifted and
learning disabled vary widely, with some estimates as high as 2–5% of
school-age children, although prevalence estimates on these populations are plagued by
varying definitions of giftedness and learning disability ( Davis & Rimm, 1985 ;  McCallum et al.,
2013 ;  Nielson, 2002 ;  Ruban & Reis, 2005 ). Several groups have asserted that there
are higher rates of individuals with RD in professions where certain visuospatial skills
are at a premium, such as art, architecture, engineering, and mechanics ( Winner, Casey, DaSilva, & Hayes, 1991 ;  Winner & Casey, 1993 ;  Winner, 2000 ;  Wolff & Lundberg,
2002 ). More recently, it has been suggested that genetic factors (although poorly
understood currently) might undergird tradeoffs in individuals with superior nonverbal IQ
and language/reading-based deficits, or “twice-exceptional” individuals
( Craggs, Sanchez, Kibby, Gilger, & Hynd,
2006 ;  Gilger et al., 2013 ). 
 Findings across controlled experimental studies that attempted to identify
visuospatial processing strengths in the cognitive profiles of individuals with RD have
been decidedly mixed ( Diehl et al., 2011 ;  Gilger et al., 2013 ). Thus, some studies looking at
non-language visuospatial tasks have reported that individuals with RD have some superior
abilities ( Bannatyne, 1971 ;  Howard, Howard, Japiske, & Eden, 2006 ;  Rugel, 1974 ;  Swanson,
1984 ;  Schneps et al., 2012 ;  von Károlyi, Winner, Gray, & Sherman,
2003 ;  von Károlyi, 2001 ), others
find comparable abilities ( Bacon, Handley, & McDonald,
2007 ;  Koenig, Kosslyn, & Wolff, 1991 ;
 Rudel & Denckla, 1976 ;  Rugel, 1974 ;  Siegel & Ryan,
1989 ;  Sinatra, 1988 ;  Smith, Coleman, Dokecki, & Davis, 1977 ;  Winner et al., 2001 ), while others have suggested diminished
skills ( Bacon et al., 2007 ;  Bannatyne, 1971 ;  Benton,
1984 ;  Eden, Stein, Wood, & Wood, 1995 ;
 Johnston & Weismer, 1983 ;  Morris et al., 1998 ;  Naidoo,
1972 ;  Rourke, 1985 ). Even when examined
from the point of view of a single common neurocognitive task that has been used on
several different samples (mental rotation;  Vandenberg
& Kuse, 1978 ), findings for that single test have been inconsistent (e.g.,
 Olulade et al., 2012 ;  Winner et al., 2001 ). Of course, all of these studies differ in
important regards, including the specific tasks/skills studied and the criteria applied in
defining RD; as such, direct comparisons are difficult. There are also methodological
concerns related to studies that have found processing advantages ( Winner et al., 2001 ). Clearly, more controlled cognitive research
is needed to answer these questions, and it has been argued that neuroimaging might yield
unique insights into this complex question by directly examining brain pathways for
reading and language relative to other visuospatial skills ( Gilger & Hynd, 2008 ). 
 Recent research on implicit visuospatial learning in individuals with RD has
suggested a possible visuospatial processing strength.  Howard and colleagues (2006)  found that adults with RD actually showed
advantages relative to typically developing (TD) peers on a visuospatial cue learning task
but impaired learning on a non-visuospatial sequential serial reaction time (SRT) task.
Correlational analyses indicated that performance on cue learning was negatively
correlated with reading skills, whereas SRT learning was positively correlated with
reading skills (it should be noted that several other studies have also reported deficits
on sequence learning tasks [ Szmalec et al.,
2011 ;  Stoodley, Harrison, & Stein,
2006 ]). Thus, while implicit sequence learning, a type of procedural
learning thought to be dependent on frontostriatal networks (e.g.,  Jenkins, Brooks, Nixon, Frackowiak, & Passingham, 1994 ;  Thomas et al., 2004 ;  Willingham, Salidis, & Gabrieli, 2002 ) has been shown to be deficient in RD
( Howard et al., 2006 ), implicit learning for
configural visuospatial patterns (thought to be medial temporal lobe dependent;  Preston & Gabrieli, 2008 ) is not only spared, but
also could be a relative strength in RD ( Howard et al.,
2006 ). 
 Two other studies recently reported that children with RD show relative
processing advantages in another non-language visuospatial configural processing task
( von Károlyi, 2001 ;  von Károlyi et al., 2003 ) and these directly motivated
the current report.  Von Károlyi and colleagues
(2001)  used stimuli that could potentially be viewed as 3-D (called possible and
impossible figures;  Carrasco & Seamon, 1996 ;
 Schacter et al., 1990 ). During the task
participants needed to quickly determine whether or not a stimulus (see  Figure 1 ) could exist in a 3-D space (possible, see  Figure 1a ) or not (impossible, see  Figure 1b ). This task (hereafter referred to as the impossible figures task)
requires the ability to see the gestalt of a figure quickly in order to get it to
“pop out” of the page in 3-D.  Von
Károlyi et al. (2001)  found that RD readers were reliably faster at this
task but comparable on accuracy (suggesting that the latency advantage did not simply
reflect a speed/accuracy tradeoff). These findings were later replicated by the same
authors with a second, independent sample ( von
Károlyi et al., 2003 ); given the replication study, we employed the
impossible figures tasks in the current neuroimaging report. It is important to note that
both studies had small effect sizes, and the TD comparison groups had slightly (but not
significantly) higher accuracy scores. Still, given that individuals with RD are often
slower at processing tasks (e.g., Wolf & Bowers, 2000), findings that show enhanced
speed in RD without an accuracy tradeoff are intriguing. 
 Why should there be an RD advantage on this type of task? Von Károlyi
and colleagues hypothesized that this relative strength might be related to a global
configural processing bias, as the ability to recognize possible figures is thought to be
related to this process (e.g.,  Schachter, 1992 ).
Other studies have also reported the presence of a global bias for processing in
individuals with RD, meaning that individuals with RD seem to display a bias toward
processing the gestalt over an image’s parts, although data from these studies
indicate that this bias is similar to the one shown by TD peers ( Keen & Lovegrove, 2000 ;  Matthews & Martin, 2009 ); this bias could, in principle, account for latency
advantages in the impossible figures task. 
 
 
 1.2 Is There a Neural Signature for Reading vs. Visuospatial Processing
Tradeoffs? 
 An extensive literature attests to the claim that language processing is
typically left hemisphere (LH) dominant, whereas the right hemisphere (RH) systems plays a
relatively heightened role for many aspects of non-language visuospatial processing (e.g.,
 Hellige, 1996 ;  Hellige & Michimata, 1989 ;  Pallier,
Devauchelle, & Dehaene, 2011 ). With respect to brain organization for
reading, neuroimaging studies have found that TD readers develop a largely LH organized
neurocircuity for print with inferior frontal, temporoparietal and occipitotemporal
components ( Pugh et al., 2000 ). Individuals with RD
exhibit reduced activation (and functional connectivity) across LH posterior networks (see
 Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2009 ,  2011 , for a meta-analysis), and for many tasks show
greater RH activation; these heightened RH responses have been argued to reflect
compensatory processing in light of LH anomalies for phonological processing ( Horwitz et al., 1998 ;  Pugh, Mencl, Shaywitz et al., 2000 ;  Rippon &
Brunswick, 2000 ;  Shaywitz et al., 2003 ;
 Simos et al, 2002 ). At the level of neuroanatomy,
some studies have reported a reversal of asymmetry (RH larger than LH) in the planum
temporale in individuals with RD, although the evidence for this is somewhat mixed ( Geschwind & Levitsky, 1968 ;  Hynd, Semrud-Clikeman, Lorys, Novey, & Eliopulos, 1990 ;  Larsen, Høien, Lundberg, & Odegarrd, 1990 ;
 Rumsey et al., 1997 ;  Schultz et al., 1994 ). Reduced gray and white matter development
in LH regions for RD readers have also been frequently reported (e.g.,  Beaulieu et al., 2005 ;  Deutsch et
al, 2005 ;  Eckert, 2004 ;  Keller & Just, 2009 ;  Klingberg et al., 2000 ;  Niogi & McCandliss,
2006 ;  Richards et al, 2008 ;  Rollins et al., 2009 ). 
 Hemispheric differences in TD and RD for reading might suggest a possible
mechanism for the language/non-language visuospatial tradeoff under consideration in this
study. Thus, to the extent that RH systems dominate in individuals with RD we might see
relative deficits in language and a potential advantage for visuospatial processing (cf.
 Craggs et al., 2006 ). Alternatively, the lack of
LH specialization for reading in RD might allow greater contributions from LH networks to
configural processing and thus the reported advantage. However, to date these kinds of
tradeoffs have not been documented in RD, and the current fMRI study will be important in
providing a first test of this hypothesis. 
 
 
 1.3 Purpose of this Study 
 Although there is anecdotal and some experimental evidence for possibly enhanced
non-language visuospatial processing in individuals with RD, research findings in this
area have been limited, and current neurocognitive RD theories tend to focus almost
exclusively on well-established processing deficits. This study aims to provide both a
cognitive and neurobiological investigation of whether strengths in non-language
visuospatial tasks do exist and, if they do, to explore the brain-basis of the
dissociation between reading and other tasks. We can begin to address questions such as
whether individuals with RD show a tendency or a preference to process information
globally rather than relying on feature-based processing, whether individuals with RD may
advantageously use contextual features to aid in areas of processing that are otherwise
hard for them, and whether there are differences between RD and TD readers in hemispheric
lateralization that might underlie visuospatial processing tradeoffs. 
 More specifically, to precisely characterize relative strengths in different
aspects of visuospatial processing and reading, we administered a standard behavioral
battery of reading measures as well as the impossible figures and two other frequently
employed non-language visuospatial tasks (mental rotation, Navon global/local processing;
Navon hierarchical stimuli;  Navon, 1977 ). Mental
rotation was chosen because it has been used in multiple RD studies in the past (e.g.,
 Olulade et al., 2012 ;  Winner et al., 2001 ), whereas the Navon task is a common measure
of the global-local processing differences (e.g.,  Behrmann
& Kimchi, 2003 ;  Fink et al., 1997 ;
 Matthews & Martin, 2009 , among many others)
that have been hypothesized by von Károlyi and colleagues as one possible
explanation for putative visual processing strengths in the impossible figures task. In a
subset of these participants, we then adapted the impossible figures paradigm that has
shown RD advantages in two previous published studies ( von Károlyi, 2001 ;  von Károlyi
et al., 2003 ) to be used during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data, along with a visual lexical decision paradigm for printed words and pseudowords to
examine the neurobiological signatures of each and how these tasks might interact with
reading skill as assessed behaviorally. We also employed a simple one-back fMRI control
task with figures vs. words in order to assess TD/RD differences when task is held
constant but stimulus type varies. 
 
 
 
 2. Method 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Fifty-three participants with reading abilities ranging from RD to superior
reading enrolled in the study (see  Table 1  for
descriptive characteristics of the sample). A subsample of 27 participants were recruited
for the fMRI portion of the study. These participants were recruited specifically because
they did or did not report having an RD in order to create two separate groups (RD and
TD). These participants completed a diagnostic battery and a series of cognitive tasks,
and a subset of this group (21 participants) was selected (as described below) to return
to participate in the fMRI portion of the study. An additional 26 participants were
recruited to provide a larger sample of data on our behavioral tasks. These participants
were not recruited based on group (TD or RD) membership: they represented a spectrum of
reading abilities. The six participants who completed behavioral testing but were not
selected for the fMRI portion of the study were still included in the data for the
cognitive tasks. All participants were recruited from the community using public
advertisements, and from existing laboratory databases of families who had indicated an
interest in participating in future studies. For the core cognitive tasks we obtained
behavioral data for all participants for the Navon task, for 49 participants on the mental
rotation task, and for 47 participants on the impossible figures task. 1 
 All participants were given a cognitive and diagnostic battery of tests that
included the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI,  Wechsler, 1999 ) and Woodcock-Johnson Test of Achievement (WJ-III,
 Woodcock, McGrew, Schrank, & Mather, 2007 ).
For the subset participants performing in the fMRI portion of the study, these
participants were additionally given the Test of Word Reading Efficiency (TOWRE,  Torgesen, Wagner, & Rashotte, 1999 ). Participants
in the fMRI subsample met criteria for RD if the average of their standard scores on the
WJ-III Basic Reading cluster, WJ-III Spelling subtest, and the TOWRE Total Word Reading
scores were 90 or lower or clinical judgment based on developmental history. All but one
participant in the RD group had a score lower than 90 (Reading Composite = 94),
but this participant had a significant and documented history of reading difficulties, so
he was included in the RD group based on past history and clinical judgment. From the
initial sample of 27, we selected a subset of TD and RD participants that were group
matched on chronological age and gender, and WASI Verbal IQ, did not reliably differ
(although the scores for the TD group were numerically higher on all three WASI scales;
see  Table 1 ). 
 
 
 2.2 Materials and Procedure 
 After completing the diagnostic battery, participants completed two cognitive
experiments (Navon and mental rotation). Together, diagnostic and behavioral testing took
approximately 2–3 hours. Participants were then given mock scanner training to
prepare them for the fMRI tasks. Before participating in the fMRI portion of the study,
participants were given the instructions for the tasks to be completed in the scanner and
completed practice sessions for each task. Participants completed three tasks during
scanning (impossible figures, lexical decision, and a one-back task using the print and
figure stimuli from the key experimental conditions). Participants used their right hand
to respond to tasks in the magnet. Total time in the fMRI scanner was approximately 1
hour, including anatomical scans. Immediately after the participants finished the fMRI
session, they performed an additional session of the impossible figures task outside of
the scanner. The motivation for this procedure was to acquire data under conditions more
similar to the previously published behavioral studies (i.e.,  von Károlyi, 2001 ;  von
Károlyi et al., 2001 ). This behavioral data was collected after the
in-scanner session, however, in order to avoid any priming effects that could affect the
fMRI patterns ( Korsnes & Magnussen, 2006 ;  Soldan, Mangels, & Cooper, 2006 ;  Soldan, Gazes, Hilton, & Stern, 2008 ). 
 
 2.2.1 Cognitive measures of visuospatial processing 
 The same general procedure was used for each of three tasks measuring
different aspects of visuospatial processing in TD and RD. For each task participants
were seated in a comfortable non-rotating chair approximately 50 cm from a computer
screen. Stimulus presentation and responses were controlled using E-Prime 2.0 software
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA). Responses for all tasks were collected
using the outside two buttons on a five-button box. For all tasks each stimulus was
present for 4 seconds, and if the participant did not respond in those 4 seconds, the
item was scored as incorrect and the program advanced to the next item with a 750 ms
inter-trial interval. Participants were given no feedback on whether their response was
correct or incorrect on experimental trials. 
 
 2.2.1.1 Impossible figures behavioral task 
 This task, identical to the in-scanner version (but collected immediately
after the fMRI session), involved a figure judgment ( Schacter et al., 1990 ) similar to the conditions that have shown an
advantage in reaction time without cost to accuracy for participants with RD ( von Károlyi, 2001 ;  von Károlyi et al., 2003 ). Participants viewed the 2D
drawings figures, and indicated by means of a button press whether the figures were
“possible” or “impossible” (see  Figure 1  for examples). Participants were instructed that
“possible” figures looked as if they were a real 3D object that you
could reach out, grab and hold, whereas it was “impossible” for an
impossible figure to exist in real life because one or more of the lines or corners
was out of place. The majority of the stimuli were taken from the original set of
possible/impossible stimuli ( Schacter et al.,
1990 ); however, following a pilot study, some stimuli were made easier (by
adding or subtracting lines or corners) in order make the stimulus difficulty more
suitable for younger adolescents. Participants had already completed the fMRI version
of this task, so they were not given any practice items. The task consisted of 168
stimuli, presented randomly in two 96 stimuli blocks, separated by a short break and
counterbalanced across groups for order of blocks and side of responses on the button
box (e.g., possible on either left or right). 
 
 
 2.2.1.2 Mental rotation task 
 For this task we adapted a common mental rotation task ( Peters & Battista, 2007 ;  Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978 ) in order to test a domain of visual processing
that does not involve global-local processing but still involves visual processing in
3 dimensions. Participants viewed pairs of shapes made of blocks, and needed to
determine if the figures were the same or different if one was rotated. During
practice participants were initially shown 3D examples of the stimuli, and then
examples in a laminated book to demonstrate the task. Participants were allowed to
practice the task once on the computer with eight practice stimuli to ensure that they
understood the task. None of the participants showed any difficulty understanding the
task. The experimental task consisted of 94 stimuli, presented randomly in two 47
stimuli blocks, separated by a short break and counterbalanced across groups for order
of blocks and side of responses on the button box (e.g., same on either left or
right). 
 
 
 2.2.1.3 Navon task 
 This task was adapted from the hierarchical stimuli paradigm ( Navon, 1977 ) that is commonly used to detect
global-local processing biases (e.g.,  Behrmann &
Kimchi, 2003 ;  Fink et al., 1997 ;  Matthews & Martin, 2009 , among many others). On
each trial participants were presented with a figure with an ‘H’ or an
‘S’ in it and they had to identify which of the letters the figure
contained. The target letters could be represented either by a number of small letters
that made up the figure or by the gestalt of a figure. In order to control for any
implicit learning that might be occurring, ‘H’ was always paired with
‘A,’ and ‘S’ was always paired with E to facilitate
implicit learning; however, there was a third type of stimuli where both
‘H’ and ‘S’ were paired with ‘T’ and
therefore would have no implicit associations between the two letters. Participants
were shown examples of the stimuli in a laminated book, and then were allowed to
practice on the computer with 12 practice stimuli in order to ensure that they
understood the task. None of the participants showed any difficulty understanding the
task. The experimental task consisted of 160 stimuli, presented randomly in two 80
stimuli blocks, one block using the stimuli with the stronger global bias, and another
block using the stimuli with a stronger local bias, separated by a short break and
counterbalanced across groups for order of blocks. 
 
 
 
 2.2.2 FMRI tasks 
 Participants completed three tasks in the fMRI scanner: (1) a version of the
impossible figures task, (2) a lexical decision (word/pseudoword discrimination) task,
and (3) a one-back task using stimuli similar to those used in the two key experimental
tasks. Participants alternated between functional imaging runs of the impossible figure
and lexical decision tasks, with order counterbalanced across participants, and then
finished with the one-back task. The one-back was completed at the end of the session to
ensure there were not any priming effects during the critical trials of the impossible
figures task. 
 Before scanning sessions participants were given instructions on the tasks
with print outs of sample stimuli followed by practice on a computer in the Yale Reading
Center. Participants were given feedback on their performance in order to ensure that
they understood what “possible” and “impossible” meant.
All participants demonstrated that they understood the tasks in the practice run. In the
scanner stimuli were presented using E-Prime 2.0, and accuracy and latencies were
recorded using a fiber optic button box. Participants were given an additional short
practice run in the scanner to familiarize them with how the task would run in the
scanner. 
 
 2.2.2.1 Impossible figures fMRI task 
 For the fMRI impossible figures runs, the task demands were similar to the
out of scanner version of the task conducted immediately afterwards, although the
timing of stimulus presentation was adapted for ideal fMRI data acquisition. In each
of six functional imaging runs in an event-related design, participants viewed 28
figures (half possible, half impossible). Unlike the behavioral version, participants
did not advance to the next figure once they registered a decision. Stimuli were
presented for 2.5 seconds. Trials entailed multiple randomized or
“jittered” durations (4–7 sec) to facilitate analysis ( Miezen et al., 2000 ), and occasional longer
durations (i.e., “null” trials) to improve our estimate of baseline
activation. 
 
 
 2.2.2.2 Lexical Decision task 
 For this event-related scanner task, participants were asked to determine
whether a printed token was a real English word or not. Word stimuli were medium
frequency (mean frequency, HAL Study: 23399.19; range: 731–324,161;  Balota et al., 2007 ;  Lund & Burgess, 1996 ) and matched to pseudowords in length (range:
4–6 letters, mean: 4.5 letters). In addition, half of the real words and half
of the pseudowords were presented in mixed case to provide a difficulty manipulation
that would be analogous to the impossible-possible figures contrast. Stimulus
presentation times and trial durations were identical to those used for the impossible
figures functional imaging runs. In each run, participants saw 28 items (7 of each of
the 4 stimulus types described above). In order to lessen task demands for
participants, “real” and “possible” responses were
always on the same button, and “pseudoword “ and
“impossible” were always on the same button for each individual
participant. 
 
 
 2.2.2.3 One-back task 
 For the last 2 runs at the scanner, participants completed a task designed
to identify the underlying perceptual circuits involved in processing figures and
printed stimuli with a common (one-back) task that involved minimal cognitive
processing demands. This allows us to determine whether differences in activation
patterns between groups on figures vs. print tokens seen in the primary lexical
decision vs. impossible figures task comparisons are still observed when the task is
held constant. If general patterns are similar in the common task condition this would
imply basic perceptual processing as opposed to task-specific cognitive processing
differences for language and non-language visual tokens. In the one-back condition
participants identified whether the stimulus on the screen was the same or different
from the preceding stimulus. A block design was used with 3 blocks of possible figures
and 3 blocks of real (not case-mixed) words (8 items per block) in each run
alternating with a baseline condition in which participants saw a
‘+’ sign on the screen and alternated between left and right
button presses with each subsequent ‘+,’ rather than making
one-back decisions. 
 
 
 
 
 2.3 FMRI Image Acquisition and Analysis 
 FMRI data were acquired using a Siemens 3 Tesla “Tim Trio”
scanner at the Yale School of Medicine. Foam wedges around the head and a restraining band
across the forehead were used in an 8 channel head coil to minimize movements. Prior to
functional imaging, 32 axial-oblique anatomic images (FA [flip angle],
60°, TE [echo time], 2.47 ms; TR [repetition
time], 300 ms; 4 mm slice thickness, no gap; 256 × 256 mm × 2 NEX
[number excitations]) were prescribed parallel to the intercommissural
line. Activation images were collected at these same slice locations using single shot,
gradient echo, echo planar acquisitions (FA, 80°; TE, 30 ms; TR, 2000 ms; 4 mm
slice thickness, no gap; 64 × 64 × 1 NEX), resulting in 95 images obtained
per 3:10 functional run with an additional 5 images at the beginning of each run discarded
due to image stabilization. High-resolution anatomical images were gathered for 3D
reconstruction (sagittal MPRAGE acquisition, FA, 8°; TE, 3.65 ms; TR, 2000 ms; 256
× 256 mm; 1 mm slice thickness, no gap; 1 NEX; 160 slices total). 
 Data analysis was completed using algorithms developed in MATLAB (Mathworks,
Inc.) in conjunction with Bio-Image Suite (REF). Functional images were corrected for
slice-acquisition time, motion-corrected with SPM2 (Friston et al., 1995), and spatially
smoothed with a 3.125 mm FWHM Gaussian filter. Images in which rotation exceeded 2 degrees
or displacement exceeded 2 mm and functional runs in which 65% or more of the
images exceeded tolerance were excluded from analysis. Using Bio-Image Suite, each
subject’s T1 anatomic was mapped onto the 2-mm MNI standard space
“Colin” brain defined by the Montreal Neurological Institute. This was
applied to all single-subject activation maps prior to across subject analysis with
trilinear interpolation. 
 Preprocessed images acquired during the block design of the one-back task were
then submitted to a linear regression analysis at each voxel for every subject in order to
compare the mean signal for each experimental condition to the baseline condition. By
dividing by the square root of the error mean square for the model, the differences of the
signal were converted to standardized activation values. Preprocessed images acquired
during the event-related design of the impossible figures and lexical decision tasks were
processed using a linear regression based method that allows for direct estimation of the
hemodynamic response function for each condition on a voxelwise basis without a priori
specification of a reference function ( Miezin et al.,
2000 ). Single subject activation maps were created for each condition using the
regression estimates to calculate the mean activation difference between a baseline
(0–3 sec prior to trial onset) and an activation period (3–8 sec post
onset). Because of a planned scanner upgrade midway through data acquisition, we employed
two methods to account for differences in signal across subjects. First, we acquired data
on individuals from both groups pre (7 RD, 8 TD) and post (4 RD, 2 TD) upgrade such that
any uncorrected scanner differences would minimally impact our primary group comparisons.
Second, within each single subject analysis, regression parameters (B-weights) were
converted to standardized activation values by dividing them by the square root of the
error mean square for the model, as in  Pugh et al.
(2008) . 
 For across-subjects analyses of both block and event-related data, values from
the single-subject analyses were entered into repeated measures analyses of variance
conducted on a voxel-wise basis with planned comparisons for main effects and interactions
of interest. All comparisons are report at a  p <.01, with a correction
for false discovery rate (FDR;  Genovese, Lazar, &
Nichols, 2002 ). 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 Results below are presented both for the entire sample (53 participants) and for
the subsample of 21 (11 RD, 10 TD) who participated in the fMRI portion of the study.
Results are presented in the following order: (1) behavioral results for the full sample out
of the scanner, (2) behavioral results for the fMRI subgroup on tasks conducted out of the
scanner, (3) behavioral results for the fMRI subgroup in the scanner, and (4) fMRI results.
It should be noted that reaction times for all sections represent reaction times for correct
trials only. 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Data 
 
 3.1.1 Full sample, out of scanner tasks 
 We conducted a series of analyses examining the relation between word reading
skills and both accuracy and reaction times to correct responses on the visuospatial
tasks (Navon, mental rotation, and impossible figures). Because current evidence
suggests that RD is best understood as a dimensional disorder ( Fletcher, Lyon, Fuchs, & Barnes, 2007 ) in which relevant
cognitive and neurobiological differences between skilled and less skilled readers are
thought to be gradient, we utilize continuous analyses of the behavioral data in which
our sample size and skill distribution is adequate for this analytic approach. 
 Given extensive variability on full-scale IQ scores in the full behavioral
sample we also included this factor along with chronological age as nuisance variables
in separate regression analyses performed with dependent variable WJ Letter-Word ID for
each of six predictors of interest: (1) reaction times to possible/impossible figure
judgments; (2) accuracy of possible/impossible figure judgments; (3) mental rotation
reaction time; (4) mental rotation accuracy, (5) Navon reaction times, and (6) Navon
accuracy. For each model WASI full-scale IQ and chronological age were entered into the
model before the predictor of interest.  Table 2 
contains mean accuracies and reaction times, and  Table
3  contains regression models along with zero order and partial correlations.
All six models were significant; however, of our six variables of interest only reaction
times for mental rotation and impossible figures significantly predicted Letter-Word ID
( p =0.03 and  p =0.01
respectively). 2  In essence, lower
reaction times on these tasks were correlated with lower scores on Letter-Word ID,
suggesting that participants who were worse at reading also displayed a relative speed
advantage in the mental rotation and impossible figures tasks. Importantly, there was no
relationship between speed and accuracy in either the impossible figures task
( r =.04,  p =.81) or the mental
rotation task ( r =−.01,  p =.95),
suggesting that participants did not sacrifice accuracy for speed. The Letter-Word ID
task is a commonly used sight word reading test used to examine word decoding skill
(e.g.,  Pugh et al., 2013 ) and given that RD is
defined by word level processing deficits, we employed this as our primary dependent
measure for these analyses. 
 
 
 3.1.2 FMRI subsample, out-of-scanner tasks 
 Next, we separately examined the out-of-scanner performance of the subsample
of 11 individuals with RD and 10 TD controls who also participated in the fMRI portion
of the study, using the same data analysis approach that we used for the entire sample
(see  Table 2  for accuracy/RT means, and  Table 4  for regression models). In this section we
examined just out-of-scanner data to see if the samples were comparable. These analyses
were performed to ensure that our subsample was similar to our overall sample in terms
of their pattern of performance. All models showed at least a marginal trend toward
significance, with the impossible figures and mental rotation reaction times reaching
significance. The lack of significance for all models is likely due to the smaller
sample sizes for the scanner tasks. Still, even with this subsample there was a trend
toward a relationship between mental rotation reaction times
( p =.07) even when FSIQ and age were included in the model. The
RD subsample was faster that the TD group in reaction times for both the impossible
figures task and the mental rotation task, although none of these differences reached
significance (all F’s<1). Additionally, in the RD group there was no
significant relationship between reaction times and accuracy for impossible figures
( r =.14,  p =.68) or mental rotation
( r =−.15,  p =.67), suggesting
that there was no trade-off between speed and accuracy. Performance on the impossible
figures task inside and outside the magnet was highly correlated in terms of accuracy,
 r =.77,  p <.001, but the reaction time
correlation was smaller,  r =.37,
 p =.10. 
 
 
 3.1.3 In-Scanner tasks 
 We then examined the behavioral performance of the fMRI subsample
(RD=11, TD=10) on tasks that were conducted during the fMRI scan
(impossible figures, lexical decision task, one-back). We conducted separate regression
analyses for accuracy/RT on each task with chronological age and FSIQ as nuisance
variables with WJ Letter-Word ID as the dependent variable (see  Table 2  for accuracy/RT means, and  Table 5  for regression models). All six overall 3  models were at least marginally significant,
with models for reaction times in impossible figures ( p <.05) and
lexical decision ( p <.05) reaching significance. Reaction time on the
lexical decision task 4 , however, was the
only factor to significantly predict Letter-Word ID in these models
( p <.05). 
 
 
 
 3.2 FMRI Results 
 
 3.2.1 Impossible figures vs. lexical decision tasks 
 Using whole-brain analysis, thresholded at  p =0.01,
with FDR correction: several regions were observed with higher activation in TD relative
to RD including RH fusiform gyrus, bilateral lateral occipital gyrus, LH fusiform gyrus,
LH putamen/insula, LH IPL, and bilateral ventral prefrontal cortex (BA 6); no regions
with RD greater than TD across tasks were observed. Main effects of task revealed a
clear pattern. In frontal cortex, extending ventrally from IFG to more dorsal MFG and
BA6/9, figures were associated with greater RH activation whereas print was associated
with greater LH activation. Because our primary interest involves the neurobiological
signature of the dissociations between reading and visuospatial processing that we
observed behaviorally, the main effects are not reported further and we focus primarily
on those regions showing a reliable Group x Task interaction. 
 A number of regions showed Group x Task interactions (see  Figure 2  and  Table 6 )
with a few distinct patterns observed across different regions. In order to illustrate
these patterns, we extracted activation values for each subject at voxels that showed a
significant Group x Task interaction in the composite map and generated barplots of the
activation levels for figures and print for RD and TD separately ( Figure 4 ). First a disordinal interaction pattern was observed
in which greater activation was observed for RD than TD when processing print and
greater activation was observed for TD than RD when processing figures. This disordinal
pattern was seen at several loci including: LH putamen/insula, bilateral precentral
gyrus and supplementary motor areas bilateral SFG, LH IFG/MFG (BA 47), LH MFG (BA 46,
prefrontal dorsolateral), anterior cingulate (BA 24), and LH intraparietal sulcus. A
second pattern was observed in which the Group x Task interaction was driven by greater
activation by TD for print relative to RD in regions including: bilateral IFG/lateral
orbital gyrus (BA 47), LH IFG (BA 45), RH STG, and RH temporal pole as well as
sub-regions in RH basal ganglia. A third pattern was characterized by increased
activation for figures in TD relative to print with but similar activation for both
print and figures in RD participants. Regions which displayed this third pattern of
activation included: RH SFG, RH Insula, RH fusiform gyrus, RH IPL, RH precuneus, and
anterior aspects of LH MTG. A final pattern was observed for bilateral lateral occipital
gyrus regions in which RD participants showed relatively decreased activation for print
but strong activation for figures with similar levels of activation in TD participants
for both figures and print. In sum, a disordinal (crossover) pattern was seen in
frontostriatal networks with RD showing greater activation for print than figures and TD
showing the opposite pattern. In addition, for TD figures were associated with strong RH
activation but print with localized LH activation. For RD less laterally differences
were seen; for these participants we observed major task differences in frontostriatal
regions and strong responses to figures in visual cortex. 
 
 
 3.2.2 One-back task 
 This task was included to identify regions where group by stimulus type
differences were seen when task is held constant (thus allowing us to distinguish
patterns that were task vs. stimulus type related across the two experiments). The
general pattern on this simple one-back task regarding group differences is very similar
to the task contrasts. Strikingly, as shown in  Figure
3 , the data show a clear group by stimulus type difference even when looking at
a simple count of numbers of activated voxels across the entire cortex. For figures, TD
readers showed much higher numbers than RD, whereas the opposite pattern is seen for
voxels activated by print stimuli. In summary, when simply processing these different
types of stimuli, TD and RD show a reversed pattern in terms of activated networks
across a broadly distributed bilateral set of regions, and as in the task comparison
data, suggest a straightforward link between performance and activation patterns across
distributed brain networks. We consider the implications of these findings, both local
and distributed, in the Discussion. 
 To summarize, broad group by stimulus hemispheric differences were observed in
this study. Indeed, as illustrated in  Figure 4 , TD
readers showed heightened RH responses to figures at precentral gyrus (BA 6), insula,
fusiform gyrus, and IPL. By contrast, print showed heightened activation for TD in a
number of LH regions including IFG/lateral occipital gyrus, IFG, and BA 38. Thus, along
with heightened frontostriatal activation for figures many RH regions contributed more
to these readers processing of figures and LH regions for print in TD but this
differentiation by hemisphere was not seen in RD. Findings from the one-back task
reinforce these patterns even when a common task is employed. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Behaviorally, the current findings (with the full sample) replicate two previous
studies reporting a latency advantage (faster latencies without corresponding error
increases) for the impossible figures as reading skill decreases ( von Károlyi et al., 2003 ;  von Károlyi, 2001 ). We also obtained a similar latency advantage on the
mental rotation task with decreasing reading skill (it should be noted that this task has
produced inconsistent findings with regard to RD in previous studies; e.g.,  Olulade et al., 2012 ;  Winner et
al., 2001 ). These behavioral findings do suggest a possible visuospatial processing
strength with children reading difficulties. 
 At the neurobiological level of analysis, when comparing the impossible figures
with the lexical decision tasks, we focused primarily on Group x Task interactions (see
 Figures 2  &  4 ) in a matched subset of TD and RD readers. One disordinal (crossover) pattern
was seen across frontostriatal networks (including the putamen/insula, motor and premotor
sites) with decreased activation for RD relative to TD participants for figures but the
opposite pattern for print. Another type of pattern was seen at a number of LH and RH sites
and revealed what appeared to be hemispheric differentiation for print vs. figures for TD
but not for RD; thus, for TD several LH networks uniquely responded more vigorously to print
than figures (fusiform and IFG), while a number of RH networks (IPL, fusiform, and MFG)
showed very elevated responses to figures relative to print in TD but less differentiation
in general for RD individuals. Findings from the one-back task analyses (used to compare
groups on processing these two types of stimuli with a common overt task that does not
involve explicit geometric or linguistic judgments) indicate a clear Group by Stimulus type
dissociation; across a wide array of regions, the TD group showed greater activation for
figures than print while the opposite pattern was found for RD (similar to  Olulade et al., 2012 , with a mental rotation task). All of these
findings suggest a more circumscribed and efficient neural organization for those stimuli
for which a given group showed a reaction time advantage; thus, in general, brain and
behavioral data converge. We next discuss the implications of these findings for
neurological accounts of RD. 
 We first consider the implications of the crossover interaction pattern seen in
frontostriatal networks (see  Figure 4 ). This system is
known to support procedural learning ( Barnes, Kubota, Hu,
Jin, & Graybiel, 2005 ;  Ullman, 2004 )
across multiple domains including reading ( McNorgan,
Alvarez, Bhullar, Gayda, & Both, 2011 ), math ( Rivera, Reiss, Eckert, & Menon, 2005 ), and sensorimotor learning ( Barnes, Kubota, Hu, Jin, & Graybiel, 2005 ). Previous
studies indicate that this system tends to be less activated for
“overlearned” relative to more effortful, less well-learned processes ( Rivera, Reiss, Eckert, & Menon, 2005 ). Extrapolating
from this, the current data might be taken to suggest that processing of figures is in some
sense more “expert-like” in RD readers and processing of print is more
“expert-like” in TD readers in terms of efficiency of processing. Similarly,
many studies also suggest that RH networks, particularly RH IPL (BA 39), tend to show
greater activation for less well-learned cognitive skills, perhaps reflecting greater
attentionally controlled processing. To illustrate, in two developmental studies of children
acquiring reading expertise over several years RH activation is reduced relative to LH
activation as reading becomes more expert ( Shaywitz et al.,
1998 ;  Shaywitz et al., 2003 ;  Turkeltaub, Gareau, Flowers, Zeffiro, & Eden, 2003 ).
Given that TD readers showed higher RH activation for figures (relative both to print and to
RD participants on figures) across multiple RH networks, including RH IPL, these data might
be seen as reinforcing our interpretation of the frontostriatal asymmetry in suggesting that
TD participants processed figures in a more effortful manner. 
 Alternative interpretations of this crossover effect are of course possible. Thus,
given that the impossible figure tokens are relatively novel for both groups, it is also
possible that TD readers were simply more intensively (and attentively) processing these
stimuli than RD because they are, in some sense, more focused on learning about them. On
such an account, we would expect that an initial advantage in latency for RD on figural
stimuli would disappear after multiple exposures because TD are more actively engaged in
learning about these tokens than RD. However, we think that this account is unlikely for two
reasons. First, the RD latency advantage for figures was obtained in a follow-up behavioral
testing session (after fMRI) and thus both groups had received multiple exposures to these
stimuli prior to testing, so these stimuli were no longer entirely novel for either group
during scanning. Secondly, the group-by-stimulus type differences on the one-back task when
participants were not explicitly attending to feature judgments reinforce our preferred
interpretation that brain differences reflect processing efficiency. Nonetheless, further
studies that actually examine longer term learning will be needed to fully address this
question. 
 Next, we consider the group differences in hemispheric distributions. A
hemispheric tradeoff hypothesis ( Horwitz et al.,
1998 ;  Pugh, Mencl, Shaywitz et al., 2000 ;
 Rippon & Brunswick, 2000 ;  Shaywitz et al., 2003 ; Simos et al, 2003) did receive some support
in this study. The notion that specialization in one network for a given type of stimulus
can result in less facility for other types of stimuli in that network has been termed the
“crowding hypothesis” (e.g.,  Behrman &
Plaut, 2013 ;  Dehaene et al., 2010 ). By way
of illustration, a recent study ( Cai et al., 2013 )
leveraged the well-established finding that most but not all individuals are LH dominant for
language and RH dominant for visuospatial processing and the dissociation is thought to
avoid crowding. To test this idea, the authors examined a subset of participants with
reversed language dominance (RH instead of LH) and found that for these individuals
visuospatial processing was associated with greater LH dominance; these results were seen as
supporting the crowding hypothesis. In the context of the current study this might have
manifested in the following ways. Either for TD, given greater LH specialization for print,
visuospatial processing in the impossible figures task would show relatively greater
reliance on RH networks, or with regard to RD, greater RH involvement for print might lead
to greater LH involvement for figures. The results seem to confirm the first hypothesis
regarding TD participants. Thus, for these participants we see greater hemispheric
differentiation across tasks with heightened RH activation for figures (relative both to
print and relative to RD participants for figures). Given these effects, we can entertain
the hypothesis that TD readers (who have been found in previous studies to transition
developmentally from bilateral activation for print to LH ventral organization for print as
they develop expertise [ Pugh, Mencl, Jenner et al.,
2000 ;  Vellutino et al., 2004 ]) may
be forced to rely more on RH pattern recognition processing systems for non-language
stimuli. By contrast, lack of LH specialization for reading could engender less
differentiation in RD and hence a small but robust advantage for impossible figure
processing. Of course all of this is speculative, and even if this view is correct, we
cannot determine in this study whether these group differences are consequence of reading
experience, or whether differences in LH/RH activation patterns reflect TD/RD tuning
characteristics that are present even before learning to read. In order to address that
developmental question, future studies will need to examine brain and behavior tradeoffs in
emergent readers (as children transition from pre to post literate brain organization).
Nevertheless, the current findings could be viewed as consistent with the notion that
greater LH expertise in print could incur some cost for other materials in TD. 
 Importantly, these findings suggest that for those processing skills that are a
relative strength for RD learners, systems-level brain organization appears relatively
“normal” (at least to the granularity available to fMRI). Although the
patterns of reduced activation at LH reading relevant networks for print in RD are
consistent with many previous fMRI studies ( Pugh et al.,
2013 ), the novel findings from the impossible figures task suggest that this type
of processing task (which is a relative strength in RD) is associated with highly efficient
functional brain organization, both in cortical/subcortical pathways associated with
learning and in visual pattern processing regions. This may have implications for how we
view the etiology of reading difficulties. Because RD is characterized as a brain-based
learning disability, much research has simply searched for structural or functional
anomalies in this population (see  Diehl et al., 2011 ,
for a review) and many have been reported. This focus on anomaly follows from the idea that
RD, a gene-based condition, is associated atypical neuronal development that acts as an
effective functional lesioning of those networks key to language and literacy learning.
Structural anomalies have been reported at several levels of analysis ranging from the
cellular ( Galaburda, 2006 ) to large-scale gray and
white matter distributions (e.g.,  Hoeft et al., 2007 ;
 Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2012 ). However,
many previous studies, both of long-term remediation ( Sandak
et al., 2004 ;  Shaywitz et al., 2003 ;  Simos et al., 2002 ;  Temple et al., 2003 ) or short-term learning in RD learners ( Pugh et al., 2008 ), suggest that neurobiological systems are
“noisy,” but not fundamentally lesioned. Indeed, as behavioral performance
improves neurobiological anomalies are diminished in RD, suggesting a relative deficit
( Pugh, Mencl, Shaywitz et al., 2000 ). We should
note that we found little evidence of task invariant neurobiological anomaly in this study.
Thus, while a few regions did show lower activation in RD than TD irrespective of task
(including RH fusiform gyrus, bilateral occipital gyrus, LH fusiform gyrus, LH insula, LH
IPL, and bilateral ventral prefrontal cortex), the differences seen were relative (these
networks do not appear to be profoundly disrupted in an absolute sense), and none
contributed directly to the group by task patterns which appear relevant to performance
differences. We suspect that only a systems level account of RD will makes sense of both the
relative strengths and relative weaknesses in behavior and the fact that when performance is
good, the neural systems appear intact (see  Goswami,
2011 ;  Vidyasagar, 2013  for examples of
systems-level accounts). Further studies of relative strengths and weaknesses in RD will be
needed to move toward a systems-level model that can account for why the same circuits can
appear abnormal or normal depending on task in what ultimately is clearly a gene/brain based
condition. 
 It should be noted that recent neurobiological studies have examined the
relationship between reading skill and mental rotation in individuals with RD compared to
typically developing peers ( Olulade et al., 2012 ) and
“twice-exceptional” individuals with RD ( Gilger, et al., 2013 ). Interestingly, these studies demonstrated diminished
neurological activity for individuals with RD. Unfortunately, we did not use the mental
rotation task in the fMRI portion of the study, so our studies are not directly comparable.
In general, we found a dissociation of skill rather than diminished activity, and we found
behavioral differences outside of the scanner. It will be important in future research to
determine whether or not these differences are related to the differences between the
impossible figures and mental rotation tasks or differences between the samples. 
 
 4.1 Implications for Cognitive Theories of RD 
 None of the major RD neurocognitive theories are necessarily refuted by these
findings. However, on the surface at least, a general visual processing deficit account
would seem to be challenged by both the behavioral data (on mental rotation and impossible
figures) and on the neural patterning in visual regions for figures, which suggested a
high degree of skill in RD. We must note however, that at least one researcher ( Stein 2001 ) positing a magnocellular visual processing
deficit theory of RD has speculated that advantages for certain kinds of stimuli relative
to print might arise as a consequence of differences in the distributions of magnocellular
and parvocellular neurons in RD, and so it remains to be seen whether this model can
account for the current findings. It might also be argued that those accounts which posit
domain general procedural learning deficits, wherein such learning deficits are thought to
arise from non-intact frontostriatal-cerebellar loops (see  Nicolson & Fawcett, 2007 ;  Ullman,
2004 ), would also be challenged to account for the crossover interaction seen in
the frontostriatal systems, which seems to suggest increased efficiency (routinization)
for configural processing in RD and print in TD. A general disruption in these
cortical/subcortical pathways would not, on first pass analysis, seem to predict efficient
neural patterning in frontostriatal networks for figures, though further studies that
actually focus on learning and consolidation of these materials will be needed to properly
test these ideas. In any case, the current findings pose a challenge to all current RD
accounts since all are focused on deficits only. 
 As to the specific underlying mechanisms responsible for producing a processing
advantage for visual (configural) stimuli in RD, the current study is also not definitive.
One idea that has been put forward ( von Károlyi
et al., 2003 ) is that RD learners are more attuned to global vs. local coding and
this produces an advantage for configural processing. However, on the Navon task in the
behavioral battery, no obvious global-local group differences were found and that would
seem, in general, inconsistent with a simple global/local difference (though the use of
letters in this task may induce advantages in TD readers that might offset other processes
so the Navon task may not be optimally suited to address this issue). Further studies
targeting those networks identified here in the context of prospective longitudinal
designs and/or online learning will be needed to inform the question of mechanism for the
advantage. Thus, if we see that advantages pre-sage reading experience it would suggest a
congenital advantage in RD associated most likely with differences in visual tuning
characteristics, but if these relative advantages are in fact the result of group
differences in reading experience it may be argued that the impossible figures finding is
in fact not an advantage in RD. 
 This study has a number of important limitations that highlight the need for
replication. First, the fMRI portion of the study has a relatively small sample size.
Additionally, our RD sample has a broad range of cognitive abilities, and it is important
to consider that the neurological profiles/pathways are not necessarily going to be the
same across this spectrum of abilities (see  Gilger &
Kaplan, 2001 ). In our study IQ was covaried to control for this variance.
However, research on “twice-exceptional” individuals might represent a
unique behavioral profile from individuals with RD ( Foley,
Allmon, Sieck, & Stinson, 2011 ), although there is some recent evidence for a
similar neurological profile ( Gilger et al., 2013 ).
It should also be noted that our RD group had lower IQs than our TD group in the fMRI
portion of the study. Still, we were able to find relative strengths and weaknesses
despite this limitation. Finally, we found latency advantages for impossible figures when
the test was conducted outside of the fMRI, but we did not replicate this behavioral
finding during scanning. We cannot be certain that individuals with RD were using the same
strategy inside and outside of the fMRI. Still, the disordinal brain differences in the
frontostriatal networks would not seem to be influenced by strategy since the same pattern
held in the simpler cognitive task (one-back). 
 In summary, we found a small (but reliable) processing advantage for geometric
patterns in RD. It may be that a proclivity for these kinds of materials and tasks reflect
basic differences in the tuning characteristics of pattern recognition systems in RD that
would be evident prior to formal literacy instruction, or it may be that these latency
advantages are really in some sense “disadvantages” in TD that reflect a
cost for increased focus on print processing in specialized LH networks. If the former is
the case, then this might be seen as consistent with anecdotal evidence of RD strengths
and talents in visuospatial domains. However, given the inability to establish
directionality here we must be very cautious at this point in over-interpreting these
findings until systematic developmental and learning studies are conducted. The current
findings, at minimum, do indicate that at the granularity of fMRI, functional
neurocircuits for some types of visuospatial processes are generally well-structured in RD
learners, which stands in stark contrast to often reported anomalies for phonology and
reading. A systems-level account is needed to provide insight into how the same circuits
can appear anomalous or normal depending on task and experience in RD. 
 
 
 
 
 This study was supported by a grant from the Learning Disabilities Network (Boston, MA),
NIH P01 HD001994 (PI: Jay Rueckl), NIH R01 HD 048830 (PI: Kenneth R. Pugh), a pilot grant
from NHK World, and the Institute for Scholarship in the Liberal Arts at the University of
Notre Dame. These organizations had no involvement in the study design,
collection/analysis/interpretation of data, writing of the report, or the decision to submit
the article for publication. We would like to thank Heatherly Carlson, Brynn Gerstle,
Kimberly Ladenheim, Jeannie O’Neill, and Elenor Tejada for their help with
participant recruitment, data collection, and data management on this project. We would also
like to thank Whitney McWherter, Heidi Miller, Kailey Kawalec, and Padraig Driscoll for
their help with manuscript preparation. 
 
 
 
 1 
 There were a small number of instances of technological failure that compromised data on
the cognitive tasks, and a small number of participants who were unable to complete all of
the tasks. 
 
 
 2 
 Because of previous research suggesting a global processing bias, we ran additional
regression models, identical to the ones described above, with reaction times to stimuli
in which participants had to make global and local judgments. We found no effects in
either model ( p ’s>.3). 
 
 
 3 
 In the Navon tasks, even when reaction times for local and global stimuli were separately
analyzed in regression models, there was still no significant relationship between RTs and
WJ Letter-Word ID (all  p ’s<.5). 
 
 
 4 
 We conducted ANOVAs on latencies of correct responses and accuracy for the lexical
decision task in order to test whether we replicated findings on this population from
previous studies. There was a standard effect of lexicality on reaction times with faster
responses to words than pseudowords,  F (1,19)=6.51,
 p <.05, but no difference on proportion correct (words = .91;
pseudowords = .90),  F <1. An effect of case mixing was also
obtained on reaction times such that responses to items in lowercase were faster than to
items in mixed case,  F (1,19)=7.07,  p <.05.
There was also an interaction of lexicality by case mixing by reader group on reaction
times driven by TD readers showing a larger case mixing effect than RD readers but only on
pseudowords,  F (1,19)=8.96,  p <.01. All other
effects were not significant,  F s<3,  p >.10. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has
been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early
version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could a3ect the
content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bacon 
 AM 
 
 
 Handley 
 SJ 
 
 
 McDonald 
 EL 
 
 
 2007 
 Reasoning and dyslexia: A spatial strategy may impede reasoning with
visually rich information 
 Br J Psychol 
 98 
 1 
 79 
 92 
 10.1348/000712606X103987 
 17227613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Yap 
 MJ 
 
 
 Cortese 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hutchison 
 KA 
 
 
 Kessler 
 B 
 
 
 Loftis 
 B 
 
 
 Neely 
 JH 
 
 
 Nelson 
 DL 
 
 
 Simpson 
 GB 
 
 
 Treiman 
 R 
 
 
 2007 
 The English Lexicon Project 
 Behav Res Meth 
 39 
 445 
 459 
 10.3758/BF03193014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barnes 
 TD 
 
 
 Kubota 
 Y 
 
 
 Hu 
 D 
 
 
 Jin 
 DZ 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 2005 
 Activity of striatal neurons reflects dynamic encoding and recoding of
procedural memories 
 Nature 
 437 
 7062 
 1158 
 1161 
 10.1038/nature04053 
 16237445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bannatyne 
 A 
 
 
 1971 
 Language, reading and learning disabilities: Psychology, neuropsychology,
diagnosis, and remediation 
 Springfield, IL 
 Charles C. Thomas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaulieu 
 C 
 
 
 Plewes 
 C 
 
 
 Paulson 
 LA 
 
 
 Roy 
 D 
 
 
 Snook 
 L 
 
 
 Concha 
 L 
 
 
 Phillips 
 L 
 
 
 2005 
 Imaging brain connectivity in children with diverse reading
ability 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 1266 
 1271 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.053 
 15850744 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Kimchi 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 What does visual agnosia tell us about perceptual organization and its
relationship to object perception? 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 29 
 1 
 19 
 42 
 10.1037/0096-1523.29.1.19 
 12669745 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Plaut 
 DC 
 
 
 2013 
 Distributed circuits, not circumscribed centers, mediate visual
recognition 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 17 
 5 
 210 
 219 
 10.1016/j.tics.2013.03.007 
 23608364 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benton 
 A 
 
 
 1984 
 Dyslexia and spatial thinking 
 Ann Dyslexia 
 34 
 69 
 85 
 10.1007/BF02663614 
 24243295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cai 
 Q 
 
 
 Van der Haegen 
 L 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 
 
 2013 
 Complementary hemispheric specialization for language production and
visuospatial attention 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci 
 110 
 4 
 E322 
 E330 
 10.1073/pnas.1212956110 
 23297206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carrasco 
 M 
 
 
 Seamon 
 JG 
 
 
 1996 
 Priming impossible figures in the object decision test: The critical
importance of perceived stimulus complexity 
 Psychonomic Bull Rev 
 3 
 3 
 344 
 351 
 10.3758/BF03210758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craggs 
 JG 
 
 
 Sanchez 
 J 
 
 
 Kibby 
 MY 
 
 
 Gilger 
 JW 
 
 
 Hynd 
 GW 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain morphology and neuropsychological profiles in a family displaying
dyslexia and superior nonverbal intelligence 
 Cortex 
 42 
 1107 
 1118 
 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70222-3 
 17209416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 GA 
 
 
 Rimm 
 SB 
 
 
 1985 
 Education and the gifted and talented 
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ 
 Prentice-Hall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demb 
 JB 
 
 
 Boynton 
 GM 
 
 
 Best 
 M 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Psychophysical evidence for a magnocellular pathway deficit in
dyslexia 
 Vis Res 
 38 
 1555 
 1550 
 10.1016/S0042-6989(98)00075-3 
 9747491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Pegado 
 F 
 
 
 Braga 
 LW 
 
 
 Ventura 
 P 
 
 
 Nunes Filho 
 G 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 2010 
 How learning to read changes the cortical networks for vision and
language 
 Science 
 330 
 6009 
 1359 
 1364 
 10.1126/science.1194140 
 21071632 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 RF 
 
 
 Bammer 
 R 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Wandell 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Children’s reading performance is correlated with white matter
structure measured by diffusion tensor imaging 
 Cortex 
 41 
 354 
 363 
 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70272-7 
 15871600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diehl 
 JJ 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Pugh 
 K 
 
 
 2011 
 Neuroimaging and the phonological deficit hypothesis 
 
 
 Braze 
 D 
 
 
 Brady 
 S 
 
 
 Fowler 
 C 
 
 
 Weighing individual differences in reading: Theory and evidence 
 217 
 237 
 New York 
 Psychology Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 Stein 
 JF 
 
 
 Wood 
 MH 
 
 
 Wood 
 FB 
 
 
 1995 
 Verbal and visual problems in reading disability 
 J Learn Disabil 
 28 
 5 
 272 
 290 
 10.1177/002221949502800503 
 7775847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Neuroanatomical markers for dyslexia: a review of dyslexia structural
imaging studies 
 Neuroscientist 
 10 
 4 
 362 
 371 
 10.1177/1073858404263596 
 15271263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 VanMeter 
 JW 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JW 
 
 
 Maisog 
 J 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 1996 
 Abnormal processing of visual motion in dyslexia revealed by functional
brain imaging 
 Nature 
 348 
 66 
 69 
 10.1038/382066a0 
 8657305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facoetti 
 A 
 
 
 Trussardi 
 AN 
 
 
 Ruffino 
 M 
 
 
 Lorusso 
 ML 
 
 
 Cattaneo 
 C 
 
 
 Galli 
 R 
 
 
 Zorzi 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Multisensory spatial attention deficits are predictive of phonological
decoding skills in developmental dyslexia 
 J Cogit Neurosci 
 22 
 5 
 1011 
 1025 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Halligan 
 PW 
 
 
 Marshal 
 JC 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Neural mechanisms involved in the processing of global and local aspects of
hierarchically organized visual stimuli 
 Brain 
 120 
 1779 
 17911 
 10.1093/brain/120.10.1779 
 9365370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JF 
 
 
 Lyon 
 GR 
 
 
 Fuchs 
 LS 
 
 
 Barnes 
 MA 
 
 
 2007 
 Learning disabilities: From identification to intervention 
 New York, NY 
 Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Foley Nicpon 
 M 
 
 
 Allmon 
 A 
 
 
 Sieck 
 B 
 
 
 Stinson 
 R 
 
 
 2011 
 Empirical investigation of twice-exceptionality: where have we been and
where are we going? 
 Gifted Child Quarterly 
 55 
 3 
 17 
 10.1177/0016986210382575 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fowler 
 A 
 
 
 Swainson 
 B 
 
 
 2004 
 Relationships of naming skills to reading, memory, and receptive
vocabulary: Evidence for imprecise phonological representations of words by poor
readers 
 Ann Dyslexia 
 54 
 2 
 247 
 280 
 10.1007/s11881-004-0013-0 
 15741938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gaab 
 N 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Tallal 
 P 
 
 
 Temple 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural correlates of rapid auditory processing are disrupted in children
with developmental dyslexia and ameliorated with training: an fMRI study 
 Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience 
 25 
 3 
 295 
 310 
 
 http://iospress.metapress.com/content/01UH6P4066615H77 
 
 17943007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galaburda 
 AM 
 
 
 2006 
 Advances in cross-level research 
 
 
 Rosen 
 GD 
 
 
 The dyslexic brain: New pathways in neuroscience discovery 
 329 
 354 
 New York 
 Psychology Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false
discovery rate 
 NeuroImage 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 10.1006/nimg.2001.1037 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geschwind 
 N 
 
 
 Galaburda 
 A 
 
 
 1987 
 Cerebral lateralization 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geschwind 
 N 
 
 
 Levitsky 
 W 
 
 
 1968 
 Human brain: Left-right asymmetries in temporal speech
region 
 Science 
 161 
 186 
 187 
 5657070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilger 
 JW 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 BJ 
 
 
 2001 
 Atypical brain development: A conceptual framework for understanding
developmental learning 
 Dev Neuropsychol 
 20 
 2 
 465 
 481 
 10.1207/S15326942DN2002_2 
 11892948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilger 
 JW 
 
 
 Hynd 
 GW 
 
 
 2008 
 Neurodevelopmental variation as a framework for thinking about the twice
exceptional 
 Roeper Review 
 30 
 214 
 228 
 10.1080/02783190802363893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilger 
 JW 
 
 
 Talavage 
 TM 
 
 
 Olulade 
 OA 
 
 
 2013 
 An fMRI study of nonverbally gifted reading disabled adults: has deficit
compensation effected gifted potential? 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 7 
 1 
 12 
 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00507 
 23355817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goswami 
 U 
 
 
 2011 
 A temporal sampling framework for developmental dyslexia 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 15 
 3 
 10 
 10.1016/j.tics.2010.10.001 
 21093350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goswami 
 U 
 
 
 Ziegler 
 JC 
 
 
 2006 
 A developmental perspective on the neural code for written
words 
 Trends Cognit Sci 
 10 
 4 
 142 
 143 
 10.1016/j.tics.2006.02.006 
 16517209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goswami 
 U 
 
 
 Thomson 
 J 
 
 
 Richardson 
 U 
 
 
 Stainthorp 
 R 
 
 
 Hughes 
 D 
 
 
 Rosen 
 S 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 2002 
 Amplitude envelope onsets and developmental dyslexia: A new
hypothesis 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci 
 99 
 16 
 10911 
 10916 
 10.1073/pnas.122368599 
 12142463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hellige 
 JB 
 
 
 1996 
 Hemispheric asymmetry for visual information processing 
 Acta Neurobiol Exp 
 56 
 485 
 497 
 
 http://www.rozjec.ane.pl/pdf/56056.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hellige 
 JB 
 
 
 Michimata 
 C 
 
 
 1989 
 Categorization versus distance: Hemispheric differences for processing
spatial information 
 Mem Cognit 
 17 
 6 
 770 
 776 
 10.3758/BF03202638 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Ueno 
 T 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Meyler 
 A 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Prediction of children’s reading skills using behavioral,
functional, and structural neuroimaging measures 
 Behav Neurosci 
 121 
 602 
 613 
 10.1037/0735-7044.121.3.602 
 17592952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JM 
 
 
 Donohue 
 BC 
 
 
 1998 
 Functional connectivity of the angular gyrus in normal reading and
dyslexia 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci 
 95 
 8939 
 8944 
 10.1073/pnas.95.15.8939 
 9671783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howard 
 JH 
 
 
 Howard 
 DV 
 
 
 Japiske 
 KC 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 2006 
 Dyslexics are impaired on implicit higher-order sequence learning, but not
on implicit spatial context learning 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 7 
 1131 
 1144 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2005.10.015 
 16313930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hynd 
 GW 
 
 
 Semrud-Clikeman 
 M 
 
 
 Lorys 
 AR 
 
 
 Novey 
 ES 
 
 
 Eliopulos 
 D 
 
 
 1990 
 Brain morphology in developmental dyslexia and attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Arch Neurol 
 47 
 919 
 926 
 2375699 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkins 
 IH 
 
 
 Brooks 
 DJ 
 
 
 Nixon 
 PD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 1994 
 Motor sequence learning: A study with positron emission
tomography 
 J Neurosci 
 14 
 6 
 3775 
 3790 
 8207487 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnston 
 J 
 
 
 Weismer 
 S 
 
 
 1983 
 Mental rotation abilities in language-disordered children 
 J Speech Lang Hear Res 
 26 
 397 
 403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keen 
 AG 
 
 
 Lovegrove 
 WJ 
 
 
 2000 
 Transient de cit hypothesis and dyslexia: Examination of whole-parts
relationship, retinal sensitivity, and spatial and temporal frequencies 
 Vis Res 
 40 
 705 
 715 
 10.1016/S0042-6989(99)00208-4 
 10824271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 2009 
 Altering cortical connectivity: Remediation-induced changes in the white
matter of poor readers 
 Neuron 
 64 
 624 
 631 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.10.018 
 20005820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 Hedeus 
 M 
 
 
 Temple 
 E 
 
 
 Salz 
 T 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Moseley 
 ME 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2000 
 Microstructore of temporo-parietal white matter as a basis for reading
ability: Evidence from diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuron 
 25 
 2 
 493 
 500 
 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80911-3 
 10719902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koenig 
 O 
 
 
 Kosslyn 
 S 
 
 
 Wolff 
 P 
 
 
 1991 
 Mental imagery and dyslexia: A deficit in processing multipart visual
objects? 
 Brain Lang 
 41 
 381 
 394 
 10.1016/0093-934X(91)90162-T 
 1933264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Korsnes 
 MS 
 
 
 Magnussen 
 S 
 
 
 2006 
 Fast perceptual priming in the left and right hemispheres 
 Scand J Psychol 
 47 
 85 
 91 
 10.1111/j.1467-9450.2006.00495.x 
 16542350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 2013 
 Neurobiological bases of reading comprehension: Insights from neuroimaging
studies of word-level and text-level processing in skilled and impaired
readers 
 Read Writ Q: Overcoming Learning Difficulties 
 29 
 145 
 167 
 10.1080/10573569.2013.758566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larsen 
 JP 
 
 
 Høien 
 T 
 
 
 Lundberg 
 I 
 
 
 Odegarrd 
 H 
 
 
 1990 
 MRI evaluation of the size and symmetry of the planum temporale in
adolescents with developmental dyslexia 
 Brain Lang 
 39 
 289 
 301 
 10.1016/0093-934X(90)90015-9 
 2224496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lund 
 K 
 
 
 Burgess 
 C 
 
 
 1996 
 Producing high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical
co-occurrence 
 Behav Res Meth Instrum Comput 
 28 
 203 
 208 
 10.3758/BF03204766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lyon 
 GR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BE 
 
 
 2003 
 A definition of dyslexia 
 Ann Dyslexia 
 53 
 1 
 1 
 14 
 10.1007/s11881-003-0001-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matthews 
 AJ 
 
 
 Martin 
 FH 
 
 
 2009 
 Electrophysiological indices of spatial attention during global/local
processing in good and poor phonological decoders 
 Brain Lang 
 111 
 152 
 160 
 10.1016/j.bandl.2009.09.002 
 19828188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCallum 
 RS 
 
 
 Bell 
 SM 
 
 
 Coles 
 JT 
 
 
 Miller 
 KC 
 
 
 Hopkins 
 MB 
 
 
 Hilton-Prillhart 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 A model for screening twice-exceptional students (gifted with learning
disabilities) within a response to intervention paradigm 
 Gifted Child Quarterly 
 57 
 209 
 222 
 10.1177/0016986213500070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McNorgan 
 C 
 
 
 Alvarez 
 A 
 
 
 Bhullar 
 A 
 
 
 Gayda 
 J 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 2011 
 Prediction of reading skill several years later depends on age and brain
region: Implications for developmental models of reading 
 Journal Neurosci 
 31 
 26 
 9641 
 9648 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0334-11.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 JM 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 SE 
 
 
 Peterson 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Characterizing the hemodynamic response: Effects of presentation rate,
sampling procedure, and the possibility of ordering brain activity based on relative
timing 
 NeuroImage 
 11 
 735 
 759 
 10.1006/nimg.2000.0568 
 10860799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 R 
 
 
 Stuebing 
 K 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 J 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 S 
 
 
 Lyon 
 GR 
 
 
 Shankweiler 
 D 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 B 
 
 
 1998 
 Subtypes of reading disability: Coherent variability around a phonological
core 
 J Educ Psychol 
 90 
 3 
 347 
 373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Naidoo 
 S 
 
 
 1972 
 Specific dyslexia 
 New York 
 Wiley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navon 
 D 
 
 
 1977 
 Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in visual
perception 
 Cognit Psychol 
 9 
 353 
 383 
 10.1016/0010-0285(77)90012-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nielson 
 ME 
 
 
 2002 
 Givted students with learning disabilities: Recommendations for
identification and programming 
 Exceptionality 
 10 
 93 
 111 
 10.1207/S15327035EX1002_4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nicolson 
 RI 
 
 
 Fawcett 
 AJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Procedural learning difficulties: reuniting the developmental
disorders? 
 Trends Neurosci 
 30 
 4 
 135 
 141 
 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00306.x 
 17328970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niogi 
 SN 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 2006 
 Left lateralized white matter microstructure accounts for individual
differences in reading ability and disability 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 11 
 2178 
 2188 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.01.011 
 16524602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olulade 
 OA 
 
 
 Gilger 
 JW 
 
 
 Talavage 
 TM 
 
 
 Hynd 
 GW 
 
 
 McAteer 
 CI 
 
 
 2012 
 Beyond Phonological Processing Deficits in Adult Dyslexics: Atypical fMRI
Activation Patterns for Spatial Problem Solving 
 Dev Neuropsychol 
 37 
 617 
 635 
 10.1080/87565641.2012.702826 
 23066939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pallier 
 C 
 
 
 Devauchelle 
 A 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2011 
 Cortical representation of the constituent structure of
sentences 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci 
 108 
 6 
 2522 
 2527 
 10.1073/pnas.1019723108 
 21224415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 M 
 
 
 Battista 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Applications of mental rotation figures of the Shepard and Metzler type and
description of a mental rotation stimulus library 
 Brain Cognit 
 66 
 3 
 260 
 264 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2007.09.003 
 17967499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2008 
 Dissociation between explicit memory and configural memory in the human
medial temporal lobe 
 Cerebr Cortex 
 18 
 9 
 2192 
 2207 
 doi: 10.1093/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Moore 
 D 
 
 
 Della Porta 
 G 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 2010 
 Mapping the Word Reading Circuitry in Skilled and Disabled
Readers 
 
 
 Cornelissen 
 PL 
 
 
 Hansen 
 PC 
 
 
 Kringelbach 
 ML 
 
 
 Pugh 
 K 
 
 
 The Neural Basis of Reading 
 Oxford Press 
 281 
 305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 J 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 2008 
 Effects of stimulus difficulty and repetition on printed word
identification: An fMRI comparison of nonimpaired and reading-disabled adolescent
cohorts 
 J Cognit Neurosci 
 20 
 7 
 1146 
 1160 
 10.1162/jocn.2008.20079 
 18284344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Jenner 
 AR 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 JR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 2000 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability
(Developmental Dyslexia) 
 Ment Retard Dev Dis Res Rev 
 6 
 207 
 213 
 10.1002/1098-2779(2000)6:3<207::aid-mrdd8>3.0.co;2-p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SA 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 2000 
 The angular gyrus in developmental dyslexia: Task-specific differences in
functional connectivity within posterior cortex 
 Psychol Sci 
 11 
 1 
 51 
 56 
 10.1111/1467-9280.00214 
 11228843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 D 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 2005 
 Examining reading development and reading disability in english language
learners: Potential contributions from functional neuroimaging 
 Learn Disabil Res Pract 
 20 
 1 
 24 
 30 
 10.1111/j.1540-5826.2005.00117.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 D 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 2013 
 Neurobiological studies of skilled and impaired reading: A work in
progress 
 
 
 Rosen 
 GD 
 
 
 The Dyslexic Brain: New Pathways in Neuroscience Discovery 
 21 
 47 
 New York 
 Psychology Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richards 
 T 
 
 
 Stevenson 
 J 
 
 
 Crouch 
 J 
 
 
 Johnson 
 LC 
 
 
 Maravilla 
 K 
 
 
 Stock 
 P 
 
 
 Abbott 
 R 
 
 
 Berninger 
 V 
 
 
 2008 
 Tract-based spatial statistics of diffusion tensor imaging in adults with
dyslexia 
 Am J Neuroradiology 
 29 
 1134 
 1139 
 10.3174/ajnr.A1007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional abnormalities in the dyslexic brain: A quantitative
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies 
 Human brain mapping 
 30 
 10 
 3299 
 3308 
 10.1002/hbm.20752 
 19288465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 2011 
 Meta-analyzing brain dysfunctions in dyslexic children and
adults 
 Neuroimage 
 56 
 3 
 1735 
 1742 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.040 
 21338695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Structural abnormalities in the dyslexic brain: A meta-analysis of
voxel-based morphometry studies 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 34 
 11 
 3055 
 3065 
 10.1002/hbm.22127 
 22711189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rippon 
 G 
 
 
 Brunswick 
 N 
 
 
 2000 
 Trait and state EEG indices of information processing in developmental
dyslexia 
 Int J Psychophysiol 
 36 
 151 
 165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rivera 
 SM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2005 
 Developmental changes in mental arithmetic: evidence for increased
functional specialization in the left inferior parietal cortex 
 Cerebr Cortex 
 15 
 11 
 1779 
 1790 
 10.1093/cercor/bhi055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rollins 
 NK 
 
 
 Vachha 
 B 
 
 
 Srinivasan 
 P 
 
 
 Chia 
 J 
 
 
 Pickering 
 J 
 
 
 Hughes 
 CW 
 
 
 Gimi 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 Simple developmental dyslexia in children: alterations in diffusion- tensor
metrics of white matter tracts at 3 T 
 Radiology 
 251 
 882 
 891 
 10.1148/radiol.2513080884 
 19346513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rourke 
 BP 
 
 
 1985 
 Neuropsychology of learning disabilities: Essentials of subtype analysis 
 New York 
 Guilford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruben 
 LM 
 
 
 Reis 
 SM 
 
 
 2005 
 Identification and assessment of gifted students with learning
disabilities 
 Theory Into Practi 
 44 
 115 
 124 
 10.1207/s15430421tip4402_6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rudel 
 R 
 
 
 Denckla 
 M 
 
 
 1976 
 Relationship of IQ and reading score to visual, spatial, and temporal
matching tasks 
 J Learn Disabil 
 9 
 3 
 42 
 51 
 10.1177/002221947600900309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugel 
 R 
 
 
 1974 
 WISC scores of disabled readers 
 J Learn Disabil 
 7 
 1 
 46 
 65 
 10.1177/002221947400700109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JM 
 
 
 Nace 
 K 
 
 
 Donohue 
 B 
 
 
 Wise 
 D 
 
 
 Maisog 
 JM 
 
 
 Andreason 
 P 
 
 
 1997 
 A positron emission tomographic study of impaired word recognition and
phonological processing in dyslexic men 
 Arch Neurol 
 54 
 562 
 573 
 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550170042013 
 9152113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Moore 
 D 
 
 
 
 2004 
 The neurobiology of adaptive learning in reading: A contrast of different
training conditions 
 Cognit Affect Behav Neurosci 
 4 
 67 
 88 
 10.3758/CABN.4.1.67 
 15259890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 1992 
 Understanding implicit memory: A cognitive neuroscience
approach 
 Am Psychol 
 47 
 559 
 569 
 10.1037/0003-066X.47.4.559 
 1595984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Cooper 
 LA 
 
 
 Delaney 
 SM 
 
 
 1990 
 Implicit memory for unfamiliar objects depends on access to structural
descriptions 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 119 
 1 
 5 
 24 
 10.1037/0096-3445.119.1.5 
 2141064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schneps 
 MH 
 
 
 Brockmole 
 JR 
 
 
 Sonnert 
 G 
 
 
 Pomplun 
 M 
 
 
 2012 
 History of reading struggles linked to enhanced learning in low spatial
frequency scenes 
 PLoS ONE 
 7 
 e35724 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0035724 
 22558210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 RT 
 
 
 Cho 
 NK 
 
 
 Staib 
 LH 
 
 
 Kier 
 LE 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 1994 
 Brain morphology in normal and dyslexic children; the influence of sex and
age 
 Ann of Neurol 
 35 
 6 
 732 
 742 
 10.1002/ana.410350615 
 8210231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shankweiler 
 D 
 
 
 Crain 
 S 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Fowler 
 AE 
 
 
 Liberman 
 AM 
 
 
 Brady 
 SA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 1995 
 Cognitive profiles of reading-disabled children: Comparison of language
skills in phonology, morphology, and syntax 
 Psychol Sci 
 6 
 3 
 149 
 156 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.1995.tb00324.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural systems for compensation and persistence: Young adult outcome of
childhood reading disability 
 Biol Psychiatr 
 54 
 25 
 33 
 10.1016/S0006-3223(03)01836-X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 1998 
 Functional disruption in the organization of the brain for reading in
dyslexia 
 Proc Nat Acad Sci 
 95 
 5 
 2636 
 2641 
 10.1073/pnas.95.5.2636 
 9482939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegel 
 L 
 
 
 Ryan 
 E 
 
 
 1989 
 Subtypes of developmental dyslexia: The influence of definitional
variables 
 Read Writ 
 2 
 257 
 287 
 10.1007/BF00377646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simos 
 PG 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Foorman 
 BR 
 
 
 Francis 
 DJ 
 
 
 Castillo 
 EM 
 
 
 Davis 
 RN 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Mathes 
 PG 
 
 
 Denton 
 C 
 
 
 Papanicolaou 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain activation during the early stages of reading
acquisition 
 J Child Neurol 
 17 
 159 
 163 
 10.1177/088307380201700301 
 12026228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sinatra 
 R 
 
 
 1988 
 Styles of thinking and literacy proficiency for males disabled in print
acquisition 
 Read Psychol 
 9 
 33 
 50 
 10.1080/0270271880090104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 M 
 
 
 Coleman 
 J 
 
 
 Dokecki 
 P 
 
 
 Davis 
 E 
 
 
 1977 
 WISC-R scores of learning disabled children 
 J Learn Disabil 
 10 
 7 
 437 
 443 
 10.1177/002221947701000708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soldan 
 A 
 
 
 Gazes 
 Y 
 
 
 Hilton 
 HJ 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 2008 
 Aging does not affect brain patterns of repetition effects associated with
perceptual priming of novel objects 
 J Cognit Neurosci 
 20 
 10 
 1762 
 1776 
 10.1162/jocn.2008.20130 
 18370593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soldan 
 A 
 
 
 Mangels 
 JA 
 
 
 Cooper 
 LA 
 
 
 2006 
 Evaluating models of object-decision priming: Evidence from event-related
potential repetition effects 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cognit 
 32 
 2 
 230 
 248 
 10.1037/0278-7393.32.2.230 
 16569143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lu 
 ZL 
 
 
 Manis 
 FR 
 
 
 2004 
 Slower implicit categorical learning in adult poor readers 
 Ann Dyslexia 
 54 
 2 
 281 
 303 
 10.1007/s11881-004-0014-z 
 15741939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lu 
 Z 
 
 
 Manis 
 FR 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 
 
 2006 
 Motion-perception deficits and reading: It’s the noise, not the
motion 
 Psychol Sci 
 17 
 1047 
 1053 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01825.x 
 17201786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stein 
 J 
 
 
 2001 
 The sensory basis of reading problems 
 Dev Neuropsychol 
 20 
 509 
 534 
 10.1207/S15326942DN2002_4 
 11892950 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stein 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Visual motion sensitivity and reading 
 Dev Neuropsychol 
 41 
 1785 
 1793 
 10.1016/S0028-3932(03)00179-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoodley 
 CJ 
 
 
 Harrison 
 EPD 
 
 
 Stein 
 JF 
 
 
 2006 
 Implicit motor learning deficits in dyslexic adults 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 795 
 798 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2005.07.009 
 16125207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swanson 
 HL 
 
 
 1984 
 Semantic and visual memory codes in learning disabled
readers 
 J Exp Child Psychol 
 37 
 124 
 140 
 10.1016/0022-0965(84)90062-6 
 6707573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szmalec 
 A 
 
 
 Loncke 
 M 
 
 
 Page 
 M 
 
 
 Duyck 
 W 
 
 
 2011 
 Order or disorder? Impaired Hebb learning in dyslexia 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cognit 
 37 
 5 
 1270 
 10.1037/a0023820 
 21604915 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Temple 
 E 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Tallal 
 P 
 
 
 Merzenich 
 MM 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural deficits in children with dyslexia ameliorated by behavioral
remediation: Evidence from functional MRI 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 100 
 2860 
 2865 
 10.1073/pnas.0030098100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 Hunt 
 RH 
 
 
 Vizueta 
 N 
 
 
 Sommer 
 T 
 
 
 Durston 
 S 
 
 
 Yang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wordon 
 MS 
 
 
 2004 
 Evidence of developmental differences in implicit sequence learning: An
fMRI study of children and adults 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 8 
 1339 
 1351 
 10.1162/0898929042304688 
 15509382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torgesen 
 J 
 
 
 Wagner 
 R 
 
 
 Rashotte 
 C 
 
 
 1999 
 Test of word reading efficiency 
 Austin, TX 
 ProEd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Gareau 
 L 
 
 
 Flowers 
 DL 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 2003 
 Development of neural mechanisms for reading 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 7 
 767 
 773 
 10.1038/nn1065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullman 
 MT 
 
 
 2004 
 Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative/procedural
model 
 Cognition 
 92 
 1 
 231 
 270 
 10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.008 
 15037131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenberg 
 S 
 
 
 Kuse 
 A 
 
 
 1978 
 Mental rotation: A group test of three dimensional spatial
visualization 
 Perceptual Motor Skills 
 47 
 599 
 604 
 10.2466/pms.1978.47.2.599 
 724398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vellutino 
 FR 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Snowling 
 MJ 
 
 
 Scanlon 
 DM 
 
 
 2004 
 Specific reading disability (dyslexia): What have we learned in the past
four decades? 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 45 
 2 
 40 
 10.1046/j.0021-9630.2003.00305.x 
 14959801 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vidyasagar 
 TR 
 
 
 2013 
 Reading into neuronal oscillations in the visual system: Implications for
developmental dyslexia 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 7 
 811 
 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00811 
 24348361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vidyasagar 
 TR 
 
 
 Pammer 
 K 
 
 
 2010 
 Dyslexia: a deficit in visuo-spatial attention, not in phonological
processing 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 14 
 2 
 57 
 63 
 10.1016/j.tics.2009.12.003 
 20080053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Károlyi 
 C 
 
 
 2001 
 Visual-spatial strength in dyslexia: Rapid discrimination of impossible
figures 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 34 
 4 
 380 
 391 
 10.1177/002221940103400413 
 15503582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Károlyi 
 C 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 Gray 
 W 
 
 
 Sherman 
 GF 
 
 
 2003 
 Dyslexia linked to talent: Global visual-spatial ability 
 Brain and Language 
 85 
 427 
 431 
 10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00052-X 
 12744954 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 1999 
 Wechsler abbreviated scale of intelligence 
 San Antonio 
 Pearson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiederholt 
 JL 
 
 
 Bryant 
 BR 
 
 
 2001 
 Gray oral reading tests 
 Austin, TX 
 Pro-Ed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Willingham 
 DB 
 
 
 Salidis 
 J 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2002 
 Direct comparison of neural systems mediating conscious and unconscious
skill learning 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 88 
 3 
 1451 
 1460 
 10.1152/jn.00461.2001 
 12205165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 2000 
 The origins and ends of giftedness 
 American Psychologist 
 55 
 1 
 159 
 169 
 11392860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 Casey 
 M 
 
 
 1993 
 Cognitive profiles of artists 
 
 
 Cupchik 
 G 
 
 
 Laszlo 
 J 
 
 
 Emerging visions: Contemporary approaches to the aesthetic process 
 Cambridge, UK 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 Casey 
 M 
 
 
 DaSilva 
 D 
 
 
 Hayes 
 R 
 
 
 1991 
 Spatial abilities and reading deficits in visual art
students 
 Empirical Studies of the Arts 
 9 
 51 
 63 
 10.2190/528M-DXT5-WUJA-W297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winner 
 E 
 
 
 von Károlyi 
 C 
 
 
 Malinsky 
 D 
 
 
 French 
 L 
 
 
 Seliger 
 C 
 
 
 Ross 
 E 
 
 
 Weber 
 C 
 
 
 2001 
 Dyslexia and visual-spatial talents: Compensation vs. deficit
model 
 Brain Lang 
 76 
 81 
 110 
 10.1006/brln.2000.2392 
 11254251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolff 
 U 
 
 
 Lundberg 
 I 
 
 
 2002 
 The prevalence of dyslexia among art students 
 Dyslexia 
 8 
 1 
 34 
 42 
 10.1002/dys.211 
 11990223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woodcock 
 RW 
 
 
 McGrew 
 KS 
 
 
 Schrank 
 FA 
 
 
 Mather 
 N 
 
 
 2007 
 Woodcock-johnson III test of achievement normative update 
 Rolling Meadows, IL 
 Riverside Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ziegler 
 JC 
 
 
 Pech-Georgel 
 C 
 
 
 George 
 F 
 
 
 Lorenzi 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 Speech-perception-in-noise deficits in dyslexia 
 Dev Sci 
 12 
 5 
 732 
 745 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00817.x 
 19702766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Examples of possible and impossible figures. Figure 1(a) is a representation of a
“possible” figure. Lines connect in a manner that give the viewer the
impression that it has depth; therefore, it is possible that it could exist as a three
dimensional object. Figure 1(b) is a representation of an “impossible”
figure. Lines do not connect in a way that depth is perceivable; therefore, it is
impossible for this object to have a three dimensional equivalent. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Regions showing a reader group by task (Impossible Figures, Lexical Decision) effect (p
< .01, corrected for FDR). Images from top to bottom correspond to the following
position along the z-axis in MNI space: +40 +22, +4, −4,
−10, −20, and −24, respectively, with the LH on the right side of
the images. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Reader group differences during the one-back task in voxels significantly activated
(p<.001, FDR corrected) for figures and print across the entire cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Functionally defined regions of interest from the reader group by task (Impossible
Figures, Lexical Decision) pattern interaction. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Descriptive characteristics of samples used for the in-scanner and out-of-scanner
tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behavioral Data Sample 
 fMRI Data Sample 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Group M (SD) [range] 
 RD M(SD) [range] 
 TD M(SD) [range] 
 F 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 N 
 53 
 11 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 Gender (M:F) 
 28:25 
 9:2 
 7:3 
 
 
 
 
 Chronological Age (in years) 
 17.9 (2.2) [13–22] 
 16.3 (1.8) [14–19] 
 16.9 (2.2) [13–20] 
 .52 
 .48 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 110.9 (11.8) [85–132] 
 105.5 (10.8) [86–117] 
 112.7 (15.7) [85–132] 
 1.62 
 .22 
 
 
 WASI VIQ 
 112.1 (14.0) [80–138] 
 107.2 (14.6) [80–127] 
 112.1 (16.5) [82–138] 
 .53 
 .48 
 
 
 WASI PIQ 
 107.5 (11.5) [82–128] 
 102.6 (10.5) [87–123] 
 110.0 (13.6) [90–125] 
 2.00 
 .17 
 
 
 WJ Basic Reading Cluster 
 101.8 (11.0) [72–123] 
 90.6 (7.5) [72–99] 
 106.9 (9.1) [93–123] 
 20.13 
 <.001 
 
 
 WJ Letter-Word ID 
 104.2 (11.6) [70–123] 
 92.0 (9.2) [70–106] 
 107.8 (7.25) [96–122] 
 18.77 
 <.001 
 
 
 WJ Word Attack 
 98.6 (11.5) [73–120] 
 88.6 (8.1) [73–99] 
 103.9 (9.7) [90–117] 
 15.36 
 <.001 
 
 
 WJ Spelling 
 104.5 (18.1) [66–137] 
 81.7 (10.8) [66–99] 
 115.8 (10.4) [103–132] 
 52.07 
 <.001 
 
 
 TOWRE 
 N/A 
 81.4 (10.6) [65–105] 
 103.6 (19.7) [81–139] 
 10.63 
 <.01 
 
 
 Reading Composite 
 N/A 
 83.94 (6.8) [71–94] 
 108.3 (9.8) [94–123] 
 44.17 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note:  WASI = Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence ( Wechsler, 1999 ). WJ = Woodcock Johnson Tests
of Achievement, Third Edition ( Woodcock et al.,
2007 ). TOWRE = Test of Word Reading Efficiency ( Torgesen et al., 1999 ). Reading Composite is composed of
average scores of WJ Basic Reading Cluster, WJ Spelling, and TOWRE Total Reading. Only
participants in the original fMRI subsample received the TOWRE. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean accuracy and reaction times for behavioral tasks conducted both outside of the
scanner and inside the scanner. For the fMRI Subsample, data are presented for overall
subsample and then for the groups with and without RD. 
 
 
 
 
 Task (sample size) 
 Accuracy –Mean %.Correct (SD) 
 Reaction Time – Mean-ms. (SD-ms.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Entire Sample – out of
scanner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Impossible Figures
( N =47) 
 
 .81 (.09) 
 
 
 1254.57 (409.89) 
 
 
 
   Mental Rotation
( N =49) 
 
 .75 (.11) 
 
 
 1679.63 (431.48) 
 
 
 
   Navon
( N =53) 
 
 .98 (.04) 
 
 
 753.05 (153.06) 
 
 
 
 
 
 fMRI Subsample – out of
scanner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Impossible Figs Overall
( N =21) 
 
 .81 (.10) 
 
 
 971.48 (210.09) 
 
 
 
   RD a  Group ( N =11) 
 .78 (.09) 
 939.20 (222.52) 
 
 
   TD a  Group ( N =10) 
 .84 (.11) 
 1007.00 (200.98) 
 
 
   Mental Rotation Overall
( N =21) 
 
 .75 (.11) 
 
 
 1764.02 (419.08) 
 
 
 
   RD Group
( N =11) 
 .73 (.07) 
 1710.97 (448.43) 
 
 
   TD Group
( N =10) 
 .76 (.14) 
 1822.39 (399.53) 
 
 
   Navon Overall
( N =21) 
 
 .98 (.02) 
 
 
 775.78 (169.70) 
 
 
 
   RD Group
( N =11) 
 .97 (.02) 
 785.24 (123.08) 
 
 
   TD Group
( N =10) 
 .98 (.02) 
 765.38 (216.64) 
 
 
 
 
 fMRI Subsample – in
scanner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Impossible Figures
( N =21) 
 
 .73 (.13) 
 
 
 1266.28 (132.75) 
 
 
 
   RD Group
( N =11) 
 .70 (.11) 
 1316.49 (75.52) 
 
 
   TD Group
( N =10) 
 .77 (.13) 
 1211.05 (162.34) 
 
 
   Lexical Decision
( N =21) 
 
 .88 (.09) 
 
 
 1149.76 (239.48) 
 
 
 
   RD Group
( N =11) 
 .84 (.08) 
 1290.92 (196.15) 
 
 
   TD Group
( N =10) 
 .92 (.08) 
 994.49 (183.18) 
 
 
   One-back
( N =21) 
 
 .80 (.19) 
 
 
 575.27 (139.48) 
 
 
 
   RD ( N =11) 
 .79 (.17) 
 596.13 (134.27) 
 
 
   TD ( N =10) 
 .82 (.20) 
 552.32 (148.60) 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 RD – Reading Disability, TD – Typically Developing 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regression Table for entire sample on out-of-scanner tasks for variables predicting WJ
Letter-Word ID. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 Omnibus/Predictor 
 b-weight 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 Correlation 
 Partial Correlation 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 F (3,46)=11.14,
 p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 27.1 
 1.61 
 0.12 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.53 
 4.53 
 < .001 
 0.57 
 0.57 
 
 
 Age 
 0.50 
 0.77 
 0.44 
 0.23 
 0.12 
 
 
 IF RT a 
 0.008 
 2.19 
 0.03 
 0.41 
 0.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 F (3,46)=8.65,
 p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 19.05 
 1.02 
 0.31 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.55 
 4.22 
 <.001 
 0.57 
 0.54 
 
 
 Age 
 1.10 
 1.78 
 0.08 
 0.23 
 0.26 
 
 
 IF ACC a 
 4.94 
 0.31 
 0.76 
 0.27 
 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 F (3,48)=14.45,
 p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 8.99 
 0.58 
 0.56 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.56 
 5.43 
 <.001 
 0.62 
 0.63 
 
 
 Age 
 1.12 
 2.00 
 0.05 
 0.23 
 0.29 
 
 
 MR a  RT 
 0.007 
 2.62 
 0.01 
 0.28 
 0.36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 F (3,48)=10.55,
 p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 23.23 
 1.47 
 0.15 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.58 
 4.73 
 <.001 
 0.62 
 0.58 
 
 
 Age 
 0.89 
 1.47 
 0.15 
 0.23 
 0.21 
 
 
 MR ACC 
 0.88 
 0.06 
 0.95 
 0.30 
 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 F (3,52)=11.71,
 p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 9.06 
 0.49 
 0.63 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.58 
 5.39 
 <.001 
 0.60 
 0.61 
 
 
 Age 
 1.35 
 2.18 
 0.03 
 0.25 
 0.30 
 
 
 Navon RT 
 0.01 
 1.06 
 0.30 
 −0.03 
 0.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 F (3,52)=11.38 , p <.001 
 
 
 Intercept 
 −1.11 
 −0.03 
 0.97 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.56 
 5.04 
 <.001 
 0.60 
 0.58 
 
 
 Age 
 1.06 
 1.78 
 0.08 
 0.25 
 0.25 
 
 
 Navon RT 
 25.10 
 0.74 
 0.46 
 0.25 
 0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 MR = Mental Rotation; IF = Impossible Figure; RT = Reaction
Time; ACC = Accuracy 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regression Table for fMRI subsample on out-of-scanner tasks for variables predicting WJ
Letter-Word ID. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 Omnibus/Predictor 
 b-weight 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 Correlation 
 Partial Correlation 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 F (3,20)=3.42,
 p <.05 
 
 
 Intercept 
 27.81 
 0.80 
 0.43 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.50 
 2.89 
 < .01 
 0.57 
 0.57 
 
 
 Age 
 0.26 
 0.22 
 0.83 
 −0.17 
 0.05 
 
 
 IF RT a 
 0.01 
 1.24 
 0.23 
 0.24 
 0.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 F (3,20)=2.68,
 p =.08 
 
 
 Intercept 
 48.67 
 1.54 
 0.14 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.46 
 2.11 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.46 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.19 
 −0.16 
 0.88 
 −0.17 
 −0.04 
 
 
 IF ACC a 
 4.26 
 0.16 
 0.88 
 0.34 
 0.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 F (3,20)=4.55,
 p <.05 
 
 
 Intercept 
 −4.81 
 −0.12 
 0.91 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.57 
 3.39 
 <.001 
 0.57 
 0.64 
 
 
 Age 
 1.30 
 1.00 
 0.33 
 −0.17 
 0.24 
 
 
 MR a  RT 
 0.01 
 1.96 
 0.07 
 0.27 
 0.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 F (3,20)=2.68,
 p =.08 
 
 
 Intercept 
 48.46 
 1.51 
 0.15 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.47 
 2.41 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.50 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.17 
 −0.14 
 0.89 
 −0.17 
 −0.03 
 
 
 MR ACC 
 3.17 
 0.14 
 0.90 
 0.25 
 0.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 F (3,20)=2.78,
 p =.07 
 
 
 Intercept 
 31.82 
 0.66 
 0.52 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.52 
 2.68 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.55 
 
 
 Age 
 0.29 
 0.19 
 0.85 
 −0.17 
 0.05 
 
 
 Navon RT 
 0.01 
 0.47 
 0.64 
 −0.00 
 0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 F (3,20)=2.76,
 p =.07 
 
 
 Intercept 
 0.44 
 0.00 
 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.47 
 2.62 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.54 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.25 
 −0.21 
 0.84 
 −0.17 
 −0.05 
 
 
 Navon RT 
 52.85 
 0.44 
 0.67 
 0.14 
 0.11 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 MR = Mental Rotation; IF = Impossible Figure; RT = Reaction
Time; ACC = Accuracy 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Regression Table for fMRI subsample on in-scanner tasks for variables predicting WJ
Letter-Word ID. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 Omnibus/Predictor 
 b-weight 
 t-value 
 p-value 
 Correlation 
 Partial Correlation 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 F (3,20)=3.11,
 p <.05 
 
 
 Intercept 
 97.00 
 1.65 
 0.12 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.42 
 2.23 
 < .05 
 0.57 
 0.48 
 
 
 Age 
 −1.03 
 −0.69 
 0.50 
 −0.17 
 −0.17 
 
 
 IF RT a 
 −0.02 
 −0.95 
 0.36 
 −0.21 
 −0.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 F (3,20)=2.88,
 p =.07 
 
 
 Intercept 
 50.00 
 1.62 
 0.12 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.42 
 2.11 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.46 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.38 
 −0.31 
 0.76 
 −0.17 
 −0.08 
 
 
 IF ACC a 
 13.36 
 0.65 
 0.52 
 0.34 
 0.16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 F (3,20)=4.55,
 p <.05 
 
 
 Intercept 
 106.62 
 3.11 
 <.01 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.34 
 2.11 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.46 
 
 
 Age 
 −1.06 
 −1.00 
 0.33 
 −0.17 
 −0.24 
 
 
 Lexical Decision RT 
 −0.02 
 −2.61 
 <.05 
 −0.54 
 −0.53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 F (3,20)=2.67,
 p =.08 
 
 
 Intercept 
 51.11 
 1.21 
 0.25 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.48 
 2.17 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.47 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.17 
 −0.14 
 0.89 
 −0.17 
 −0.03 
 
 
 Lexical Decision ACC 
 −0.01 
 −0.06 
 0.96 
 −0.32 
 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 F (3,20)=2.67,
 p =.08 
 
 
 Intercept 
 51.11 
 1.21 
 0.25 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.48 
 2.17 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.47 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.17 
 −0.14 
 0.89 
 −0.17 
 −0.03 
 
 
 One-back RT 
 −0.01 
 −0.06 
 0.96 
 −0.32 
 −0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 F (3,20)=2.69,
 p =.08 
 
 
 Intercept 
 49.15 
 1.57 
 0.13 
 
 
 
 
 WASI FSIQ 
 0.48 
 2.64 
 <.05 
 0.57 
 0.54 
 
 
 Age 
 −0.24 
 −0.19 
 0.85 
 −0.17 
 −0.05 
 
 
 One-back ACC 
 2.82 
 0.22 
 0.83 
 0.07 
 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 IF = Impossible Figure; RT = Reaction Time; ACC = Accuracy 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Interaction Table for Group (TD vs. RD) by Task (Figures vs. Print) in magnet tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 Vol. (mm 3 ) 
 MNI Coord. (X, Y, Z) 
 p-value 
 
 
 
 
 L Cerebellum 
 18 
 17200 
 −26 
 −86 
 −38 
 0.0021 
 
 
 R IPL 
 39 
 14470 
 54 
 −69 
 30 
 0.0018 
 
 
 L Precentral gyrus 
 6 
 13264 
 −51 
 0 
 44 
 0.0001 
 
 
 R Cerebellum 
 19 
 13000 
 54 
 −72 
 −34 
 0.0033 
 
 
 R SFG 
 6 
 8416 
 −6 
 −6 
 58 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L IPL 
 40 
 7528 
 −60 
 −44 
 40 
 0.0025 
 
 
 L Subcallosal gyrus 
 34 
 6832 
 10 
 8 
 −16 
 0.0001 
 
 
 R Fusiform gyrus 
 19 
 6432 
 34 
 −66 
 −9 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L Lateral occipital gyrus 
 18 
 6352 
 −42 
 −84 
 −12 
 0.0015 
 
 
 R Precentral 
 6 
 5704 
 34 
 −6 
 44 
 0.0001 
 
 
 R Lateral occipital gyrus 
 19 
 5624 
 30 
 −84 
 18 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L Lateral occipital gyrus 
 19 
 4568 
 −38 
 −68 
 9 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L MTG 
 22 
 4288 
 −40 
 −22 
 −12 
 0.0053 
 
 
 L Putamen/Insula 
 13 
 4200 
 −30 
 20 
 7 
 0.0001 
 
 
 R MTG 
 21 
 3952 
 62 
 −26 
 −13 
 0.0020 
 
 
 R Lateral occipital gyrus 
 18 
 3664 
 26 
 −98 
 4 
 0.0021 
 
 
 L SFG 
 9 
 3408 
 2 
 41 
 38 
 0.0033 
 
 
 R SFG 
 9 
 3312 
 4 
 58 
 30 
 0.0026 
 
 
 L MFG 
 46 
 2144 
 −32 
 32 
 16 
 0.0001 
 
 
 R STG 
 22 
 2056 
 66 
 −36 
 10 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L Intraparietal sulcus 
 7 
 2032 
 −22 
 −52 
 46 
 0.0001 
 
 
 Bilateral sup. SFG 
 6 
 2032 
 12 
 20 
 62 
 0.0020 
 
 
 R MTG 
 21 
 1872 
 48 
 −2 
 −24 
 0.0035 
 
 
 R IFG/Precentral gyrus 
 13 
 1848 
 36 
 2 
 22 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L IFG/Lateral orbital gyrus 
 47 
 1600 
 −48 
 36 
 −6 
 0.0029 
 
 
 R MFG 
 9 
 1232 
 46 
 34 
 34 
 0.0045 
 
 
 R sup. frontal sulcus 
 8 
 1200 
 30 
 22 
 54 
 0.0025 
 
 
 L Fusiform gyrus 
 20 
 1152 
 −36 
 −12 
 −20 
 0.0032 
 
 
 R Insula 
 --- 
 1128 
 34 
 16 
 4 
 0.0007 
 
 
 R IFG 
 47 
 896 
 62 
 24 
 0 
 0.0054 
 
 
 R SFG (sup. aspect) 
 6 
 800 
 12 
 8 
 70 
 0.0018 
 
 
 R Basal ganglia 
 --- 
 752 
 30 
 −8 
 −4 
 0.0037 
 
 
 R IFG 
 44 
 632 
 64 
 18 
 14 
 0.0032 
 
 
 R Postcentral gyrus 
 1 
 624 
 62 
 −26 
 47 
 0.0001 
 
 
 L IFG 
 45 
 616 
 −58 
 26 
 2 
 0.0021 
 
 
 R IFG/Lateral orbital gyrus 
 47 
 608 
 46 
 38 
 −16 
 0.0042 
 
 
 L Putamen 
 --- 
 528 
 −30 
 −4 
 10 
 0.0004 
 
 
 R Temporal pole 
 38 
 480 
 34 
 16 
 −36 
 0.0027 
 
 
 L MFG 
 8 
 464 
 −34 
 18 
 60 
 0.0034 
 
 
 R Precentral gyrus 
 6 
 432 
 24 
 −24 
 74 
 0.0033 
 
 
 L MTG 
 37 
 392 
 −64 
 −57 
 −6 
 0.0031 
 
 
 R STG 
 21 
 288 
 62 
 4 
 −16 
 0.0008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We examined the basis of visuospatial processing strengths in Reading Disorder
(RD) 
 
 
 Individuals with RD showed a processing advantage for figures relative to
peers 
 
 
 FMRI analyses revealed different patterns of cortical/subcortical
activation 
 
 
 A possible neural tradeoff in visuospatial processing in RD is discussed 
 
 
 
 
