
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 25102420 
 4253678 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.053 
 NIHMS619637 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Age Mediation of Frontoparietal Activation during Visual Feature Search 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 David J. 
 
 a 
 b 
 * 
 
 
 
 Parks 
 Emily L. 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 Simon W. 
 
 c 
 
 
 
 Diaz 
 Michele T. 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Potter 
 Guy G. 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Chou 
 Ying-hui 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 Nan-kuei 
 
 a 
 d 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 Roberto 
 
 c 
 
 
 a Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA 
 b Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA 
 c Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA 
 d Department of Radiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710 USA 
 
 * Address correspondence to: David J. Madden, Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Box 2737, Hock Plaza, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, Phone: 919-681-9345,  david.madden@duke.edu 
 
 
 9 
 8 
 2014 
 
 
 04 
 8 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2015 
 
 102 
 0 2 
 262 
 274 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Activation of frontal and parietal brain regions is associated with attentional control during visual search. We used fMRI to characterize age-related differences in frontoparietal activation in a highly efficient feature search task, detection of a shape singleton. On half of the trials, a salient distractor (a color singleton) was present in the display. The hypothesis was that frontoparietal activation mediated the relation between age and attentional capture by the salient distractor. Participants were healthy, community-dwelling individuals, 21 younger adults (19 – 29 years of age) and 21 older adults (60 – 87 years of age). Top-down attention, in the form of target predictability, was associated with an improvement in search performance that was comparable for younger and older adults. The increase in search reaction time (RT) associated with the salient distractor (attentional capture), standardized to correct for generalized age-related slowing, was greater for older adults than for younger adults. On trials with a color singleton distractor, search RT increased as a function of increasing activation in frontal regions, for both age groups combined, suggesting increased task difficulty. Mediational analyses disconfirmed the hypothesized model, in which frontal activation mediated the age-related increase in attentional capture, but supported an alternative model in which age was a mediator of the relation between frontal activation and capture. 
 
 
 Attention 
 Aging 
 fMRI 
 Neuroimaging 
 Reaction Time 
 Perception 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Behavioral investigations of cognitive aging have established that age-related decline occurs in some aspects of attention, including those related to executive function ( Craik and Bialystok, 2006 ;  Kramer and Madden, 2008 ;  Wecker et al., 2000 ). One aspect of this decline is decreased ability to inhibit irrelevant information, for older adults, relative to younger adults, which may in turn lead to an age-related increase in distraction ( Hasher and Zacks, 1988 ;  Healey et al., 2008 ;  Lustig et al., 2007 ;  Rabbitt, 1979 ). In the context of visual search and discrimination tasks ( Eckstein, 2011 ;  Wolfe, 1998 ,  2007 ), age-related decline in attentional functioning is reflected in a disproportionate slowing of older adults’ conjunction search, in which the target and nontarget (distractor) items share visual features (e.g., a red vertical bar among red horizontal and green vertical bars), relative to feature search, in which the target has a feature not shared with the distractors (e.g., a red vertical bar among green vertical bars;  Hommel et al., 2004 ;  Madden, 2007 ;  Madden and Whiting, 2004 ;  Plude and Doussard-Roosevelt, 1989 ). Similarly, older adults appear to be more vulnerable than younger adults to attentional capture by salient distractors ( Cashdollar et al., 2013 ;  Pratt and Bellomo, 1999 ;  Tsvetanov et al., 2013 ). 
 The age-related increase in attentional capture, however, varies across task context and is most pronounced when perceptual load is low ( Maylor and Lavie, 1998 ), and the source of distraction is both visually salient ( Porter et al., 2012 ) and known to be irrelevant to task goals ( Kramer et al., 2000 ). Age-related differences in distraction and attentional capture thus do not appear to reflect a general failure of all inhibitory processes ( Kramer et al., 1994 ;  Madden and Plude, 1993 ), but rather result from an interaction of bottom-up (stimulus-driven) and top-down (goal-driven) attentional selection within specific task demands ( Ludwig and Gilchrist, 2002 ;  Yantis, 1998 ). In addition, some aspects of attention are resistant to age-related decline. When top-down attentional guidance is available, in terms of the observer’s knowledge of the task goals or target predictability, older adults often exhibit improvements in search performance that are at least as pronounced as those of younger adults ( Humphrey and Kramer, 1997 ;  Madden, 1987 ;  Madden et al., 2004 ;  Whiting et al., 2007 ;  Whiting et al., 2005 ;  Whiting et al., 2014 ). Age-related decline in the efficiency of visual sensory functioning and perceptual motor speed are well established ( Madden et al., 1999 ;  Salthouse, 1985 ;  Salthouse and Madden, 2007 ;  Schneider and Pichora-Fuller, 2000 ;  Scialfa, 2002 ), and thus older adults may place greater emphasis on top-down attention as a compensatory mechanism for decline in bottom-up processing ( Madden et al., 2007a ;  McAvinue et al., 2012 ;  Porter et al., 2012 ). 
 The neural bases of age-related differences and constancies in visual attention are not yet well defined. Extensive neuroimaging research suggests that, for healthy younger adults, performance in visual search tasks is mediated by a widely distributed frontoparietal network with dorsal and ventral components ( Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Hopfinger et al., 2000 ;  Shulman et al., 2004 ;  Vossel et al., 2013 ). The dorsal component of this network comprises the middle frontal gyrus (MFG), frontal eye field (FEF), superior parietal lobule (SPL), and intraparietal sulcus (IPS), bilaterally. These regions support the voluntary, top-down allocation of attention ( Anderson et al., 2007 ;  Donner et al., 2002 ;  Egner et al., 2008 ;  Pollmann et al., 2003 ;  Shulman et al., 2003 ) and active generation of a  salience map  or template of features defining the search target ( de Fockert et al., 2004 ;  Hodsoll et al., 2009 ;  Kusunoki et al., 2000 ;  Mevorach et al., 2009 ). The ventral component of the frontoparietal network, comprising the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and ventral frontal cortex, particularly in the right hemisphere, operates in a more sensory-driven, bottom-up manner and is active in the detection of infrequently occurring targets ( Astafiev et al., 2006 ;  Kincade et al., 2005 ;  Shulman et al., 2003 ). 
 One theme across several functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies is that older adults exhibit higher levels of activation than younger adults ( Dennis and Cabeza, 2008 ;  Grady et al., 2010 ;  Madden et al., 2005 ;  Nielson et al., 2002 ), particularly within the dorsal frontoparietal regions.  Madden et al. (2007b) , for example, reported that older adults exhibited higher frontoparietal activation, specifically in the FEF and SPL than younger adults, during visual search with multi-letter displays. The behavioral effect of visual salience (from a color singleton in the display) was correlated with the frontoparietal activation for older adults, whereas for younger adults the corresponding relation between activation and salience occurred in more ventral (fusiform) cortical regions. In addition, these activation-performance correlations occurred only when the salient display item was predictive of target location, consistent with an age-related increase in top-down attention, perhaps as a compensatory response to decline in the efficiency of bottom-up processing ( Davis et al., 2008 ).  Schmitz et al. (2010)  reported a related pattern, with a perceptually demanding task involving identification of superimposed face/place images. These authors found that older adults exhibited less suppression, relative to younger adults, of parahippocampal activation by the task-irrelevant place images but increased activation in left MFG. 
 Nearly all previous neuroimaging research on age-related differences in visual attention has relied on tasks with substantial demands on either perceptual discrimination ( Madden et al., 2007b ;  Schmitz et al., 2010 ), working memory ( Campbell et al., 2012 ;  Gazzaley and D’Esposito, 2007 ), or response selection ( Nielson et al., 2002 ). The  Madden et al. (2007b)  study, for example, reported an age-related difference in activation associated with visual salience, but the salient display item (a color singleton) could be either a target or a distractor, and consequently the effects of salience, and the interaction with top-down attention, combined facilitatory and inhibitory influences. Thus, the neural basis of age-related differences in attentional processes such as inhibition, particularly at the early perceptual level related to visual salience, have not been clearly isolated. 
 In this experiment we therefore investigated younger and older adults’ fMRI activation by a highly salient but irrelevant display item, in the context of a feature search task: detection of a shape singleton (e.g., a vertical bar among four triangles). Further, the salient distractor, a color singleton, could never be the target. The combination of low perceptual load and designation of the salient distractor as irrelevant should thus maximize older adults’ vulnerability to attentional capture ( Kramer et al., 2000 ;  Maylor and Lavie, 1998 ;  Porter et al., 2012 ) and allow for the isolation of inhibitory effects. We also included separate task conditions of feature search that differed in the availability of top-down attention, in terms of the predictability of a particular shape occurring as a target. Although the visual salience of the display items is a critical determinant of feature search performance ( Theeuwes, 2004 ,  2010 ;  Theeuwes et al., 2006 ), top-down attention, in the form of target predictability, can also lead to improvement in feature search ( Bravo and Nakayama, 1992 ;  Wolfe et al., 2003 ). Under some conditions, target predictability may reduce or eliminate attentional capture by salient distractors ( Bacon and Egeth, 1994 ;  Leber and Egeth, 2006 ). Thus, a feature search task with color singleton distractors should provide an optimal context in which to assess age-related differences, not only in attentional capture by a salient distractor, but also in the ability of top-down attention to reduce the magnitude of distraction. 
 We predicted that, at the behavioral level, the magnitude of attentional capture by the color singleton would be greater for older adults than for younger adults ( Hasher and Zacks, 1988 ;  Lustig et al., 2007 ;  Tsvetanov et al., 2013 ), but that both younger and older adults would exhibit an overall improvement in target detection with the availability of top-down attention ( Madden, 2007 ;  Whiting et al., 2014 ). If top-down attention can reduce the magnitude of attentional capture by a salient distractor ( Bacon and Egeth, 1994 ;  Leber and Egeth, 2006 ), then top-down reduction in attention capture should also be evident for both younger and older adults. 
 At the neural level, we expected an age-related increase in the magnitude of frontoparietal activation, particularly in response to attentional capture by salient distractors ( Madden et al., 2007b ;  Schmitz et al., 2010 ). More critically, we sought to characterize the relation between age-related differences in activation and behavioral performance. If age-related increases in capture-related activation are compensatory ( Davis et al., 2008 ), then we would expect that, particularly for older adults, increasing frontoparietal activation would be associated with decreasing reaction time (RT; i.e., better performance). Alternatively, increasing activation may reflect the increased number or complexity of information processing operations (i.e., task difficulty) and would thus be associated with increasing RT ( Anderson et al., 2007 ;  Donner et al., 2002 ). 
 Finally, we used mediation analyses to determine the causal relations among the variables representing age group, activation, and search performance ( Baron and Kenny, 1986 ;  Mackinnon and Fairchild, 2009 ;  Preacher and Hayes, 2008 ;  Salthouse, 1992a ). Typically, neuroimaging studies assume that variables related to brain structure and function are mediators, in the sense that they directly influence the relation between other variables such as age and cognitive performance. As  Salthouse (2011)  has pointed out, however, the evaluation of mediation requires the assessment of different models of the relations among the relevant variables. We compared two models, one in which brain activation mediates the relation between age and search performance, and an alternative model in which age is the mediator of the relation between activation and performance. 
 
 
 Material and methods 
 
 Participants 
 The participants were 21 younger adults between 19 and 29 years of age (12 women) and 21 older adults between 60 and 87 years of age (11 women). Participants gave written informed consent for a protocol approved by the Duke University Institutional Review Board. During a screening session conducted up to two weeks before the fMRI testing, participants completed several psychometric tests and a practice version (120 trials) of the visual search task to be used during scanning (described in the following section,  Visual Search Task ). By self-report, all participants were right-handed, free from significant health problems (including atherosclerosis, neurological and psychiatric disorders), and none reported taking medications known to affect cognitive function or cerebral blood flow (including antihypertensive agents). Participants scored a minimum of 27 points on the Mini Mental State Exam ( Folstein et al., 1975 ), a maximum of 9 on the Beck Depression Inventory ( Beck, 1978 ), and had normal color vision with a score of at least 12 (out of 14) on the Dvorine color plates ( Dvorine, 1963 ). Vocabulary and years of education were comparable for the two age groups ( Table 1 ). 
 
 
 Visual Search Task 
 The behavioral task during fMRI scanning was a version of visual search in which, on each trial, participants made a yes/no decision regarding whether one target shape (hexagon, trapezoid, or vertical bar) was present among nontarget shapes (diamonds, horizontal bars, ovals, circles, or triangles). Thus, this was a feature search task in which the shape of the target was always different from that of the nontargets (i.e., the target was a shape singleton), and all of the nontargets had the same shape ( Figure 1 , Panel A). The target and nontargets were green outline shapes on a black background. There was an equal number of target-present and target-absent trials. On half of the trials (both target-present and target-absent), one of the nontargets was red (i.e., a color singleton), thus making it a salient distractor. The color singleton distractor never corresponded to the target, and participants were instructed to try to ignore this distractor when it occurred. Display size was constant at five items, either one target within four distractors, or five distractors, and the five display locations were approximately equidistant from fixation. 
 Two search conditions,  varied  and  constant , differed in the degree to which knowledge of the task structure could influence the ability to ignore the distractor. In both conditions, the shapes assigned to target and distractor status remained distinct (i.e., consistent mapping;  Schneider and Shiffrin, 1977 ). Also, for both search conditions, the distractor shapes (diamonds, horizontal bars, ovals, circles, or triangles) were homogeneous within the display on each trial but varied across trials. Varied and constant conditions differed regarding the predictability of the target: In the varied condition, the target was not predictable and varied among the three possible target shapes (hexagon, trapezoid and vertical bar), whereas in the constant condition, the shape of the target was pre-defined at the beginning of the task and remained constant for each participant. Thus, in this latter condition, top-down attention was available, in the form of target predictability. 
 Within the scanner, participants completed two blocks of 32 practice trials, one for constant search and one for varied search. These practice trials were followed by five functional imaging runs, each comprising two on-task periods (one constant and one varied). Each on-task period comprised 32 trials, yielding a total of 64 trials per run, for a total of 320 trials across the five runs ( Figure 1 , Panel B). Within each run, three off-task periods were interleaved with the on-task periods (i.e., an off-task period occurred at both the beginning and end of each scanner run, as well as between the two on-task periods). Within an on-task period, the 32 trials represented eight instances for each combination of target status (present, absent) and distractor status (present, absent), distributed pseudorandomly, yielding a total of 40 trials for each task condition, per participant. Target location was balanced approximately equally across the display locations. The shape assigned as the target in the constant condition was balanced across participants. Two run orders, alternated across participants, started with either a constant or varied search condition. Participants held an fMRI-compatible response box and used the left and right index fingers to respond to the presence or absence of the target shape. Participants were instructed to respond as quickly as possible without sacrificing accuracy, and the assignment of target presence to the response buttons was balanced across participants within each age group. 
 An instruction screen at the beginning of the on-task period informed participants as to whether the target would be constant or varied. Following the instruction screen, each trial started with stimuli displayed for 250 ms, followed by a 2750 ms post-display response period, during which the display was black. We measured the RT from display onset, but the screen remained black during the 2750 ms response period regardless of when the participant responded. Following the response period, a white center fixation cross was displayed on the black screen, for a variable time period (jitter). Nine jitter durations between 1500 ms and 13500 ms were defined by multiples of the fMRI repetition time (TR) value (1500 ms). The jitters were distributed randomly within on-task periods, but the shorter durations more heavily sampled, so that the overall frequency distribution of individual jitter values was approximately exponential. No feedback regarding response accuracy was provided. During the off-task periods, three white center fixation crosses remained onscreen for 19.5 s. Participants were instructed to fixate the three crosses during the off-task period, in preparation for the upcoming task. 
 
 
 MRI Data Acquisition 
 Imaging was conducted on a 3 T GE Signa Excite MRI scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) with an eight-channel head coil. Head motion was minimized with foam pads and headband, and participants wore earplugs to reduce scanner noise. The imaging sequence included a three-plane localizer, followed by T1-weighted anatomical images and five runs of T2*-weighted (functional) imaging. Slice orientation was near-axial, parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure (AC-PC) plane. 
 The T1-weighted anatomical images were 60 contiguous slices acquired with a 3D fast inverse-recovery-prepared spoiled gradient recalled (SPGR) sequence, with TR = 7.3 ms, echo time (TE) = 2.97 ms, inversion recovery time (TI) = 450 ms, field of view (FOV) = 256 mm, slice thickness = 2 mm, flip angle = 12°, voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm, 128 × 128 matrix, and a parallel imaging with a selection factor of 2. 
 The T2*-weighted echo-planar, functional images were sensitive to the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal. These were 30 contiguous slices acquired using an inverse spiral sequence, with TR = 1500 ms, TE = 30 ms, FOV = 256 mm, slice thickness = 4 mm, flip angle = 60°, voxel size = 4 × 4 × 4 mm, and 64 × 64 matrix. 
 
 
 fMRI Analyses 
 To maintain the independence of activation magnitude and region selection ( Kriegeskorte et al., 2009 ), we adopted a region of interest (ROI) approach, with eight ROIs selected from two previous studies of visual search that focused on issues related to top-down attention, salience, and distraction ( de Fockert et al., 2004 ;  Shulman et al., 2003 ). The ROIs are illustrated in  Figure 2  and the coordinate locations are listed in  Table 2 . The first of the previous studies,  de Fockert et al. (2004) , reported activation related to the presence of a color singleton distractor during visual search, in the left MFG, and SPL bilaterally. We thus used the coordinates, in standardized space, for these local maxima reported by de Fockert et al. in their  Table 1 , adding a right MFG ROI homologous to their left hemisphere value. The second of the previous studies,  Shulman et al. (2003) , found that both the IPS and FEF maintained activity during visual search (digit detection and motion detection), consistent with top-down attentional control, whereas the IPS also exhibited sensitivity to the sensory properties of the display (i.e., salience). We defined ROIs from the IPS and FEF coordinates listed in Table 2 of the Shulman et al. article. The complete set of eight dorsal frontoparietal ROIs also represent regions that tend to exhibit higher activation for older adults than for younger adults ( Dennis and Cabeza, 2008 ;  Grady et al., 2010 ;  Madden et al., 2005 ;  Nielson et al., 2002 ). 
 For all of the ROIs, we used the coordinates of the reported local maxima, converting from Talairach space, as reported in the original articles, to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. We then used these coordinates as the centers of 8 mm diameter ROI spheres. Because the IPS and SPL ROIs are spatially proximate, the spheres for these two regions overlapped slightly in the left hemisphere, with 116 voxels shared by the two ROIs. These overlapping voxels were eliminated from the analyses, reducing the size of each of these ROIs by 5.8%. Thus, no voxel contributed to more than one ROI. 
 We used Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5; Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK;  http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ) along with locally developed Matlab scripts (Mathworks, Natick, MA) and the MarsBar toolbox ( http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/ ) to estimate the magnitude of activation within the pre-selected ROIs. The initial six volumes of each run, which always occurred during an off-task period, were discarded. Images were corrected for slice-timing and head motion, spatially normalized to the MNI template, and then spatially smoothed with an 8 mm Gaussian kernel. No participant moved more than 3 mm in any direction, either within or across runs, and a high-pass filter was included in every model to correct for scanner drift. 
 At the first level, we conducted voxelwise analyses within the general linear model of SPM5 ( Friston et al., 1995 ). Because the constant- versus varied-search manipulation was a block-level effect, with each search condition associated with an on-task period, we used a mixed blocked/event-related design, which incorporated both event-related (transient) and blocked (sustained) regressors for the hemodynamic response function ( Donaldson et al., 2001 ;  Visscher et al., 2003 ). The participant-specific SPM models contained both event-related and sustained regressors. Event-related regressors were coded as a stick function (delta) convolved with the hemodynamic response + time basis function ( Miezin et al., 2000 ), with the onset corresponding to the onset of the display. We modeled activation for each event-related regressor (i.e., trial type), for each participant, versus the implicit baseline (the jittered inter-trial interval from the on-task periods). For each search condition (constant, varied), four trial types were modeled including the orthogonal representation of target present/absent, and distractor present/absent, resulting in a total of eight trial types. To estimate sustained activation across the on-task period, sustained regressors were modeled as a fixed response (boxcar) waveform, with onset corresponding to the onset of the first display and lasting the duration of the on-task period. The 19.5 s off-task periods were modeled explicitly as a baseline for analysis of sustained effects. Trials with either an incorrect response (accuracy rates presented in  Table 3 ) or no response (< 2.1% of trials per age group) were modeled as a nuisance regressor. Head motion and scanner drift were treated as covariates of no interest. 
 From the first-level SPM models (for both the event-related and sustained data), we used the MarsBar toolbox to extract the average fMRI activation effect size (beta value), at the individual participant level, for each task condition, across all voxels within each of the eight ROIs. We conducted the hypothesis testing with the ROI beta values, using multivariate and univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) and linear regression. Statistical methods are described further in  Results . 
 Additional SPM analyses with a voxelwise approach confirmed that these eight ROIs captured areas of task-relevant activation. To estimate the overall pattern of task-related activation, we entered the first-level SPM contrast images for each of the eight task conditions, for each participant, in a second-level analysis with participants as a random effect. The contrast compared all task conditions to the implicit baseline ( p  < 0.0001, FWE corrected with an extent threshold of 1,000 voxels), using age group as a covariate of no interest. The results of this contrast ( Figure 3 ) yielded widespread activation in the dorsal frontal and parietal regions used as the basis for the selected ROIs. When we superimposed the 8 mm-diameter ROI spheres ( Figure 2 ) on the overall task-related activation ( Figure 3 ), the FEF, SPL, and IPS ROIs all exhibited > 96% overlap with the SPM activation, and the MFG ROIs exhibited 73% overlap. 
 Voxelwise SPM analyses of task-related and age group effects, described in  Supplementary Material , also confirmed that activation occurred within frontoparietal regions, consistent with our ROI analyses reported in the following section ( fMRI Results ). Specifically, these voxelwise analyses detected activation for distractor presence (relative to distractor absence), for target presence (relative to target absence), and for older adults (relative to younger adults). The voxelwise analyses did not detect any regions of decreased activation for older adults relative to younger adults. 
 
 
 Statistical Power 
 With 21 participants in each of the two age groups, power was 0.89 to detect within-subjects (task condition) main effects and associated interactions, with an ANOVA effect size ( f ) of 0.25, at an alpha level of  p  < .05 ( Faul et al., 2007 ). Power was 0.84 to detect age group main effects with an effect size of 0.35, at an alpha level of  p  < .05. Using  Cohen’s (1988)  effect size guidelines of  f  = 0.10 as small,  f  = 0.25 as medium, and  f  = 0.40 as large, our sample size was sufficient to detect medium effect sizes. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Visual search performance 
 Individual trials on which one of the assigned response keys was not pressed within 3000 ms were eliminated from the RT analyses. These failures to respond, as a percentage of all trials, did not differ significantly for younger adults (2.10%) relative to older adults (0.95%). Three additional trials (one for an older adult, two for younger adults), with responses < 200 ms were also eliminated. For each participant, we obtained the median RT for correct responses in each task condition, and the means of these values, across participants, are presented in  Table 3 . Mean accuracy was high overall, but was higher for younger adults (94.81%) than for older adults (91.34%),  F (1, 40) = 7.20,  p  < .01. In addition, across the eight task conditions listed in  Table 3 , RT was unrelated to accuracy for younger adults ( r  = −0.064), but RT and accuracy were highly related for older adults ( r  = −0.922). Thus, whereas younger adults maintained a relatively constant level of accuracy across the task conditions, older adults exhibited slower responses as accuracy decreased. That is, older adults did not exhibit a speed-accuracy tradeoff, but rather responded more slowly in those conditions in which they made more errors. 
 In addition to the age-related differences in accuracy, mean RT was 105 ms higher for older adults than for younger adults, which complicates age group comparisons because statistical interactions between age group and task condition may reflect a proportional age-related increase in RT rather than a specific effect of the task conditions (i.e., generalized slowing;  Salthouse, 1985 ;  Salthouse and Madden, 2007 ). To take into account generalized slowing as well as the age-related differences in accuracy, for analyzing visual search performance, we used a  scaled RT  measure that both standardized RT across participants and adjusted for accuracy. First, for each participant, across the complete distribution of correct responses within the 320 total trials, we recoded each RT value as a standardized z value, using the mean and standard deviation of the participant’s distribution ( Faust et al., 1999 ). We then obtained the mean z value across trials within each task condition, for each participant, and adjusted this standardized RT measure (mean z) for accuracy by either dividing by accuracy (for positive values) or multiplying by accuracy (for negative values).  Tsvetanov (2013)  used a similar approach, based on methods developed by  Townsend and Ashby (1983)  and  Horowitz and Wolfe (2003) . The RT standardization provides a common metric for the two age groups, as the accuracy adjustment moves the z value higher (i.e., towards slower responding) when accuracy decreases. For example, for two identical RT values, the one associated with lower accuracy will be adjusted upward. The mean scaled RT values are presented in  Table 3 . 
 A univariate ANOVA of the scaled RT values included age group (younger, older) as a between-subjects variable; search condition (constant, varied), target status (present, absent), and distractor status (present, absent) were within-subjects variables. The ANOVA yielded significant main effects for age group,  F (1, 40) = 5.51,  p  < .05, search condition,  F (1, 40) = 9.04,  p  < .01, and distractor presence,  F (1, 40) = 97.14,  p  < .001. These main effects represented higher scaled RT values for older adults relative to younger adults, 1  for the varied condition relative to the constant condition, and for the presence of the color singleton distractor relative to its absence. 
 The only interaction that was significant in the scaled RT data was the Age Group x Distractor effect,  F (1, 40) = 20.69, p < .0001 ( Figure 4 ). This interaction represents an age-related increase in attentional capture by the color singleton: The increase in scaled RT for distractor-present trials, as compared to distractor-absent trials, was greater for older adults than for younger adults. The effect of distractor presence was significant for both age groups,  F (1, 40) = 36.0,  p  < .001, in each case, and the age-related difference in the distractor effect remained significant when covaried for best-corrected visual acuity ( Table 1 ),  F (1, 39) = 17.29, p < .001. 
 
 
 fmRI Results 
 
 Event-related activation 
 We analyzed the event-related activation in a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), with age group as a between-subjects independent variable, and search condition, target presence, and distractor presence as within-subjects independent variables. The eight ROIs were multiple dependent variables. Univariate tests were conducted when the corresponding multivariate effect was significant. The univariate tests were Bonferroni-corrected by the number of ROIs (eight). 
 The MANOVA main effect of age group was significant,  F (8, 33) = 3.83,  p  < .01, with corresponding univariate tests significant for the left MFG, right MFG, and left FEF, with  F (1, 40) > 11.0,  p  < .05 (corrected) in each case. For all three ROIs with significant univariate age group effects, mean activation was higher for older adults than for younger adults ( Figure 5 ). The MANOVA main effect of target presence was significant,  F (8, 33) = 4.69,  p  < .01, with corresponding univariate effects significant for the left SPL, right SPL, left IPS, and right IPS, with  F (1, 40) > 9.0,  p  < .05 (corrected) in each case ( Figure 6 ). The MANOVA main effect of distractor presence was significant,  F (8, 33) = 3.47,  p  < .01, ( Figure 6 ), with the corresponding univariate test significant for the right SPL,  F (1, 40) = 11.53,  p  < .05 (corrected). For both the target presence and distractor presence effects, the univariate effects reflected relatively higher activation for the presence of either a target or a distractor. No interaction terms were significant in the MANOVA analysis. 2 
 
 
 Sustained activation 
 The first-level SPM models (see the previous section,  fMRI Analyses ), included a regressor representing activation sustained for the duration of the on-task period, relative to the off-task baseline, as well as the event-related regressors, in a mixed blocked/event-related design ( Donaldson et al., 2001 ;  Visscher et al., 2003 ). The estimated activation associated specifically with the sustained component was small in magnitude. Within each combination of age group, and constant/varied search condition, none of the ROI mean beta values for the sustained activation ( Table 4 ) differed significantly from zero at  p  < .05 (corrected), with the event-related regressors included. A MANOVA of the sustained effects, with age group as a within-subjects variable, search condition as a within-subjects variable, and the eight ROIs as dependent variables, did not yield any significant effects. 
 The mixed blocked/event-related design assumes that the raw time series fMRI data have a boxcar shape in which the off-task periods have a low-amplitude signal that is relatively constant across time ( Figure 1 , Panel B). To test this assumption, we conducted further analyses of the fMRI blood oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal across the time course of the imaging volumes (TRs) within each imaging run ( Supplementary Material ). These analyses suggested that the data did not conform well to the assumptions of the mixed design model. Specifically, the off-task period signal varied significantly over the TRs and was not substantially lower than the on-task period signal, even when the initial five TRs of the off-task periods were removed to reduce transient signal fluctuations. 
 
 
 Correlation between event-related activation and search performance 
 The analyses of the behavioral data (see the previous section,  Visual search performance ) demonstrated that the presence of the color distractor led to a greater slowing of search performance for older adults than for younger adults. This age-related difference in attentional capture, in the RT data, did not interact with either search condition or target presence. We thus calculated Pearson  r  correlations for the relation between mean activation in each ROI, and scaled RT, for each combination of age group and distractor presence, as well as for both age groups combined. The alpha level  p  = 0.05 was Bonferroni-corrected within each level of distractor presence by the number of ROIs (eight). 
 Preliminary analyses indicated the presence of one outlier, with a studentized residual of 4.98, in the correlation data, which was removed. For both age groups combined, the correlation between activation and scaled RT was significant at  p  < 0.05 (corrected), on distractor-present trials, for the MFG bilaterally, and for the left FEF ( Table 5 ). For both age groups combined, comparison of the correlations for the distractor-present and distractor-absent trials, with  Steiger’s Z (1980) , demonstrated that the activation-RT correlation was significantly higher for distractor presence, relative to distractor absence, for the left MFG, Z = 2.82,  p  < .005, right MFG, Z = 2.76,  p  < .006, and left FEF, Z = 4.65,  p  < .001. All correlations were positive, indicating that, in the presence of a distractor, increasing scaled RT was associated with increasing activation. Within each of these three ROIs, we compared the two age groups’ activation-RT correlations, for the distractor-present trials, with the Fisher  r  to  z  transformation. None of these age group comparisons, however, was significant, and as is evident in  Figure 7  the two age groups’ data comprise a single linear function. Exploratory analyses did not yield any reliable modulation of these correlations by target presence or search condition. 
 
 
 Mediation of search performance 
 For the three regions exhibiting a significant correlation between event-related activation and attentional capture ( Figure 7 ), we examined the degree to which individual differences in activation accounted for age-related variance of scaled RT on distractor-present trials. Because years of age was not distributed continuously, we used contrast coding (-1, 1) to represent the difference between the two age groups. Considered separately, the age group variable accounted for 39.20% of the variance in scaled RT on distractor-present trials ( Table 6 , Model 1). Activation in the three prefrontal ROIs from  Figure 7  shared a moderate amount of the age-related variance in this scaled RT measure. When left MFG activation was entered before age group, the variance associated specifically with age decreased (i.e., attenuated) by 50.0%, indicating shared variance between left MFG activation and age, though age group remained a significant predictor ( Table 6 , Model 2). Similar regression models, conducted separately for the activation in the right MFG and left FEF ( Table 6 , Models 3 and 4), demonstrated that entering either of these variables before age group in the regression model attenuated the age-related variance in scaled RT by 52% and 38%, respectively, though age group remained a significant predictor in each case. 
 We used mediation analyses to determine whether the shared variance between age and prefrontal activation, in scaled RT on distractor-present trials, represents a specifically mediating effect, in the sense that the relation between two variables is not entirely direct but instead influenced (i.e., mediated) by the effect of a third variable ( Baron and Kenny, 1986 ;  Mackinnon and Fairchild, 2009 ;  Preacher and Hayes, 2008 ;  Salthouse, 1992a ). We investigated two models of the relations among the variables ( Salthouse, 2011 ), one in which activation is a mediator of the relation between age and search performance ( Figure 8 , Panel A), and an alternative model in which age is a mediator of the relation between activation and performance ( Figure 8 , Panel B). We used bootstrap analyses ( Mackinnon and Fairchild, 2009 ;  Preacher and Hayes, 2008 ) based on a resampling procedure to obtain a point estimate of the beta value for the mediating effect. The original data were resampled 20,000 times, with replacement, providing a sampling distribution (and 95% confidence interval) of the estimated beta for the mediating effect. Thus, mediation was considered to be significant when the confidence intervals for the parameter estimate of the mediator variable did not include zero. 
 The bootstrap results did not support the model in which activation is a mediator of the age-RT relation ( Figure 8 , Panel A). The confidence intervals associated with the parameter estimates for both MFG ROIs, and the left FEF, all included zero ( Table 7 , Models 1–3). The tests of the alternative model, however, were significant for all three of the ROIs ( Table 7 , Models 4–6) and support a model in which age is the mediator between activation and RT on the distractor-present trials ( Figure 8 , Panel B). 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 
 Visual search performance 
 At the behavioral level, we extend previous findings by demonstrating a contribution of top-down attention to feature search (shape singleton detection) for both older and younger adults, although top-down attention was not successful in preventing attentional capture from a salient distractor for either age group. The Age Group x Distractor interaction for scaled RT ( Figure 4 ) confirmed our prediction that attentional capture by a salient distractor was greater for older adults than for younger adults, consistent with previous reports of age-related decline in inhibitory functioning ( Hasher and Zacks, 1988 ;  Healey et al., 2008 ;  Lustig et al., 2007 ;  Rabbitt, 1979 ). Previous studies of age-related differences in attentional capture, however, have used tasks with more complex attentional demands, in which the distractor is a response-incompatible target in an irrelevant display location ( Maylor and Lavie, 1998 ;  Porter et al., 2012 ), or the response is a two-choice visual discrimination combined with target detection ( Pratt and Bellomo, 1999 ;  Whiting et al., 2007 ). In the present experiment, we used a highly efficient, feature search task requiring a target present/absent response regarding a shape singleton (i.e., target detection). Our results thus provide novel evidence that visual salience per se is a critical component of the age-related increase in attentional capture, even when perceptual load is low and the distractor is defined as an irrelevant item to be ignored. The age-related difference in search performance remained significant when covaried for acuity, suggesting that this age-related effect does not reflect a deficit in the ability to discriminate target and distractor items visually but instead reflects the allocation of attention to the salient distractor. 
 The behavioral data also support our hypothesis of age-related preservation of top-down attention. The predictability of the target, in the constant search condition, led to a decrease in scaled RT, relative to the varied search condition, which did not vary significantly across the age groups. This pattern is consistent with several previous findings in visual search tasks, indicating that older adults use some forms of top-down attention as efficiently as younger adults ( Humphrey and Kramer, 1997 ;  Madden, 1987 ,  2007 ;  Madden et al., 2004 ;  McAvinue et al., 2012 ;  Whiting et al., 2005 ). Target detection in this feature search task required the relatively simple recognition that one different shape was present among four other homogeneous shapes. The improved search performance in the constant condition confirms that, even within a feature search task with minimal attentional demands, top-down attention can facilitate target detection ( Bravo and Nakayama, 1992 ;  Wolfe et al., 2003 ). The constant search condition includes more repetition priming of target features, relative to the varied condition, which would also allow a greater contribution from bottom-up attentional guidance in the constant condition ( Geyer et al., 2010 ;  Kristjansson et al., 2002 ;  Maljkovic and Nakayama, 1994 ). Target feature priming, however, would contribute more to target-present trials than to target-absent trials, and the improvement in search performance in the constant condition did not vary significantly in relation to target presence, as predicted by a priming explanation. Assuming that target detection occurs when the activation of target-relevant features, within the internal representation of the display (i.e., target template), exceeds a threshold value ( Eckstein, 2011 ;  Wolfe, 1998 ,  2007 ), the age-constancy of the search condition effect indicates that top-down attentional guidance within the target template is available to older as well as younger adults. 
 Finally, the behavioral results demonstrate that the beneficial effects of target predictability do not include protection from attentional capture by a salient distractor. Contrary to our initial hypothesis, top-down attention was not associated with a reduction in attentional capture for either age group.  Bacon and Egeth (1994)  and  Leber and Egeth (2006)  have reported that, in some forms of feature search, target predictability may enable a  singleton detection mode , based on top-down attention, that can override attentional capture. Theeuwes and colleagues, however, have proposed that attentional capture is determined entirely by the bottom-up variables associated with visual salience ( Theeuwes, 2004 ,  2010 ;  Theeuwes et al., 2006 ). In the present form of feature search for a shape singleton, with homogeneous distractors and separation of target and distractor sets, target predictability leads to enhanced guidance within the target template, but consistent with the findings of Theeuwes and colleagues, this contribution of top-down attention does not override the disruption of performance associated with a salient color singleton. 
 
 
 fMRI activation 
 The fMRI activation varied significantly as a function of both age group and visual search performance. From two previous studies of visual search ( de Fockert et al., 2004 ;  Shulman et al., 2003 ), we selected eight frontoparietal ROIs (comprising MFG, FEF, SPL, and IPS, bilaterally). These ROIs were relevant for target detection, attentional capture by a salient distractor, and top-down attentional control, as well as for age-related differences in visual attention ( Dennis and Cabeza, 2008 ;  Grady et al., 2010 ;  Madden et al., 2005 ;  Nielson et al., 2002 ). Consistent with previous findings, these data yielded a significant age-related increase in frontoparietal activation, specifically MFG and FEF, and a corresponding trend was also evident in the parietal regions ( Figures 5  and  6 ). We had expected, however, that both attentional capture from a salient distractor and top-down attention from target predictability would modulate this age-related difference in activation, which did not occur. Although both the presence of a salient distractor and the availability of a predictable target influenced the efficiency of feature search performance, the age-related increase in activation was independent of these variables. Thus, we isolated an age-related effect of attentional capture at the behavioral level but not at the neural level. 
 Two considerations are relevant to the interpretation of the age-related increase in activation. First, previous experiments linking older adults’ increased activation to attentional capture and top-down guidance ( Madden et al., 2007b ;  Schmitz et al., 2010 ) used behavioral tasks with more complex perceptual discrimination than the feature search task in the present study. Although decreasing perceptual load appears to enhance the magnitude of older adults’ attentional capture at the behavioral level ( Maylor and Lavie, 1998 ), increased complexity of the perceptual discrimination may be needed to detect the interaction of age with top-down attention and visual salience in activation data. Second, the age-related interaction in activation may depend on a task context in which sensory level or bottom-up processing is demonstrably lower for older adults, triggering a compensatory increase in activation ( Davis et al., 2008 ;  Schneider and Pichora-Fuller, 2000 ). Older adults in this study exhibited typical age-related decline in visual acuity and perceptual-motor speed ( Table 1 ), but the visual displays were high contrast shapes presented well above threshold (250 ms), and whole-brain, voxelwise analyses ( Supplementary Material ) did not detect significant age-related decline in activation in visual sensory regions. 
 The increases in activation associated with both target presence (IPS and SPL, bilaterally) and distractor presence (right SPL) were independent of age group and target predictability ( Figure 6 ). These parietal regions are frequently activated during visual search, particularly in response to abrupt sensory changes in the display, which in turn lead to attentional shifts within or across feature dimensions ( Liu et al., 2003 ;  Wei et al., 2011 ;  Yantis et al., 2002 ). The IPS and SPL are also associated with various aspects of top-down attentional control ( Egner et al., 2008 ;  Pollmann et al., 2003 ;  Shulman et al., 2003 ;  Vossel et al., 2013 ), but the absence of a target predictability effect in these data indicate a greater contribution from the sensory-level aspects of parietal activation. 
 The location of the distractor-related SPL activation obtained here is consistent with that obtained by  de Fockert et al. (2004) , who found that color singletons were associated with bilateral SPL activation. The de Fockert et al. report also highlighted a correlation between left prefrontal cortex activation (at the location corresponding to our MFG ROI) and a RT measure of attentional capture by a color singleton distractor. The de Fockert et al. correlation was negative, with increasing MFG activation associated with decreased attentional capture, which these authors interpreted as representing top-down attentional control of task-irrelevant information. The present analyses also revealed an association between attentional capture and activation, in this case a correlation between scaled RT and three frontal ROIs, for both age groups combined, which was specific to the distractor-present trials ( Table 5  and  Figure 7 ). Our correlations, however, were positive, reflecting increased prefrontal activation as scaled RT increased on distractor-present trials, which likely represents the different type of search decision in this task relative to that of de Fockert et al. 3  Our findings suggest that the distractor-related activation represents an increase in the number or complexity of information processing operations (task difficulty;  Anderson et al., 2007 ;  Donner et al., 2002 ), rather than the successful implementation of top-down attentional control ( de Fockert et al., 2004 ). More generally, the independence of the age-related and distractor-related activation suggests that, at least in the context of low perceptual load, age-related increases in frontoparietal activation do not necessarily signal a specific compensatory attentional strategy. 
 The absence of any significant effects in the sustained activation ( Table 4 ) was surprising.  Madden et al. (2007b)  reported an age-related increase in sustained, frontoparietal activation, during letter search with color singleton distractors, although the effect did not vary significantly across task conditions and was not entirely independent of the event-related activation. The perceptual load was lower in the present form of feature search than in the letter-search task used by  Madden et al. (2007b) , and this feature search task may not have required substantial allocation of sustained attention. In addition, the fMRI BOLD time series data did not exhibit the boxcar shape necessary to accurately model separate estimates of sustained and transient activity ( Supplementary Material ). It is possible that our off-task periods of 19.5 s were not of sufficient duration to yield stable, low-level BOLD activity throughout the off-task period. Thus, the event-related regressors may have captured the majority of the task-related variance. 
 The default assumption of neuroimaging studies is that brain-related variables are mediators of the relation between age and cognitive performance, but this assumption should be tested empirically ( Salthouse, 2011 ). The mediation analyses enabled us to distinguish alternative models of the relations among age, search performance, and regional activation. The initial regression analyses of scaled RT on the distractor-present trials indicated that individual differences in activation, for each of three ROIs (left MFG, right MFG and left FEF), accounted for 38–52% of the age-related variance in scaled RT ( Table 6 ), suggesting that frontal activation may have a causal or mediating influence on the age-related increase in attentional capture by the color singleton. When, however, we estimated the beta values for mediating effects with a resampling procedure ( Mackinnon and Fairchild, 2009 ;  Preacher and Hayes, 2008 ), and compared different arrangements of the mediating variables, a different conclusion emerged. For all three frontal ROIs, these analyses support a model in which age is a significant mediator of the relation between activation and performance on distractor-present trials ( Table 7 ). The alternative model, with activation as a mediator of the age-RT relation, was not significant for any of the ROIs. This pattern is illustrated in  Figure 7 : Although the relation between activation and RT holds for both age groups combined, the relation is not significant within either age group, and the pattern relies on the age-related increase in both mean RT and mean activation. Thus, although activation shares age-related variance in RT, which is specific to the distractor-present trials, the relation between activation and RT is indirect and occurs because both frontal activation and RT increase with age. Years of age, in this context, represents not only the passage of time but also the combined influence of many unmeasured variables in the sensory/motor and central nervous systems, for which age is a proxy ( Bishop et al., 2010 ;  Heringa et al., 2014 ). 
 
 
 Limitations 
 The present form of top-down attentional guidance, target predictability, was associated with improved performance in visual feature search, but we did not detect any effects of target predictability in the activation data. Although increased activation was evident for target presence and distractor presence, and statistical power was sufficient to detect medium-sized effects, the analyses did not reveal significant effects in either event-related or sustained activation for top-down attention (constant vs. varied search). Larger sample sizes may be needed to detect the pattern of neural activity representing top-down attentional control in this form of feature search. Similarly, age-related differences in attentional capture were clearly evident in the behavioral data but no age-related interactions were significant in the activation data, and larger sample sizes with a more continuous distribution of age would provide additional power to detect smaller effects. 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 In a highly efficient version of feature search (detection of a shape singleton target), both younger and older adults were able to use top-down attention (target predictability) to improve performance. A salient but task-irrelevant distractor, a color singleton, disrupted performance for both age groups, but particularly older adults, and top-down attention did not protect either age group from this form of attentional capture. The occurrence of either a target shape or a color singleton distractor was associated with increased activation in parietal ROIs (IPS and SPL), for both age groups, whereas frontal ROIs (MFG and FEF) exhibited higher activation for older adults than for younger adults. On trials with a color singleton distractor, search performance declined as a function of increasing activation in three frontal ROIs (left MFG, right MFG and left FEF). This pattern suggests that the age-related increase in activation represents increased task difficulty, in the presence of a salient distractor, rather than a compensatory response. Mediational analyses, however, did not support a model in which the frontal activation was a mediator of the relation between age and distraction. Rather, age was a mediating variable: Both frontal activation and the time required to detect a target, when a salient distractor occurs, increase with adult age. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by NIH research grant R01 AG039684 (DJM), R01 AG034138 (MTD), K23 MH087741 (GGP), R01 NS074045 (NKC), and R01 AG019731 (RC). We are grateful to Sally Cocjin, David Hoagey, Chris Petty, Matt Costello, Anne Shepler, and the members of the Brain Imaging and Analysis Center (Allen Song, Director), for their assistance and support. A preliminary version of these findings was presented at the Third International Conference on Visual Search and Selective Attention (VSSA III), Munich, Germany, July 2012. 
 
 
 
 1 
 Note that although the mean of each participant’s standardized RT distribution is zero, there is no mathematical requirement that the mean of the final, scaled RT values would be exactly zero for either age group, or that the mean scaled RT, across the task conditions, would be equal for the two age groups. The shape of the RT distribution will differ across participants, as will the mapping between the individual trials for each of the eight task conditions and their respective locations on the distribution. The final, scaled RT values are also affected by the accuracy adjustment. Additional analyses of these data demonstrated that the overall pattern of results is very similar if just the standardized RTs are analyzed, without the accuracy adjustment, or if other methods for correcting for generalized slowing are used, such as the logarithmic transformation or proportional change scores ( Faust et al., 1999 ). We find the scaled RT measure to be useful in this context because it corrects for generalized slowing while combining the influences of RT and accuracy into a single measure, facilitating the comparison between participant groups. 
 
 
 2 
 The activation effects were not entirely attributable to time on task ( Grinband et al., 2011 ). Note that the main effect of target presence was not significant in the analysis of scaled RT (previous section,  Visual search performance ), although activation was reliably higher for target-present trials than for target-absent trials in both IPS and SPL bilaterally. The age group main effect in activation did correspond to the age group main effect in scaled RT, with older adults exhibiting both higher mean activation and higher scaled RT. In additional analyses, however, we found that within each age group, no correlation between mean scaled RT and mean activation was significant for any ROI, even at a more liberal threshold of  p  < .05, uncorrected for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 3 
 Specifically, in the  de Fockert et al. (2004)  task, each display contained a shape singleton target (a circle among four diamonds), and participants made a two-choice response regarding the orientation of a line (horizontal/vertical) contained within the target shape. Thus, the de Fockert et al. task required an initial (covert) identification of the target shape and then the (overt) two-choice discrimination of the line located within the shape. This is an example of what  Duncan (1985)  referred to as  compound search.  The defining attribute of the target (shape) differs from the reported attribute (line orientation) defining the response. The present form of feature search, in contrast, is what Duncan referred to as  simple search,  in which the defining and reported attributes of the target are the same (presence vs. absence of a unique shape). Further, in the de Fockert et al. task, those trials with a color singleton (half of the trials overall) were divided equally between those on which one of the distractors was the color singleton and those on which the circle target was a color singleton. Thus, in the de Fockert et al. task, while color information was not needed for the line orientation response, color could facilitate the response when combined with the target. In the present task, the color singleton was always a distractor, never the target, and participants were instructed to ignore it. This design feature allows for the isolation of distractor and target related attentional effects. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 EJ 
 
 
 Mannan 
 SK 
 
 
 Husain 
 M 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Sumner 
 P 
 
 
 Mort 
 DJ 
 
 
 McRobbie 
 D 
 
 
 Kennard 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Involvement of prefrontal cortex in visual search 
 Exp Brain Res 
 180 
 289 
 302 
 17310377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Visuospatial reorienting signals in the human temporo-parietal junction are independent of response selection 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 23 
 591 
 596 
 16420468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bach 
 M 
 
 
 1996 
 The Freiburg Visual Acuity test automatic measurement of visual acuity 
 Optom Vis Sci 
 73 
 49 
 53 
 8867682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bacon 
 WF 
 
 
 Egeth 
 HE 
 
 
 1994 
 Overriding stimulus-driven attentional capture 
 Percept Psychophys 
 55 
 485 
 496 
 8008550 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baron 
 RM 
 
 
 Kenny 
 DA 
 
 
 1986 
 The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations 
 J Pers Soc Psychol 
 51 
 1173 
 1182 
 3806354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 1978 
 The Beck depression inventory 
 Psychological Corporation 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bishop 
 NA 
 
 
 Lu 
 T 
 
 
 Yankner 
 BA 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural mechanisms of ageing and cognitive decline 
 Nature 
 464 
 529 
 535 
 20336135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bravo 
 M 
 
 
 Nakayama 
 JK 
 
 
 1992 
 The role of attention in different visual-search tasks 
 Percept Psychophys 
 51 
 465 
 472 
 1594436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Campbell 
 KL 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Ng 
 C 
 
 
 Hasher 
 L 
 
 
 2012 
 Age differences in the frontoparietal cognitive control network: Implications for distractibility 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 2212 
 2223 
 22659108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cashdollar 
 N 
 
 
 Fukuda 
 K 
 
 
 Bocklage 
 A 
 
 
 Aurtenetxe 
 S 
 
 
 Vogel 
 EK 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 Prolonged disengagement from attentional capture in normal aging 
 Psychol Aging 
 28 
 77 
 86 
 23066799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 J 
 
 
 1988 
 Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 Hillsdale, NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2008 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FI 
 
 
 Bialystok 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 Cognition through the lifespan: mechanisms of change 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 131 
 138 
 16460992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 SW 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Fleck 
 MS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2008 
 Que PASA? The posterior-anterior shift in aging 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1201 
 1209 
 17925295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Fockert 
 J 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 Lavie 
 N 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural correlates of attentional capture in visual search 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 16 
 751 
 759 
 15200703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 2008 
 Neuroimaging of healthy cognitive aging 
 The handbook of aging and cognition 
 Psychology Press 
 New York 
 1 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2001 
 Dissociating state and item components of recognition memory using fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 129 
 142 
 11133316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Donner 
 TH 
 
 
 Kettermann 
 A 
 
 
 Diesch 
 E 
 
 
 Ostendorf 
 F 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Brandt 
 SA 
 
 
 2002 
 Visual feature and conjunction searches of equal difficulty engage only partially overlapping frontoparietal networks 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 16 
 25 
 11771970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Marin 
 OSM 
 
 
 1985 
 Visual search and visual attention 
 Attention and performance XI 
 Erlbaum 
 Hillsdale, NJ 
 85 
 105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dvorine 
 I 
 
 
 1963 
 Dvorine pseudo-isochromatic plates 
 2 
 Harcourt 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckstein 
 MP 
 
 
 2011 
 Visual search: A retrospective 
 J Vis 
 11 
 1 
 36 
 21856869 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Egner 
 T 
 
 
 Monti 
 JM 
 
 
 Trittschuh 
 EH 
 
 
 Wieneke 
 CA 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural integration of top-down spatial and feature-based information in visual search 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 6141 
 6151 
 18550756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faul 
 F 
 
 
 Erdfelder 
 E 
 
 
 Lang 
 AG 
 
 
 Buchner 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences 
 Behav Res Methods 
 39 
 175 
 191 
 17695343 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 ME 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Spieler 
 DH 
 
 
 Ferraro 
 FR 
 
 
 1999 
 Individual differences in information-processing rate and amount: implications for group differences in response latency 
 Psychol Bull 
 125 
 777 
 799 
 10589302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 MF 
 
 
 Folstein 
 SE 
 
 
 McHugh 
 PR 
 
 
 1975 
 “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician 
 J Psychiatr Res 
 12 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Poline 
 JP 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 1995 
 Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: A general linear approach 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2 
 189 
 210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Top-down modulation and normal aging 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1097 
 67 
 83 
 17413013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geyer 
 T 
 
 
 Zehetleitner 
 M 
 
 
 Muller 
 HJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Contextual cueing of pop-out visual search: when context guides the deployment of attention 
 J Vis 
 10 
 20 
 20616131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Protzner 
 AB 
 
 
 Kovacevic 
 N 
 
 
 Strother 
 SC 
 
 
 Afshin-Pour 
 B 
 
 
 Wojtowicz 
 M 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JA 
 
 
 Churchill 
 N 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 2010 
 A multivariate analysis of age-related differences in default mode and task-positive networks across multiple cognitive domains 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 1432 
 1447 
 19789183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grinband 
 J 
 
 
 Savitskaya 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Teichert 
 T 
 
 
 Ferrera 
 VP 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 The dorsal medial frontal cortex is sensitive to time on task, not response conflict or error likelihood 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 303 
 311 
 21168515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hasher 
 L 
 
 
 Zacks 
 RT 
 
 
 
 
 Bower 
 GH 
 
 
 1988 
 Working memory, comprehension, and aging: A review and a new review 
 The psychology of learning and motivation 
 Academic Press 
 Orlando 
 193 
 225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healey 
 MK 
 
 
 Campbell 
 KL 
 
 
 Hasher 
 L 
 
 
 2008 
 Cognitive aging and increased distractibility: costs and potential benefits 
 Prog Brain Res 
 169 
 353 
 363 
 18394486 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heringa 
 SM 
 
 
 van den Berg 
 E 
 
 
 Reijmer 
 YD 
 
 
 Nijpels 
 G 
 
 
 Stehouwer 
 CD 
 
 
 Schalkwijk 
 CG 
 
 
 Teerlink 
 T 
 
 
 Scheffer 
 PG 
 
 
 van den Hurk 
 K 
 
 
 Kappelle 
 LJ 
 
 
 Dekker 
 JM 
 
 
 Biessels 
 GJ 
 
 
 2014 
 Markers of low-grade inflammation and endothelial dysfunction are related to reduced information processing speed and executive functioning in an older population - the Hoorn Study 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 40 
 108 
 118 
 24485482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hodsoll 
 J 
 
 
 Mevorach 
 C 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GW 
 
 
 2009 
 Driven to less distraction: rTMS of the right parietal cortex reduces attentional capture in visual search 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 106 
 114 
 18515299 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hommel 
 B 
 
 
 Li 
 KZ 
 
 
 Li 
 SC 
 
 
 2004 
 Visual search across the life span 
 Dev Psychol 
 40 
 545 
 558 
 15238042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 2000 
 The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 284 
 291 
 10700262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horowitz 
 TS 
 
 
 Wolfe 
 JM 
 
 
 2003 
 Memory for rejected distractors in visual search? 
 Vis Cogn 
 10 
 257 
 298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphrey 
 DG 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 1997 
 Age differences in visual search for feature, conjunction, and triple-conjunction targets 
 Psychol Aging 
 12 
 704 
 717 
 9416638 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Abrams 
 RA 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 An event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study of voluntary and stimulus-driven orienting of attention 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 4593 
 4604 
 15872107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Hahn 
 S 
 
 
 Irwin 
 DE 
 
 
 Theeuwes 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 Age differences in the control of looking behavior: do you know where your eyes have been? 
 Psychol Sci 
 11 
 210 
 217 
 11273405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Humphrey 
 DG 
 
 
 Larish 
 JF 
 
 
 Logan 
 GD 
 
 
 Strayer 
 DL 
 
 
 1994 
 Aging and inhibition: beyond a unitary view of inhibitory processing in attention 
 Psychol Aging 
 9 
 491 
 512 
 7893421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kramer 
 AF 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 2008 
 Attention 
 The handbook of aging and cognition 
 Psychology Press 
 New York 
 189 
 249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PS 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 2009 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping 
 Nat Neurosci 
 12 
 535 
 540 
 19396166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kristjansson 
 A 
 
 
 Wang 
 D 
 
 
 Nakayama 
 K 
 
 
 2002 
 The role of priming in conjunctive visual search 
 Cognition 
 85 
 37 
 52 
 12086712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kusunoki 
 M 
 
 
 Gottlieb 
 J 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 ME 
 
 
 2000 
 The lateral intraparietal area as a salience map: the representation of abrupt onset, stimulus motion, and task relevance 
 Vision Res 
 40 
 1459 
 1468 
 10788652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leber 
 AB 
 
 
 Egeth 
 HE 
 
 
 2006 
 It’s under control: top-down search strategies can override attentional capture 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 13 
 132 
 138 
 16724780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 T 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2003 
 Cortical mechanisms of feature-based attentional control 
 Cereb Cortex 
 13 
 1334 
 1343 
 14615298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ludwig 
 CJ 
 
 
 Gilchrist 
 ID 
 
 
 2002 
 Stimulus-driven and goal-driven control over visual selection 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 28 
 902 
 912 
 12190257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Hasher 
 L 
 
 
 Zacks 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Gorfein 
 DS 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 CM 
 
 
 2007 
 Inhibitory deficit theory: Recent developments in a “new view” 
 The place of inhibition in cognition 
 American Psychological Association 
 Washington, DC 
 145 
 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mackinnon 
 DP 
 
 
 Fairchild 
 AJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Current directions in mediation analysis 
 Curr Dir Psychol Sci 
 18 
 16 
 20157637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 1987 
 Aging, attention, and the use of meaning during visual search 
 Cognitive Dev 
 2 
 201 
 216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Aging and visual attention 
 Curr Dir Psychol Sci 
 16 
 70 
 74 
 18080001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Gottlob 
 LR 
 
 
 Allen 
 PA 
 
 
 1999 
 Adult age differences in visual search accuracy: attentional guidance and target detectability 
 Psychol Aging 
 14 
 683 
 694 
 10632154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Plude 
 DJ 
 
 
 
 
 Cerella 
 J 
 
 
 Rybash 
 J 
 
 
 Hoyer 
 W 
 
 
 Commons 
 ML 
 
 
 1993 
 Selective preservation of selective attention 
 Adult information processing: Limits on loss 
 Academic Press 
 San Diego 
 273 
 300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Bucur 
 B 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 2007a 
 Age-related increase in top-down activation of visual features 
 Q J Exp Psychol (Colchester) 
 60 
 644 
 651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Bucur 
 B 
 
 
 Provenzale 
 JM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 White 
 LE 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 2007b 
 Adult age differences in the functional neuroanatomy of visual attention: A combined fMRI and DTI study 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 28 
 459 
 476 
 16500004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 
 
 Costa 
 PT 
 
 
 Siegler 
 IC 
 
 
 2004 
 Age-related changes in visual attention 
 Recent advances in psychology and aging 
 Elsevier 
 Amsterdam 
 41 
 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 2004 
 Age-related preservation of top-down attentional guidance during visual search 
 Psychol Aging 
 19 
 304 
 309 
 15222823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Park 
 D 
 
 
 2005 
 Age-related changes in neural activity during visual perception and attention 
 Cognitive neuroscience of aging: Linking cognitive and cerebral aging 
 Oxford University Press 
 Oxford 
 157 
 185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maljkovic 
 V 
 
 
 Nakayama 
 K 
 
 
 1994 
 Priming of pop-out: I. Role of features 
 Mem Cognit 
 22 
 657 
 672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maylor 
 EA 
 
 
 Lavie 
 N 
 
 
 1998 
 The influence of perceptual load on age differences in selective attention 
 Psychol Aging 
 13 
 563 
 573 
 9883457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McAvinue 
 LP 
 
 
 Habekost 
 T 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Kyllingsbaek 
 S 
 
 
 Vangkilde 
 S 
 
 
 Bundesen 
 C 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 2012 
 Sustained attention, attentional selectivity, and attentional capacity across the lifespan 
 Atten Percept Psychophys 
 74 
 1570 
 1582 
 22825931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mevorach 
 C 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GW 
 
 
 Shalev 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 Reflexive and preparatory selection and suppression of salient information in the right and left posterior parietal cortex 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 21 
 1204 
 1214 
 18752407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Maccotta 
 L 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Characterizing the hemodynamic response: effects of presentation rate, sampling procedure, and the possibility of ordering brain activity based on relative timing 
 Neuroimage 
 11 
 735 
 759 
 10860799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nielson 
 KA 
 
 
 Langenecker 
 SA 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 2002 
 Differences in the functional neuroanatomy of inhibitory control across the adult life span 
 Psychol Aging 
 17 
 56 
 71 
 11931287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plude 
 DJ 
 
 
 Doussard-Roosevelt 
 JA 
 
 
 1989 
 Aging, selective attention, and feature integration 
 Psychol Aging 
 4 
 98 
 105 
 2803617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pollmann 
 S 
 
 
 Weidner 
 R 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GW 
 
 
 Olivers 
 CN 
 
 
 Muller 
 K 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Wiggins 
 CJ 
 
 
 Watson 
 DG 
 
 
 2003 
 Separating distractor rejection and target detection in posterior parietal cortex--an event-related fMRI study of visual marking 
 Neuroimage 
 18 
 310 
 323 
 12595185 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Porter 
 G 
 
 
 Wright 
 A 
 
 
 Tales 
 A 
 
 
 Gilchrist 
 ID 
 
 
 2012 
 Stimulus onsets and distraction in younger and older adults 
 Psychol Aging 
 27 
 1111 
 1119 
 22582884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pratt 
 J 
 
 
 Bellomo 
 CN 
 
 
 1999 
 Attentional capture in younger and older adults 
 Aging Neuropsychol C 
 6 
 19 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preacher 
 KJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 AF 
 
 
 2008 
 Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models 
 Behav Res Methods 
 40 
 879 
 891 
 18697684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rabbitt 
 P 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffmeister 
 F 
 
 
 Muller 
 C 
 
 
 1979 
 Some experiments and a model for changes in attentional selectivity with old age 
 Brain function in old age: Evaluation of changes and disorders 
 Springer-Verlag 
 New York 
 82 
 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 
 
 Birren 
 JE 
 
 
 Schaie 
 KW 
 
 
 1985 
 Speed of behavior and its implications for cognition 
 Handbook of the psychology of aging 
 Van Nostrand Reinhold 
 New York 
 400 
 426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 1992a 
 Mechanisms of age-cognition relations in adulthood 
 Erlbaum 
 Hillsdale: NJ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 1992b 
 What do adult age differences in the Digit Symbol Substitution Test reflect? 
 J Gerontol 
 47 
 121 
 128 
 1385513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 2011 
 Neuroanatomical substrates of age-related cognitive decline 
 Psychol Bull 
 137 
 753 
 784 
 21463028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 
 
 Deluca 
 J 
 
 
 Kalmar 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Information processing speed and aging 
 Information processing speed in clinical populations 
 Psychology Press 
 New York 
 221 
 241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmitz 
 TW 
 
 
 Cheng 
 FH 
 
 
 De Rosa 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Failing to ignore: paradoxical neural effects of perceptual load on early attentional selection in normal aging 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 14750 
 14758 
 21048134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schneider 
 BA 
 
 
 Pichora-Fuller 
 MK 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FIM 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 2000 
 Implication of perceptual deterioration for cognitive aging research 
 The handbook of aging and cognition 
 Erlbaum 
 Mahwah, NJ 
 155 
 219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 Shiffrin 
 RM 
 
 
 1977 
 Controlled and automatic human information processing: I. Detection, search, and attention 
 Psychol Rev 
 84 
 1 
 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scialfa 
 CT 
 
 
 2002 
 The role of sensory factors in cognitive aging research 
 Can J Exp Psychol 
 56 
 153 
 163 
 12271746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 2004 
 Two cortical systems for the selection of visual stimuli 
 Cognitive neuroscience of attention 
 The Guilford Press 
 New York, NY 
 114 
 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Cowan 
 MC 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Tansy 
 AP 
 
 
 d’Avossa 
 G 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Quantitative analysis of attention and detection signals during visual search 
 J Neurophysiol 
 90 
 3384 
 3397 
 12917383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steiger 
 JH 
 
 
 1980 
 Tests for comparing elements of a correlation matrix 
 Psychol Bull 
 87 
 245 
 251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Theeuwes 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 Top-down search strategies cannot override attentional capture 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 11 
 65 
 70 
 15116988 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Theeuwes 
 J 
 
 
 2010 
 Top-down and bottom-up control of visual selection 
 Acta Psychol (Amst) 
 135 
 77 
 99 
 20507828 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Theeuwes 
 J 
 
 
 Reimann 
 B 
 
 
 Mortier 
 K 
 
 
 2006 
 Visual search for featural singletons: No top-down modulation, only bottom-up priming 
 Vis Cogn 
 14 
 466 
 489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Townsend 
 JT 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 1983 
 The stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes 
 Cambridge University Press 
 Cambridge, UK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsvetanov 
 K 
 
 
 Mevorach 
 C 
 
 
 Allen 
 H 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 G 
 
 
 2013 
 Age-related differences in selection by visual saliency 
 Atten Percept Psychophys 
 75 
 1382 
 1394 
 23812959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Bhalodia 
 VM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2003 
 Mixed blocked/event-related designs separate transient and sustained activity in fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 1694 
 1708 
 12948724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vossel 
 S 
 
 
 Geng 
 JJ 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2013 
 Dorsal and ventral attention systems: Distinct neural circuits but collaborative roles 
 Neuroscientist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 1981 
 Wechsler adult intelligence scale-revised 
 Psychological Corporation 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wecker 
 NS 
 
 
 Kramer 
 JH 
 
 
 Wisniewski 
 A 
 
 
 Delis 
 DC 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 E 
 
 
 2000 
 Age effects on executive ability 
 Neuropsychology 
 14 
 409 
 414 
 10928744 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wei 
 P 
 
 
 Muller 
 HJ 
 
 
 Pollmann 
 S 
 
 
 Zhou 
 X 
 
 
 2011 
 Neural correlates of binding features within- or cross-dimensions in visual conjunction search: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 235 
 241 
 21539923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Babcock 
 KJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Overriding age differences in attentional capture with top-down processing 
 Psychol Aging 
 22 
 223 
 232 
 17563178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pierce 
 TW 
 
 
 Allen 
 PA 
 
 
 2005 
 Searching from the top down: Ageing and attentional guidance during singleton detection 
 Q J Exp Psychol A 
 58 
 72 
 97 
 15881292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whiting 
 WL 
 
 
 Sample 
 CH 
 
 
 Hagan 
 SE 
 
 
 2014 
 Top-down processing modulates older adults’ susceptibility to noise 
 Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition 
 21 
 370 
 385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolfe 
 JM 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 1998 
 Visual search 
 Attention 
 Psychology Press 
 East Sussex, UK 
 13 
 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolfe 
 JM 
 
 
 
 
 Gray 
 W 
 
 
 2007 
 Guided search 4.0: Current progress with a model of visual search 
 Integrated models of visual systems 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 99 
 119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolfe 
 JM 
 
 
 Butcher 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 C 
 
 
 Hyle 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Changing your mind: on the contributions of top-down and bottom-up guidance in visual search for feature singletons 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
 29 
 483 
 502 
 12760630 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 
 
 Pashler 
 H 
 
 
 1998 
 Control of visual attention 
 Attention 
 Psychology Press 
 East Sussex, UK 
 223 
 256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 Schwarzbach 
 J 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Carlson 
 RL 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 MA 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 2002 
 Transient neural activity in human parietal cortex during spatial attention shifts 
 Nat Neurosci 
 5 
 995 
 1002 
 12219097 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix A.  Supplementary Data 
 Supplementary data  to this article can be found online at  http://  [to be added]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Panel A = Sequence of events on each trial. The task required a present/absent response regarding the presence of a target shape singleton. In the example, the target is a vertical bar. In the constant search condition, the target was known in advance and remained constant during all trials, and was never a distractor. In the varied search condition, the target was also a shape singleton but varied unpredictably among hexagon, trapezoid, and vertical bar shapes. In the experiment, the target and nontarget items were green outline shapes against a black background. On half of the trials (both target-present and target-absent) within each search condition, there was a red color singleton distractor, illustrated in the figure as the darker outlined shapes. The color singleton was never the target. Panel B = fMRI task design. Each of five runs contained two on-task periods, one constant and one varied search condition, each containing 32 trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Regions of interest (ROIs) were selected from local maxima of event-related activation in previous neuroimaging studies of visual search. The left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and superior parietal lobule (SPL) ROIs were selected from  de Fockert (2004) . The frontal eye field (FEF) and intraparietal sulcus (IPS) ROIs were selected from  Shulman et al. (2003) . Further information is provided in  Table 2 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Voxelwise SPM analysis of the overall pattern of task-related activation, for both age groups combined. The contrast compared all eight task conditions to the implicit baseline ( p  < 0.0001, FWE corrected with an extent threshold of 1,000 voxels), using age group as a covariate of no interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 The Age Group x Distractor Presence interaction in visual search performance. Panel A = Scaled reaction time (RT). For each participant, RT was scaled by first standardizing to the mean of all correct responses (for that participant) and then adjusting for accuracy. Illustrated values are mean scaled RT values across participants (+1  SE ). Panel B = untransformed, mean RT. For comparison, the Age Group x Distractor Presence interaction is also presented in mean RT (+1  SE ), untransformed. For both the scaled and untransformed RT data, the increased slowing of responses associated with the presence of the singleton distractor, relative to its absence, was greater in magnitude for older adults than for younger adults. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Event-related activation (beta values) for frontal regions of interest, as a function of age group, search condition, target presence, and distractor presence. Panel A = Left frontal eye field; Panel B = Right frontal eye field; Panel C = Left middle frontal gyrus; Panel D = Right middle frontal gyrus. Dist = Distractor; Targ = Target; Abs = Absent; Pres = Present. Values are means (+1  SE ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Event-related activation (beta values) for parietal regions of interest, as a function of age group, search condition, target presence, and distractor presence. Panel A = Left superior parietal lobule (SPL); Panel B = Right SPL; Panel C = Left intraparietal sulcus (IPS); Panel D = Right IPS. Dist = Distractor; Targ = Target; Abs = Absent; Pres = Present. Values are means (+1  SE ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Correlation between event-related activation (beta values) and visual search performance, on distractor-present trials. Panel A = left middle frontal gyrus (MFG); Panel B = right MFG; Panel C = left frontal eye field (FEF). Scaled reaction time (RT) is standardized at the individual participant level and adjusted for accuracy (see Methods). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Alternative models of the relation among age, activation in either left or right middle frontal gyrus (MFG) or left frontal eye field (FEF) ROIs, and visual search reaction time (RT) on distractor-present trials. Panel A = Activation as a mediator of the relation between age and visual search performance. Panel B = Age as a mediator of the relation between activation and visual search performance. The solid arrows represent an indirect effect between variables through a mediator, and the dotted arrows represents a direct effect, controlling for the mediator variable. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participant Characteristics by Age Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 Younger 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 21.67 a  (2.89) 
 69.241 b  (5.62) 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 14.95 a  (1.39) 
 16.19 a  (2.64) 
 
 
 Vocabulary 
 63.09 a  (3.69) 
 64.38 a  (3.15) 
 
 
 Digit Symbol Acc 
 97.48 a  (2.22) 
 95.77 a  (2.86) 
 
 
 Digit Symbol RT (ms) 
 1241.33 a  (243.06) 
 1841.38 b  (275.73) 
 
 
 Visual Acuity (log MAR) 
 −0.11 a  (0.13) 
 0.04  b  (0.15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n  = 21 per age group. Values are means, with standard deviations in parentheses. Vocabulary = raw score (maximum of 70) on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised ( Wechsler, 1981 ); Digit Symbol Acc and Digit Symbol RT = percentage correct and reaction time (ms), respectively, on a computer test of digit-symbol coding ( Salthouse, 1992b ). Visual acuity = logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (MAR), for the Freiburg Visual Acuity Test (FRACT;  Bach, 1996 ). Log MAR of 0 corresponds to Snellen 20/20, with negative values corresponding to better resolution. Means in the same row that do not share subscripts differ by  t- test at  p  < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Regions of Interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 Location 
 BA 
 Source 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Left MFG 
 −48 
 9 
 36 
 6 
 
 de Fockert et al. (2004) 
 
 
 
 Right MFG 
 51 
 10 
 34 
 6 
 
 de Fockert et al. (2004) 
 
 
 
 Left FEF 
 −27 
 −9 
 53 
 6 
 
 Shulman et al. (2003) 
 
 
 
 Right FEF 
 29 
 −7 
 54 
 6 
 
 Shulman et al. (2003) 
 
 
 
 Left SPL 
 −24 
 −64 
 58 
 7 
 
 de Fockert et al. (2004) 
 
 
 
 Right SPL 
 30 
 −66 
 57 
 7 
 
 de Fockert et al. (2004) 
 
 
 
 Left IPS 
 −27 
 −52 
 55 
 7 
 
 Shulman et al. (2003) 
 
 
 
 Right IPS 
 31 
 −50 
 56 
 7 
 
 Shulman et al. (2003) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  MFG = middle frontal gyrus; FEF = frontal eye field; SPL = superior parietal lobule; IPS = intraparietal sulcus. Location = center of mass in x, y, z coordinates of Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard space; BA = Brodmann area. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Visual Search Performance as a Function of Age Group, Search Condition, Target Presence, and Distractor Presence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean RT 
 Accuracy 
 Scaled RT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Condition 
 Target 
 Distractor 
 Younger 
 Older 
 Younger 
 Older 
 Younger 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 Constant 
 Abs 
 Abs 
 743 (112) 
 804 (123) 
 0.960 (0.046) 
 0.943 (0.069) 
 −0.059 (0.218) 
 −0.197 (0.225) 
 
 
 Constant 
 Abs 
 Pres 
 774 (155) 
 900 (169) 
 0.960 (0.039) 
 0.905 (0.113) 
 0.059 (0.211) 
 0.166 (0.338) 
 
 
 Constant 
 Pres 
 Abs 
 729 (142) 
 829 (124) 
 0.954 (0.049) 
 0.933 (0.072) 
 −0.123 (0.243) 
 −0.165 (0.210) 
 
 
 Constant 
 Pres 
 Pres 
 752 (154) 
 906 (161) 
 0.927 (0.059) 
 0.897 (0.101) 
 −0.060 (0.250) 
 0.191 (0.356) 
 
 
 Varied 
 Abs 
 Abs 
 761 (126) 
 832 (140) 
 0.964 (0.039) 
 0.913 (0.079) 
 −0.012 (0.174) 
 −0.094 (0.258) 
 
 
 Varied 
 Abs 
 Pres 
 793 (141) 
 922 (156) 
 0.947 (0.039) 
 0.892 (0.097) 
 0.211 (0.299) 
 0.352 (0.321) 
 
 
 Varied 
 Pres 
 Abs 
 756 (139) 
 836 (127) 
 0.931 (0.060) 
 0.919 (0.045) 
 −0.020 (0.243) 
 −0.113 (0.169) 
 
 
 Varied 
 Pres 
 Pres 
 781 (134) 
 903 (166) 
 0.942 (0.045) 
 0.905 (0.067) 
 0.109 (0.230) 
 0.170 (0.246) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n  = 21 for each age group; values are means, with standard deviations in parentheses; RT = reaction time; Abs = Absent; Pres = Present; mean RT values are milliseconds, for correct responses; Accuracy = percentage of correct responses; Scaled RT = standardized reaction time, for each participant, divided by accuracy (see Methods). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Sustained Activation as a Function of Age Group, Search Condition, and Region of Interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 Younger 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constant 
 Varied 
 Constant 
 Varied 
 
 
 
 
 Left MFG 
 0.078 (0.606) 
 0.103 (0.432) 
 0.143 (0.720) 
 −0.013 (0.508) 
 
 
 Right MFG 
 −0.029 (0.364) 
 0.024 (0.488) 
 0.010 (0.341) 
 0.039 (0.456) 
 
 
 Left FEF 
 0.019 (0.287) 
 −0.027 (0.284) 
 0.091 (0.527) 
 0.036 (0.279) 
 
 
 Right FEF 
 −0.069 (0.244) 
 −0.095 (0.304) 
 0.082 (0.321) 
 0.042 (0.309) 
 
 
 Left SPL 
 −0.160 (0.767) 
 −0.089 (0.466) 
 0.004 (0.513) 
 0.111 (0.492) 
 
 
 Right SPL 
 −0.136 (0.790) 
 −0.002 (0.477) 
 0.077 (0.701) 
 0.234 (0.763) 
 
 
 Left IPS 
 −0.192 (0.630) 
 −0.152 (0.314) 
 −0.082 (0.509) 
 0.028 (0.513) 
 
 
 Right IPS 
 −0.137 (0.504) 
 −0.095 (0.353) 
 −0.090 (0.581) 
 0.023 (0.553) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n  = 21 for each age group; data are mean beta values, with standard deviations in parentheses. MFG = middle frontal gyrus; FEF = frontal eye field; SPL = superior parietal lobule; IPS = intraparietal sulcus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Correlation between Event-Related Activation and Scaled Reaction Time, as a Function of Distractor Presence and Region of Interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 Distractor
 
 
 
 
 Absent 
 Present 
 
 
 
 
 Left MFG 
 −0.158 
 0.465 * 
 
 
 Right MFG 
 −0.125 
 0.481 * 
 
 
 Left FEF 
 −0.169 
 0.421 * 
 
 
 Right FEF 
 −0.182 
 0.316 
 
 
 Left SPL 
 −0.159 
 0.393 
 
 
 Right SPL 
 −0.037 
 0.160 
 
 
 Left IPS 
 −0.183 
 0.336 
 
 
 Right IPS 
 −0.169 
 0.369 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n =  21 younger adults and 20 older adults, following removal of one outlier (see Results). Values are Pearson  r  correlations. MFG = middle frontal gyrus; FEF = frontal eye field; SPL = superior parietal lobule; IPS = intraparietal sulcus. 
 
 
 * 
 p  < .05, corrected 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Hierarchical Regression Analyses of Scaled RT on Distractor-Present Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B 
 
 
 SE B 
 
 
 F 
 
 Δ r 2 
 
 r 
 2 
 
 Attenuation 
 
 
 
 
 Model 1 
 
 
  Age Group 
 −0.06 
 0.012 
 25.10 *** 
 0.392 
 0.392 
 
 
 
 Model 2 
 
 
  Left MFG 
 0.018 
 0.016 
 1.33 
 0.216 
 0.216 
 
 
 
  Age Group 
 −0.051 
 0.014 
 12.68 ** 
 0.196 
 0.412 
 50.00 
 
 
 Model 3 
 
 
  Right MFG 
 0.020 
 0.015 
 1.86 
 0.232 
 0.232 
 
 
 
  Age Group 
 −0.049 
 0.014 
 12.35 ** 
 0.188 
 0.420 
 52.04 
 
 
 Model 4 
 
 
  Left FEF 
 0.031 
 0.023 
 1.75 
 0.177 
 0.177 
 
 
 
  Age Group 
 −0.052 
 0.013 
 15.77 *** 
 0.241 
 0.418 
 38.52 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n =  21 younger adults and 20 older adults, following removal of one outlier (see Results). For each model, the dependent variable is scaled RT (standardized RT adjusted for accuracy) on the distractor-present trials.  B  = regression model parameter estimate for predictor variable;  SE B  = standard error of parameter estimate;  F  =  F  value for parameter estimate; Δ r 2  = unique effect of predictor;  r 2  = cumulative  r 2  for current and preceding steps; Attenuation = percentage attenuation of age-related variance ( r 2  for age group alone minus  r 2  for age group following predictor) / ( r 2  for age group alone). Predictor variables are beta values for activation within regions. MFG = middle frontal gyrus; FEF = frontal eye field. 
 
 
 * 
 p < 0.05; 
 
 
 ** 
 p < 0.01; 
 
 
 *** 
 p < .0001. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 7 
 
 Mediation Analyses of Scaled RT on Distractor-Present Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 PE 
 SE 
 Lower CI 
 Upper CI 
 
 
 
 
 Event-related Activation as mediator
 
 
 
 Model 1: Age →  Left MFG  → Scaled RT 
 −0.009 
 0.009 
 −0.031 
 0.005 
 
 
 Model 2: Age →  Right MFG  → Scaled RT 
 −0.010 
 0.008 
 −0.033 
 0.001 
 
 
 Model 3: Age →  Left FEF  → Scaled RT 
 −0.008 
 0.008 
 −0.032 
 0.002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age as mediator
 
 
 
 Model 4: Left MFG →  Age  → Scaled RT 
 0.031 
 0.011 
 0.014 
 0.054 * 
 
 
 Model 5: Right MFG →  Age  → Scaled RT 
 0.028 
 0.008 
 0.016 
 0.047 * 
 
 
 Model 6: Left FEF →  Age  → Scaled RT 
 0.041 
 0.015 
 0.015 
 0.073 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. n =  21 younger adults and 20 older adults, following removal of one outlier (see Results). For each regression model, the outcome variable was scaled reaction time for distractor-present trials. Potential mediator variable listed in bold font. PE = point estimate of regression coefficient for the mediator variable, defined as the mean of the estimated regression coefficients for the indirect (mediating) effect, across 20,000 bootstrap samples; SE = bootstrap derived estimate of the standard error of the indirect effect point estimate. Lower CI / Upper CI = lower / upper bounds of 95% bias-corrected and accelerated bootstrap confidence interval for indirect effect. MFG = middle frontal gyrus; FEF = frontal eye field. 
 
 
 * 
 p  < .05 for regression coefficient of mediator variable, as defined by 95% confidence interval that does not include 0. 
 
 
 
 
