
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 25107677 
 4180107 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.07.033 
 NIHMS626261 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural correlates of inhibitory control and functional genetic variation in the dopamine D4 receptor gene 
 
 
 
 
 Mulligan 
 Richard C. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Kristjansson 
 Sean D. 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Reiersen 
 Angela M. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Parra 
 Andres S. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Anokhin 
 Andrey P. 
 
 a 
 
 
 a Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA 
 b Pason Systems Corporation, Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
 
 Corresponding Author: Richard C. Mulligan, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, Campus Box 8134, St Louis, MO 63110,  mulligar@psychiatry.wustl.edu , (314)562-3300 
 
 
 10 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 05 
 8 
 2014 
 
 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2015 
 
 62 
 306 
 318 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 
 Background 
 The dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) has been implicated in psychiatric disorders in which deficits of self-regulation are a prominent feature ( e.g ., attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorders) and in dopamine D4 receptor insensitivity within prefrontal regions of the brain. Our hypothesis was that carriers of 7-repeats in the Variable Number of Tandem Repeats (VNTR) of DRD4 (7R+) would recruit prefrontal brain regions involved in successful inhibitory control to a lesser degree than non-carriers (7R−) and demonstrate less inhibitory control as confirmed by observation of locally reduced blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) % signal change and lower accuracy while performing “No-Go” trials of a Go/No-Go task. 
 
 
 Methods 
 Participants (age=18, n=62, 33 females) were recruited from the general population of the St. Louis, Missouri region. Participants provided a blood or saliva sample for genotyping, completed drug and alcohol-related questionnaires and IQ testing, and performed a Go/No-Go task inside of a 3T fMRI scanner. 
 
 
 Results 
 Go/No-Go task performance did not significantly differ between 7R+ and 7R− groups. Contrast of brain activity during correct “No-Go” trials with a non-target letter baseline revealed significant BOLD activation in a network of brain regions previously implicated in inhibitory control including bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal, inferior frontal, middle frontal, medial prefrontal, subcortical, parietal/temporal, and occipital/cerebellar brain regions. Mean BOLD % signal change during “No-Go” trials was significantly modulated by DRD4 genotype, with 7R+ showing a lower hemodynamic response than 7R− in right anterior prefrontal cortex/inferior frontal gyrus, left premotor cortex, and right occipital/cerebellar areas. Follow-up analyses suggested that 7-repeat status accounted for approximately 5–6% of the variance in the BOLD response during “No-Go” trials. 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The DRD4 7-repeat allele may alter dopaminergic function in brain regions involved in inhibitory control. When individuals must inhibit a prepotent motor response, presence of this allele may account for 5–6% of the variance in BOLD signal in brain regions critically associated with inhibitory control, but its influence may be associated with a greater effect on brain than on behavior in 18-year-olds from the general population. 
 
 
 
 dopamine 
 DRD4 
 executive function 
 fMRI 
 inhibitory control 
 response inhibition 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Executive function refers to a collection of cognitive abilities that support goal-directed behavior. Cognitive abilities thought to contribute substantially to executive function include the ability to orient to goal-relevant stimuli (attention), hold information online while performing goal-directed actions (working memory), shift between sets of automatic behaviors (cognitive flexibility), imagine the steps necessary to reach a goal in the future (planning), and cancel a prepotent motor response on demand (inhibitory control). Dopamine is thought to play an important role in executive function. For example, individuals with Parkinson’s Disease or attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have notable dopaminergic deficiencies and impairment in executive function ( Bidwell, McClernon, & Kollins, 2011 ;  Dirnberger & Jahanshahi, 2013 ;  Kudlicka, Clare, & Hindle, 2011 ;  Swanson, Baler, & Volkow, 2011 ), supporting the view that intact executive function depends on normal dopaminergic functioning. 
 The etiology of dopamine-deficiency-associated executive impairment and related psychiatric disorders in which deficits of inhibitory control are prominent ( e.g ., ADHD, substance abuse disorders, conduct disorder, etc.) may be related to genes, environment, or to an interaction between environment and genes. For example, twin, family, and adoption studies suggest that ADHD is substantially heritable. One review considered the results of 20 studies of heritability and concluded that 76% of the variance in ADHD diagnosis may be under genetic control ( Faraone, et al., 2005 ). The most replicated genetic association with ADHD is with a Variable Number of Tandem Repeats (VNTR) of a 48 bp sequence located in exon 3 of DRD4 ( Faraone, et al., 2005 ;  Gizer, Ficks, & Waldman, 2009 ;  Li, Sham, Owen, & He, 2006 ), a gene that encodes the dopamine D4 receptor ( Ding, et al., 2002 ; E.  Wang, et al., 2004 ). The 48-bp fragment is repeated between 2 to 11 times, and the most common variants (2-repeats, 4-repeats and 7-repeats) are represented in over 90% of the general population (E. T.  Wang, Kodama, Baldi, & Moyzis, 2006 ). Meta-analyses have confirmed that individuals with 7-repeats of this bp sequence in exon 3 of DRD4 are at increased risk of developing ADHD ( Faraone, et al., 2005 ;  Gizer, et al., 2009 ;  Li, et al., 2006 ). However, this finding has not been replicated in all studies that have examined this association, and the estimated odds ratio associated with the risk for ADHD is only small to moderate (1.1–1.4) ( Faraone, et al., 2005 ;  Gizer, et al., 2009 ;  Li, et al., 2006 ). Similarly, variation at the DRD4 VNTR locus has been increasingly implicated in addiction-related phenotypes ( McGeary, 2009 ). 
 Greater density of dopamine D4 receptors has reportedly been observed in prefrontal regions of the human brain compared to other brain regions ( Meador-Woodruff, et al., 1996 ;  Mulcrone & Kerwin, 1997 ). Prefrontal brain regions have been identified as being critically involved in executive functions including inhibitory control ( Aron, Fletcher, Bullmore, Sahakian, & Robbins, 2003 ;  Drewe, 1975 ;  Iversen & Mishkin, 1970 ;  Picton, et al., 2007 ). Previous biochemical studies have suggested that the DRD4 7-repeat variant impacts the length of D4 receptor's third cytoplasmic loop. As this region is responsible for G-protein coupling and activation of intracellular responses to dopamine release through reducing intracellular cAMP levels, the DRD4 7-repeat variant has been posited to be associated with a less sensitive D4 receptor ( Asghari, et al., 1995 ;  Van Tol, et al., 1992 ). More recent work suggests that differences in dopamine function may additionally be due to the inability of the 7-repeat variant of the D4 receptor to heterodimerize with D2 receptors affecting signal transduction pathways such as the mitogen-activated protein kinases pathway ( Borroto-Escuela, et al., 2011 ;  Gonzalez, et al., 2012 ). As such, the exact mechanisms by which dopamine function may be affected in DRD4 7-repeat carriers remain unclear at this time. Nevertheless, all of these lines of evidence support the view that genetic variation in the VNTR of the DRD4 gene is associated with dysfunction of the dopamine D4 receptor within prefrontal regions of the human brain and that variation at this genetic locus could potentially account for prefrontally mediated dopamine-deficiency-associated impairment of inhibitory control and related neuropsychiatric symptoms. 
 However, studies that have investigated whether variation in the DRD4 VNTR polymorphism is associated with poorer performance on tasks that require intact executive function have produced heterogeneous findings. Neuropsychological studies of children and adults with ADHD have reported that 7-repeat carriers (7R+) may perform more poorly ( Kieling, Roman, Doyle, Hutz, & Rohde, 2006 ;  Langley, et al., 2004 ) or better ( Johnson, et al., 2008 ;  Swanson, et al., 2000 ) on tasks of executive function than non-carriers of the 7-repeat allele (7R−) whereas other studies have reported no difference between these groups ( Barkley, Smith, Fischer, & Navia, 2006 ;  Konrad, et al., 2010 ). There are several potential explanations for the heterogeneity in findings across studies including administration of very different neuropsychological tests purported to measure the same cognitive construct, failure to control for developmental changes in cognitive performance that may interact with ADHD, stimulant treatment, the presence of comorbid conditions, and varying sample sizes ( Kebir & Joober, 2011 ). 
 When the association between inhibitory control and variation in the DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat polymorphism has been examined in non-clinical samples, the results of these studies have shown mixed findings with some studies reporting that 7R+ carriers perform more poorly on measures of inhibitory control than 7R− ( Altink, et al., 2011 ;  Congdon, Lesch, & Canli, 2008 ), and other studies reporting no differences between the groups ( Barkley, et al., 2006 ;  Colzato, van den Wildenberg, Van der Does, & Hommel, 2010 ;  Cummins, et al., 2012 ;  Heinzel, et al., 2012 ;  Johnson, et al., 2008 ;  Kramer, et al., 2009 ). Administration of different neuropsychological instruments across studies, heterogeneity in age groups examined within and across studies, and differences in the way that the allele carriers were grouped may account for the mixed findings. For example, it is notable that the two studies that reported associations in this literature used the Stop Signal task, a task that provides an estimate of the average latency to inhibition of a prepotent response (stop signal reaction time, SSRT), with groups of adolescents and adults ( Altink, et al., 2011 ;  Congdon & Canli, 2008 ). By contrast, when variants of the Continuous Performance Test (CPT) or the Go/No-Go task were administered to groups of healthy 7R+ and 7R−, the two groups did not differ on accuracy during “No-Go” trials or on rate of commission errors ( Barkley, et al., 2006 ;  Colzato, et al., 2010 ;  Heinzel, et al., 2012 ;  Johnson, et al., 2008 ;  Kramer, et al., 2009 ), the traditional measures of inhibitory control associated with these tasks ( Strauss, Sherman, & Spreen, 2006 ). Almost all of the studies that administered the Go/No-Go or the CPT task either neglected to report accuracy or commission rates during “No-Go” trials or they reported commission error rates very close to floor ( i.e ., 0%) calling into question whether their version of the CPT or the Go/No-Go challenged inhibitory control within the age range studied. Although Kramer and colleagues administered both “easy” and “hard” versions of a Go/No-Go task and reported that healthy volunteers ranging in age between 20 and 30 years of age made commission errors on approximately 23% of “No-Go” trials, they reportedly found no difference in commission error rates between 7R+ and 7R− ( Kramer, et al., 2009 ). Because this study compared the behavioral performance of small groups of homozygous 7R+ (n=10) and homozygous 4-repeat carriers (n=10), it is difficult to compare the findings of this study with others in this literature as other studies collected larger samples and compared carriers of at least one 7-repeat allele with 7R−. Thus, the relationship between this DRD4 VNTR polymorphism and performance on inhibitory control tasks remains an open question for future research. 
 To our knowledge, only one study to date has used fMRI to explore a possible association between variation in the DRD4 7-repeat allele and differences in the neural correlates of executive function ( Gilsbach, et al., 2012 ). Gilsbach and colleagues administered two executive function tasks to 26 healthy children between 8 and 15 years of age (mean age=11.4), one of which challenged inhibitory control (the interference control task). On each trial of the interference control (IC) task, two symbols were simultaneously presented on the screen but one of the two symbols was presented for a longer period of time than the other one (250 to 350 milliseconds longer). On most of the trials (60–80%), the two symbols were visually identical whereas on a minority of the trials, the symbols did not match. Participants were instructed to respond on every trial, and if they judged the two symbols to be visually identical they were instructed to make a button press response on the side where one of the symbols was presented for a longer period of time, but if the two symbols did not match, they were instructed to respond on the side opposite to where one of the symbols was presented for the longer period of time. The authors reported that performance on the IC task was associated with a significant error rate (approximately 22%) in children and adolescents between the ages of 8 and 15. Although they did not observe that 7R+ (n=10) had a higher error rate on this task than 7R− (n=16), they did observe that 7R+ had lower blood oxygenation level dependent response (BOLD) during performance of the IC task than 7R−. Associations with lower BOLD response were observed in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and left middle frontal gyrus, two brain regions that have been previously associated with inhibitory control. The authors interpreted their findings to be consistent with the idea that 1) D4 receptor function in prefrontal cortex may be less sensitive in DRD4 7R+; 2) that the BOLD response in prefrontal brain regions may be sensitive to this genetically-mediated difference in D4 dopamine sensitivity; and 3) that fMRI studies may be more sensitive than neuropsychological measures in the detection of genetically-mediated alterations of prefrontal function. However, the authors did note limitations to the conclusions of their study due to the small size of their sample. Also, because this fMRI study employed a block design rather than an event-related design, it is possible that this experiment may have also been more vulnerable to confounds such as mixed event types and error-related processing. Lack of behavioral differences within the presence of differences in brain function, however, is not unusual in fMRI studies. Some authors have proposed that genes may have a greater effect on brain functions than they do on behavioral phenotypes ( Goldberg & Weinberger, 2004 ). Furthermore, several groups have argued that when group differences in task-based fMRI BOLD responses are observed within the context of group differences in task performance, interpretation of the differences in BOLD response may be falsely attributed to group differences in brain function when they may actually be epiphenomenal to task performance ( Barch, et al., 1997 ;  Church, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2010 ;  Murphy & Garavan, 2004 ;  Price & Friston, 1999 ;  Schlaggar, et al., 2002 ). 
 The goal of the current fMRI study was to use an event-related fMRI design to investigate how the presence of the DRD4 7-repeat variant affects inhibitory control and associated BOLD response in 18-year-old emerging young adults. We decided to examine a sample of 62 emerging young adults ascertained from a general population sample ( Anokhin, Golosheykin, Grant, & Heath, 2010 ) so that we could minimize potential confounds associated with aspects of ADHD diagnosis including comorbid conditions, stimulant effects, and general health issues. We ascertained a group who were 18 years of age to control for developmental changes in performance of an inhibitory control task ( Christ, White, Mandernach, & Keys, 2001 ;  Diamond, 1990 ;  Ridderinkhof & van der Molen, 1997 ), the functional neuroanatomy of inhibitory control ( Casey, et al., 1997 ;  Garavan, Hester, Murphy, Fassbender, & Kelly, 2006 ;  Nielson, Langenecker, & Garavan, 2002 ;  Rubia, Smith, Taylor, & Brammer, 2007 ), and brain metabolism that may be related DRD4 7-repeat status ( Volkow, et al., 2013 ). Examination of emerging young adults also provides a counterpoint to the study by Gilsbach and colleagues as our study can address whether the pattern of neural activation associated with 7-repeats is stable across development into young adulthood. Eighteen years of age is also just prior to the period of time wherein the greatest risk for dependence on substances of abuse occurs. Thus, we also hoped to minimize confounds associated with dependence on substances ( Lessov-Schlaggar, et al., 2012 ) while still potentially describing behavioral and neural correlates of risk for dependence on such substances. We use a Go/No-Go task, the behavioral and neural correlates of which have been previously reported in the literature ( Garavan, Ross, & Stein, 1999 ;  Simmonds, Pekar, & Mostofsky, 2008 ), and, in previous research, we have shown that our implementation of this Go/No-Go task is sensitive to continuing symptoms of ADHD in adulthood ( Mulligan, et al., 2011 ). In our fMRI analyses, we examine hemodynamic BOLD response associated with those trials in which a prepotent motor response tendency was successfully inhibited so that we might avoid confounds associated with potential differences in task performance. 
 Our hypotheses were derived from previous literature. Based on: 1) biochemical studies suggesting that possessing at least one 7-repeat allele in the VNTR of DRD4 gene is associated with insensitivity of the dopamine D4 receptor; 2) neuroanatomical evidence suggesting that D4 receptors are more likely to be expressed in prefrontal cortex; 3) behavioral genetic evidence suggesting an association between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and a disinhibited psychiatric presentation (e.g., ADHD, substance use disorders); 4) neuropsychological evidence suggesting that prefrontal brain regions are critically involved in inhibitory control; 5) neuropsychopharmacological evidence suggesting that insufficient dopamine is associated with worse performance on tasks of executive function; and 6) a previous fMRI study that observed lower BOLD response during performance of an executive function task in the prefrontal cortex of children and adolescents with 7-repeats in at least one allele of the VNTR of DRD4 compared to individuals without this genetic variant, we hypothesized that individuals with at least one allele associated with 7-repeats of the 48 bp fragment would display a lower percentage of correctly inhibited trials on our Go/No-Go task, and that these individuals would show lower BOLD response during correct “No-Go” trials than non-carriers within areas of prefrontal cortex that have been previously implicated in inhibitory control ( e.g ., the right inferior frontal gyrus). 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Participants were originally identified through the Missouri Family Registry and recruited from the general population to participate in a prospective, longitudinal study of adolescent twins ( Anokhin, et al., 2010 ). Those who participated in the current study protocol were a subset (n=62, age at assessment: M= 18.01 years, S.D. = 0.25; 47.7% females) of the originally ascertained group (original  n  = 747; age at first assessment: M= 12.52 years, S.D. = 0.20; 47.8% females). As part of the original longitudinal study protocol, they were administered standardized assessments including the second edition of the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (K-BIT 2), a screening measure of IQ ( Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004 ), the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11), a self-report measure of trait impulsiveness ( Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995 ), and a semi-structured interview including detailed questions about substance use. Participants were excluded from the current and longitudinal study protocol if they reported a history of serious head trauma or health conditions that would make a laboratory visit or performance of the experimental task infeasible ( e.g . severe visual impairment or mental retardation). Those who were under the influence of alcohol or illicit substances were also excluded based on Breathalyzer and urine drug tests. Twin zygosity was assessed through three methods: 1) a standard interview administered to twins’ parents; 2) research assistants’ ratings of the twins’ physical similarity; and 3) a set of 156 DNA markers genotyped in 96% of the participants. Our sample included 25 monozygotic (MZ) and 37 dizygotic (DZ) twins. Eight of the individuals were single twins (twins whose co-twin was unwilling or unable to participate). Additional characteristics of the sample can be found in  Table 1 . This table shows that the 7R+ and 7R− did not differ with regard to any behavioral or self-report measure including IQ or sex distribution. The Human Research Protection Office at the Washington University School of Medicine approved the study. A written informed consent was obtained from all the participants. Participants were compensated for participation in the study. 
 
 
 2.2 Collection of DNA samples and genotyping of DRD4 VNTR 
 DNA was collected from either blood or buccal mucosa samples collected from the participants using standard genomic DNA extraction techniques. Genomic DNA was prepared for multiple displacement amplification (MDA) using a kit commercially available from Qiagen, Inc. (Valencia, CA) following manufacturers instructions. The number of 48-bp repeats in the VNTR of exon 3 of DRD4 was genotyped following previously described procedures ( LaHoste, et al., 1996 ). Briefly, primers D4–42 and D4–3 were used to amplify the 48-bp repeat in exon 3 of the DRD4 gene following PCR guidelines ( Lichter, et al., 1993 ). PCR products were visualized by gel electrophoresis and compared to positive controls for the variant alleles. The experimenters who collected the behavioral and fMRI data were blinded to the results of genotyping at the time of data collection. 
 
 
 2.3 Inhibitory control task, Go/No-Go 
 Our version of the Go/No-Go task followed a format that has been described previously ( Garavan, et al., 1999 ;  Mulligan, et al., 2011 ). During three practice runs performed outside of the scanner, participants saw a series of lower case letters presented on a computer screen replacing one another at a rate of 500 ms/letter. In the first two practice runs (2 runs of 250 letters each, 75 targets per run), participants were instructed to make a button press response as quickly and as accurately as possible whenever certain target letters (“x” or “y”) were presented within a series of distracter letters. In the third run, a switch in the rules was made stipulating that participants should only respond to the letters “x” or “y” if the two target letters alternated in the presented series ( Figure 1 ). Following the three practice runs, participants completed six runs of this task inside of the scanner while attempting to conform to the new rule (250 letters per run, 1500 total letters). A 15.5 second rest period was presented at the beginning and end of each run. During these rest periods, participants viewed a fixation cross that was of the same size, font, and coloring as the presented letters (black with white background). Response to targets constituted the “Go” condition of this task whereas the presentation of “lure” letters, to which a prepotent response has been practiced but becomes inappropriate, constituted the “No-Go” condition. When blocks of letters were presented during the six scanning runs and the last practice run, “No-Go” letters were presented in a jittered pseudorandom sequence approximately every ~ 20 seconds and targets approximately every 3.5 seconds. There were a total of 214 “Go” trials and 38 “No-Go” trials across the six runs and an average of 36 “Go” letters and 7 “No-Go” letters per run. Response prepotency was maintained by including five times more valid “Go” letters than “No-Go” letters and through prior instructions that emphasized rapid response. Participants were encouraged to respond while the stimulus was still on screen, but responses within 1000 milliseconds of stimulus onset were considered valid responses. 
 
 
 2.4 Magnetic resonance imaging and processing 
 Whole-brain imaging was performed on a Siemens TIM TRIO 3 Tesla scanner (Erlangen, Germany) at the Center for Clinical Imaging Research at Washington University in St. Louis. For anatomical reference, high resolution, 3D MP-RAGE anatomic images were collected [TE = 3.16 ms; TR = 2400 ms, 8 flip angle, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, FOV = 25.6 cm, matrix size = 256 2 ] prior to the collection of the BOLD echoplanar data. 
 To provide whole-brain coverage, BOLD echoplanar images [TE = 27 ms; TR = 2000 ms; 77 flip angle; slice thickness = 4.0 mm; FOV = 25.6 cm; matrix size = 64 2; ] were acquired with 35 slices. For each of the six two-minute and 36 second imaging runs, this procedure yielded 78 whole-brain volumes with a spatial resolution of 4 mm 3  per voxel. 
 Image processing and analyses were performed using Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) software ( Cox, 1996 ). Prior to individual analyses, images were spatially registered in 3D space to the third image in the time series using an iterative linear least squares algorithm that achieved least-squares alignment of three translational and three rotational parameters, and activation outside of the brain was removed through edge detection algorithms. 
 
 
 2.5 fMRI analysis 
 
 2.5.1 Individual models of functional activity 
 The time-series data were then modeled using onset times associated with correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials. This was performed within the context of a general linear model by convolving onset times associated with each trial type with the temporal derivative of a γ-variate function representing the event-related hemodynamic BOLD response (M. S.  Cohen, 1997 ). This general linear model yielded a separate estimate of the magnitude of the hemodynamic response associated with correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials within every voxel in the brain with no bias in estimation of the magnitude of hemodynamic response associated with each trial type. Trends in the time series and estimates of motion from each dimension of space were included in the individual model as covariates of no interest. Baseline hemodynamic activity during distracter letters was also allowed to vary freely in the model. Voxelwise calculation of % signal change was achieved by dividing the beta weight associated with a particular trial type of interest  (i.e ., “No-Go” trials) by an estimate of the baseline provided by the general linear model. 
 
 
 2.5.2 Group activation maps associated with correct “No-Go” trials 
 Percent signal change data for all participants were then transformed into stereotaxic space ( Talaraich & Tourneaux, 1988 ) and spatially averaged over a 6 mm radius to allow direct voxel-by-voxel statistical comparisons and to compensate for individual differences in brain anatomy. To identify a network of brain regions associated with inhibitory control, estimates of % signal change associated with correct “No-Go” trials were then contrasted against an implicit baseline (non-target letters) using a one-sample, two-tailed t-test comparison ( Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). An uncorrected voxelwise threshold of α = 1.0 × 10 −5  was applied to this contrast, and voxels not comprising a cluster of contiguous voxels with a minimum volume of 200 µl were removed. This approach is based on theory suggesting that larger clusters of voxels have less likelihood of being false positive errors ( Forman, et al., 1995 ). A Monte Carlo simulation procedure implemented in AFNI (3dClustSim) allows one to estimate the probability of Type I error due to multiple comparisons on a cluster by cluster basis based on each cluster’s size, the level of smoothness associated with the BOLD data, and 1,000 random image permutation simulations. Application of this procedure suggested that our approach was associated with < 0.1% chance of any of the clusters identified in our analyses as being false positive errors. 
 
 
 2.5.3 fROI analysis 
 Following voxel-wise analyses, a functional region of interest (fROI) analysis was conducted ( Poldrack, 2007 ). An fROI analysis aims to identify task-associated brain regions prior to testing a study’s hypotheses ( Celone, et al., 2006 ;  Mitsis, Iannetti, Smart, Tracey, & Wise, 2008 ;  Mulligan, et al., 2011 ;  Roberts, Nestor, & Garavan, 2009 ). Benefits include 1) improved statistical power over voxel-wise approaches; 2) reduced potential for Type I error due to the overall number of comparisons made; and 3) hypothesis testing within meaningfully defined regions of interest. Any clusters of voxels showing significant % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials in the voxelwise analyses (as defined by the methods described above in section 2.5.2) were identified as fROIs. Although some authors have argued that the BOLD response observed during “No-Go” trials should be contrasted with the BOLD response observed during “Go” trials rather than with baseline, the latter approach may be more effective in identifying areas of the brain critically involved in inhibitory control when this version of Go/No-Go task is administered ( Mulligan, et al., 2011 ;  Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). In our own study ( Mulligan, et al., 2011 ), this version of the Go/No-Go task was administered to groups of longitudinally-tracked adults with and without continuing symptoms of ADHD. When the BOLD response associated with correct “No-Go” trials was contrasted against the BOLD response associated with correct “Go” trials, significantly greater hemodynamic response during “No-Go” trials was only evident in the parietal lobes whereas contrast of correct “No-Go” trials with implicit baseline (non-target letters) revealed significant activation in prefrontal regions previously identified as being critically related to inhibitory control ( e.g ., pre-supplementary motor area and the right IFG). Follow-up conjunction and fROI analyses revealed that there was only one region of the brain that was commonly recruited during correct performance of Go and “No-Go” trials, the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), and that adults with continuing symptoms of ADHD recruited this brain region to a lesser degree than control participants during “No-Go” trials but not during “Go” trials. This raised the possibility that the pre-SMA may have been overlooked as a neural correlate of inhibitory control in previous studies that employed the Go/No-Go task wherein the neural correlates of Go and “No-Go” trials were directly contrasted against one another. Consistent with this interpretation, a meta-analysis of studies that used versions of the Go/No-Go task similar to our own also found significant activation in the pre-SMA when the neural correlates of correct “No-Go” trials were contrasted against baseline ( Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). Following this line of research, fROIs for the current study were defined based on the contrast of % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials with implicit baseline (non-target letters). The degree of % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials was averaged for each participant within the spatial extent of each of the fROIs so that these metrics could be used as dependent variables in statistical analyses. Follow-up analyses included contrasts between 7R+ and 7R− as well as correlational analyses. Correlation analyses included correlation of % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials with key measures such as task performance, as measured by the percentage of correctly inhibited “No-Go” trials, and trait impulsivity, as measured by quantitative scores on the BIS-11. 
 
 
 2.5.4 Common areas of recruitment: “Go” and “No-Go” trials 
 To reveal brain regions that may have made contributions to both “Go” and “No-Go” trials and to determine if differences in hemodynamic change observed during “No-Go” trials may have been accounted for by differences that may have been present during “Go” trials, a conjunction analysis ( i.e ., “AND” mask) was also performed following the Minimum Statistic compared to the Conjunction Null method (MS/CN)( Nichols, Brett, Andersson, Wager, & Poline, 2005 ). This followed a series of steps. First, BOLD % signal change associated with correct “Go” and “No-Go” trials were each contrasted separately against an implicit task baseline ( i.e ., non-target letters) through use of voxelwise one-sample, two-tailed t-test comparisons at uncorrected α = 1.0 × 10 −5  and a minimum cluster volume of 200 µl. Second, maps associated with each trial type were then converted to binary code (1=activated, 0=not activated) and added to one another in order to identify brain regions that were common to both trial types. To perform comparisons that examined potential group differences (7R+ vs. 7R−) in hemodynamic response within each fROI that was identified by this “AND” mask, an averaged BOLD % signal change response for correctly performed “Go” trials was calculated for all voxels within each fROI identified by the conjunction analyses and then compared between groups (7R+ vs. 7R−) using the follow-up contrast procedures described for “No-Go” trials. 
 
 
 
 2.6 Genetic association analyses 
 As noted above, we used a sample of 25 MZ and 37 DZ twins. Consequently, observations (% signal change within each fROI) were assumed non-independent due to the nesting of individuals  (i.e ., each twin from a pair) within families. Our data was comprised of 54 individuals who were members of 27 family units, and eight twins whose co-twin was unable to participate (single twins). Typically, when observations are non-independent, statistical tests computed using the general linear model are positively biased leading to increased probability of Type I errors (J. R.  Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003 ). 
 To account for potential non-independence of brain activation between twins, we used a simple two-level multilevel model implemented in HLM7 (S.W.  Raudenbush, Bryk, & Congdon, 2011 ). Raudenbush and Bryk reported that restricted maximum likelihood (REML) has better small sample performance (when estimating variance components) compared to full maximum likelihood (S. W.  Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002 ). Consequently, we used REML to estimate model parameters. The two-level, fixed intercept, random slopes regression model and its parameters are defined below. 
 y ij  = β0 j  + β1 j  * (Carrier Status ij ) + ε ij                     Level 1 β0 j  = γ00                     Level 2 β1 j  = γ10 + r1 j   Where,                     Level 1 y ij was the % signal change in BOLD in a region for individual  i  in family  j . β0 j was the Y-intercept for family unit  j . β1 j was the linear association ( i.e. , slope) of BOLD % signal change with 7-repeat allele carrier status for family unit  j . Carrier Status ij was a dummy variable that distinguished whether individual  i  in family unit  j was a 7-repeat carrier (coded 1) or non-carrier (coded 0). ε ij was the error for individual  i  in family unit  j . Our model assumed that the variance of the errors, σ ε 2 , (within-family error variance; level 1 error variance) was the same for all of the family units.                     Level 2 γ00 was the grand mean (across sample) Y-intercept. γ10 was the grand mean slope (association of the 7-repeat allele with BOLD % signal change). This was our parameter of interest. r j was the residual slope for family unit  j . Each residual slope was the difference between the slope for family unit  j  and the grand mean slope (r j  = γ10 - β1 j ). Variance among family unit slopes, Var(r j ), was assumed to be uncorrelated with level 1 error variance (σ ε 2 ). 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Genotyping 
 The sample sizes associated with the two experimental groups were as follows: 7R+ (n = 23) and 7R− (n = 39). There was an approximately equal distribution of the 7-repeat allele across gender in our sample (7R+: 11 males, 12 females; and 7R−: 18 males, 21 females). The 7R+ and 7R− groups were not different with respect to the proportion of self-reported Caucasians to African-Americans ( Table 1 ). The allele frequency of the 7-repeat allele in the sample was 0.209. This estimate is consistent with estimates of the worldwide prevalence of 7-repeat allele ( Chang, Kidd, Livak, Pakstis, & Kidd, 1996 ;  Ding, et al., 2002 ) and with estimates of its prevalence in individuals of mixed European descent ( Chang, et al., 1996 ;  Kidd, Pakstis, & Yun, 2014 ) provided by studies with larger sample sizes. The genotype frequencies were as follows: no 7-repeat alleles=0.629 (n=39), one 7-repeat allele=0.323 (n=20), 7-repeat homozygotes=0.048 (n=3). Genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). Because our sample contained related individuals, one representative from each family was randomly selected to test deviation from HWE. To avoid biases related to small sample size and the presence of multiple rare alleles, genotype frequencies were tested using the exact test with likelihood ratio as the test statistic ( Engels, 2009 ). This was performed using ExactoHW ( http://www.genetics.org/cgi/content/full/genetics.109.108977/DC1 ). A published genotype classification scheme for the DRD4 exon 3 VNTR was employed ( Das, Tan, & Easteal, 2010 ). Results suggested the probability of deviation from HWE in a sample with our observed allele frequencies was p=0.51. 
 
 
 3.2  Behavioral measures 
 The 7R+ and 7R− did not differ with regard to % accuracy of correct responses during “Go” trials (the number of responses where the participant pressed the button within 1000 milliseconds of onset of a “Go” trial divided by the total number of “Go” trials presented), % accuracy of responses withheld during “No-Go” trials (the number of events where no response was recorded within 1000 milliseconds of presentation of a “No-Go” trial divided by the total number of “No-Go” trials presented), or mean reaction time to “Go” trials ( Table 1 ). There was no significant difference between 7R+ and 7R− with regard to the mean number of responses successfully withheld during “No-Go” trials [mean (standard deviation): 7R+ = 31.3 (4.8), 7R− = 29.5 (5.4)] or with regard to the minimum (7R+ = 17, 7R− = 16) or maximum (7R+ = 38, 7R− = 38) number of responses successfully withheld during “No-Go” trials. Furthermore, the two groups did not differ with regard to K-BIT 2 Standard Score estimates of Verbal or Non-Verbal IQ ( Table 1 ). 
 
 
 3.3  Self-report measures 
 The 7R+ did not differ from 7R− with regard to the proportion of individuals who reported having smoked greater than 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, the proportion of individuals who reported ever having smoked marijuana, their score on BIS-11, or the self-reported number of drinks per year ( Table 1 ). 
 
 
 3.4  fMRI BOLD activation patterns associated with correct “No-Go” trials 
 Contrast of % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials with implicit baseline (non-target letters) revealed a bilateral pattern of brain activity in 14 distinct brain regions including anterior prefrontal (BA 10), inferior frontal (BA 47), medial prefrontal (pre-SMA), middle frontal (BA 6/8), parietal/temporal, striatal (caudate and putamen), and occipital/cerebellar brain regions in addition to a distinct region in right cerebellum ( Table 2 ,  Figure 2 ). 
 
 
 3.5 Associations between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and BOLD % signal change 
 Associations between 7-repeat status and BOLD % signal change in each of the 14 fROIs during correct “No-Go” trials are shown in  Table 2 . Also shown are the results of statistical tests. Results suggest that during “No-Go” trials, % signal change in right IFG extending into anterior frontal cortex (BA 47/10), left middle frontal gyrus (BA 8), right occipital gyrus extending into the cerebellum, and a distinct region in the right cerebellum were significantly associated with 7-repeat carrier status ( Figure 3 ). Trends for association were also observed between right IFG (pars triangularis), right middle frontal gyrus, bilateral parietal lobe extending into the temporal lobe, and left occipital gyrus extending into the cerebellum. All of the coefficients (γ 10 ) were negative indicating that compared to 7R−, 7R+ showed reduced BOLD % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials. 
 
 3.5.1 Genetic association robustness analyses 
 We conducted additional analyses to determine whether or not the associations of right middle occipital gyrus, right IFG extending into anterior frontal cortex (BA 47/10), left middle frontal gyrus (BA 8), and the right cerebellum were robust to potential confounding variables: sex, race, and zygosity status. To do so, we entered each as a covariate into the level-one model (such that in separate analyses, each level one-model comprised two predictor variables (carrier status; treated as a random effect) and sex, zygosity or race (treated as fixed effects, due to too few degrees of freedom available to compute level-one error variance with the random effect included). Only zygosity was associated with BOLD % signal change in the right cerebellum (but not with the other regions), t(adjusted df = 25) = −2.76, p < .05. However, zygosity status accounted for variance in right cerebellum that was mostly non-overlapping with variance that was accounted for by carrier status; the association of carrier status with BOLD % signal change remained statistically significant, t(adjusted df = 34) = −2.23, p < .05, when zygosity was included in the model. The covariate-adjusted association of carrier status with right cerebellum was −0.0786. For the other three regions, none of the covariates were associated with BOLD % signal change, and our results remained unchanged. 
 
 
 3.5.2 % variance explained by carrier status 
 Following Snidjers & Bosker ( Snijders & Bosker, 1999 ), we report variance explained by carrier status. To do so, we used the formula:  1 − ( S e 2 + Var ( rj ) ) / ( S e 2 + Var ( rj ) )  where the numerator comprised the variance components defined above that included carrier status in the model (conditional model), and the denominator comprised the same variance components with carrier status not in the model (unconditional model). 7-repeat carrier status significantly accounted for 6.02% of the variance in BOLD % signal change in right middle occipital gyrus, 5.55% of the variance in right IFG extending into anterior frontal cortex (BA 47/10), 4.84% of the variance in left middle frontal gyrus (BA 8), and 5.66% of the variance in right cerebellum. 
 
 
 3.5.3 Correlations between BOLD % signal change during “No-Go” trials and behavior 
 Correlational analyses did not suggest that there were significant associations between BOLD % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials and accuracy of performance on “No-Go” trials. Furthermore, significant associations were not observed between BOLD % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials and trait impulsiveness as measured by BIS-11 score. 
 
 
 
 3.6 % Common activation patterns observed during “Go” and “No-Go” trials and follow-up contrasts of BOLD % signal change (7R+ vs. 7R−) in commonly recruited brain regions 
 The results of the conjunction analysis using the MS/CN method showed that there were four regions in which participants demonstrated common activation during the correct performance of “Go” and “No-Go” trials: right caudate/putamen (x=21, y=−4, z=18, 1,888 µl), left caudate (x=−20, y=−9, z=21, 1,080 µl), left pre-SMA/SMA (x=−1, y=−1, z=57, 384 µl), and the left cerebellum (x=−5, y=−70, z=−18; 256 µl). Follow-up analyses of average BOLD % signal change within these brain regions suggested that the 7R+ group did not demonstrate significantly different BOLD % signal change than the 7R− group during correct “Go” trials within any brain region that was commonly recruited during correct performance of “Go” and “No-Go” trials. As none of these brain regions were the regions in which a difference in BOLD % signal change was observed between 7R+ and 7R− during “No-Go” trials ( Table 2 ,  Figures 2  &  3 ) and no differences were observed between 7R+ and 7R− during “Go” trials within any of these brain regions, this suggests that differences in BOLD % signal change observed between 7R+ and 7R− during “No-Go” trials could not be attributed to differences in brain response observed during “Go” trials. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 The goal of the present study was to evaluate the effect of a functional polymorphism in the dopamine D4 receptor gene on regional changes in hemodynamic activity occurring during inhibition of a prepotent motor response. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that 18-year-old 7R+ carriers might demonstrate lower fMRI BOLD % signal change in prefrontal cortex and worse performance than 7R− during performance of “No-Go” trials of a Go/No-Go task. Such a finding would be consistent with the hypothesis that possessing a 7-repeat allele might place individuals at greater risk for the development of associated psychiatric conditions involving a disinhibited presentation such as continuing symptoms of ADHD and development of substance abuse disorders. The results of the current study suggested that 7R+ did not demonstrate worse performance than 7R− on the Go/No-Go task even though both groups responded inappropriately on approximately 20% of “No-Go” trials. However, our group of 7R+ demonstrated significantly lower BOLD % signal change than 7R− in four out of 14 brain regions that were recruited during successful inhibition of a prepotent motor response including two brain regions that were located in the prefrontal cortex: the right anterior prefrontal cortex extending into the right IFG and an area in left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6). Furthermore, significant associations between the presence of a 7-repeat allele and lower BOLD % signal change were also observed in other brain regions that were activated during correct inhibition of a motor response including a right occipital lobe region that extended into the cerebellum and a distinct area in right cerebellum. Trends for an association between 7-repeat status and lower BOLD % signal change were also observed in another right IFG region (pars triangularis), a right middle frontal gyrus region (BA 6/8), bilateral parietal areas that extended into the temporal lobes, and in a left occipital region that extended into the cerebellum. Differences in event-related hemodynamic activity between 7R+ and 7R−during “No-Go” trials could not be accounted for by differences in age, sex, zygosity, IQ, trait impulsivity as measured by the BIS-11, the number of alcoholic drinks reportedly consumed per year, the ratio of smokers to non-smokers in the sample, the ratio of those who ever tried to those who never tried marijuana in the sample, or to differences in the hemodynamic response during “Go” trials. 
 Insufficient sample size could be a possible explanation for the lack of behavioral differences in performance of the Go/No-Go task, but zero out of five previous studies that used the CPT or Go/No-Go tasks in samples of healthy participants found an association between DRD4 7-repeat status and performance on “No-Go” trials even though participants in these studies ranged between 5 and 55 years of age and the sample sizes in these studies ranged between 10 and >100 participants in each group ( Barkley, et al., 2006 ;  Colzato, et al., 2010 ;  Heinzel, et al., 2012 ;  Johnson, et al., 2008 ;  Kramer, et al., 2009 ). Cummins and colleagues also observed no association between DRD4 7-repeat status and SSRT when the Stop Signal task was administered to 405 undergraduate participants ( Cummins, et al., 2012 ). However, this study did not examine whether DRD4 7-repeat status was associated with differences in event-related fMRI BOLD signal. Such associations were only examined within a subsample of participants who had participated in the fMRI protocol (n=50) when genetic variants first demonstrated an association with performance on the Stop Signal task (SSRT) within the entire sample (n=405). Although Gilsbach and colleagues also observed that 7R+ and 7R− groups between the ages of 8 and 15 years of age performed similarly on the IC task, this null behavioral finding was observed within the context of observed differences in recruitment of prefrontal brain regions during fMRI task performance. One possible explanation for these results would follow from neuropsychological theory ( Lezak, Howiesen, Bigler, & Tranel, 2012 ) suggesting that performance on “No-Go” trials of Go/No-Go tasks would only be impacted if certain prefrontal regions thought to be critically involved in inhibitory control were substantially affected by DRD4 7-repeat status. Support for this theory would require evaluation of the degree to which certain brain regions that are thought to be critically involved in inhibitory control are affected by the presence of a DRD4 7-repeat allele during inhibition of a prepotent motor response. We address this hypothesis within the context of reviewing our fMRI findings. 
 Our sample of 18-year-old twins demonstrated a bilateral pattern of brain activation while correctly inhibiting a motor response. Significant bilateral activation was observed in anterior prefrontal (BA 10), inferior frontal (45/47), middle frontal (BA 6/8), striatal (caudate/putamen), parietal/temporal, and occipital/cerebellar brain regions. Numerous studies that have investigated the neural correlates of inhibitory control have reportedly found significant brain activation in inferior frontal, middle frontal, striatal, and parietal brain regions when Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go tasks are administered ( Aron, 2010 ;  Chambers, Garavan, & Bellgrove, 2009 ;  Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, a meta-analysis showed that activation can be observed in temporal, occipital, and cerebellar brain regions when a version of the Go/No-Go task similar to our own is administered to groups of healthy adults and the neural correlates of “No-Go” trials are contrasted with implicit baseline ( Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). Our version of the Go/No-Go task required use of working memory (remembering the character of the previous target) to successfully complete the task. As such, some studies have purported that the large activation patterns that were observed in dorsolateral prefrontal and parietal areas could be related to the event-related demands on working memory that were associated with administration of our version of the Go/No-Go task ( Mostofsky, et al., 2003 ;  Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). However, other studies have suggested that working memory and inhibitory control may depend on common neural substrates that include the dorsolateral prefrontal and parietal brain regions identified ( Hester, Murphy, & Garavan, 2004 ), and that dependence on common brain regions may account for behavioral decrement in inhibitory control performance under increased working memory demand ( Hester & Garavan, 2005 ). As such, the brain regions that were identified as activated during correct “No-Go” trials in our study may have described areas involved in inhibitory control in addition to those involved in working memory or they may describe the neural correlates of a cognitive control system that is responsible for multiple executive functions while that system is engaged in inhibitory control. 
 In the present study, associations between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and reduced BOLD % signal change during “No-Go” trials were observed in the right anterior prefrontal cortex/IFG (BA 10/BA 47), middle frontal gyrus (BA 6/8), the occipital lobe/cerebellum (BA 17, 18), and a distinct region in the cerebellum whereas no such associations were observed in striatal regions. Due to lack of a specific ligand, there is still controversy with regard to the regional distribution of D4 receptors in the human brain ( McGeary, 2009 ). However, several studies that have used indirect methods have reported that the density of D4 receptors is highest in prefrontal cortex relative to other brain regions. For example, one study used RT-PCR on human brain tissue (post-mortem) to characterize D4 receptor expression levels ( Mulcrone & Kerwin, 1997 ). Results suggested relatively increased expression levels in areas of frontal lobe, including middle frontal gyrus and cingulate gyrus, the temporal lobe, the hippocampus, the amygdala, the occipital lobe, and cerebellum whereas relatively reduced levels of expression were observed in substantia nigra, caudate, globus pallidus, and the parietal lobe. The results of the present study are highly consistent with this previous report. 
 When our sample of 18-year-old twins successfully inhibited a prepotent motor response tendency, they demonstrated a pattern of significant brain activity in regions of prefrontal cortex considered critical for inhibitory control including the right IFG and the pre-SMA. Lesion, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), single cell recording, and functional neuroimaging studies suggest that intact function of the right IFG and pre-SMA is critical for intact inhibitory control ( Aron, 2010 ;  Chambers, et al., 2009 ). The results of the present study further revealed that when a prepotent response tendency is successfully inhibited, lower BOLD % signal change may be observed in DRD4 VNTR 7R+ in an area of prefrontal cortex extending from the right IFG (pars orbitalis, BA 47) into the anterior prefrontal cortex (BA 10) (region 1,  Table 2 ,  Figure 2 ). Anterior prefrontal cortex (BA 10) is reliably activated during successful “No-Go” trials when this version of Go/No-Go task is administered ( Garavan, et al., 2006 ;  Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). The results of one study indicated that the extent to which the anterior prefrontal cortex is recruited during inhibitory control may be modulated by the degree to which participants are prepared to inhibit a prepotent response tendency ( Kelly, et al., 2004 ), potentially implicating this brain region in proactive processes related to inhibitory control ( Aron, 2010 ). Recent resting state functional connectivity studies also suggest that the anterior prefrontal cortex, IFG, and medial prefrontal cortex may form a circuit related to task control ( Power & Petersen, 2013 ). Based on this previous literature, we expected that if the right IFG were associated with DRD4 VNTR status it would also be associated with poorer performance on “No-Go” trials of our Go/No-Go task. Contrary to our expectations, we observed that even though DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status was associated with lower BOLD % signal change in the right IFG/anterior prefrontal cortex (BA 47/10), lower hemodynamic response in this brain region was not associated with poorer “No-Go” trial performance. However, follow-up analyses also revealed that only 5.6% of the variance in BOLD % signal change observed during correct “No-Go” trials could be accounted for by DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status in this brain region. Thus, the degree to which the right IFG was affected by DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status may not have been sufficient to produce gross deficits in inhibitory control. This interpretation would be consistent with the results of the study conducted by Gilsbach and colleagues who in their study of healthy children and adolescents also found lower task-related BOLD response in IFG to be associated with DRD4 7-repeat status but also found no evidence for an association between DRD4 7-repeat status and performance on the IC task ( Gilsbach, et al., 2012 ). These findings would seemingly support the view that the effect of DRD4 7-repeat status on inhibitory control and its neural correlates may be subtle. 
 Although our group of adolescents exhibited significant BOLD % signal change in the pre-SMA/SMA (region 7,  Table 2 ,  Figure 2 ; BA 6) during successful inhibition of a motor response, change in BOLD signal was not associated with DRD4 7-repeat status in this brain region. In our previous study that examined the neural correlates of inhibitory control in a sample of longitudinally-tracked adults showing continuing symptoms of ADHD, we observed that our ADHD group recruited the pre-SMA to a lesser degree than our age-, education-, and IQ-matched control group while successfully performing “No-Go” trials on this version of the Go/No-Go task ( Mulligan, et al., 2011 ). Taken within the context of the results of this previous study, our findings suggest that less recruitment of the pre-SMA during successful inhibitory control may be more related to continuing symptoms of ADHD than it may be to DRD4 7-repeat status  per se . 
 In our sample of 18-year-old participants, DRD4 VNTR 7R+ demonstrated lower BOLD % signal change than 7R− in the left middle frontal gyrus (BA 6) while they correctly inhibited a prepotent motor response. Gilsbach and colleagues also observed lower BOLD response in the left premotor cortex of children and adolescents who possessed at least one 7-repeat allele while they performed an executive function task (IC task). Significant increases in fMRI BOLD response have been repeatedly observed in the left premotor cortex (middle frontal gyrus, BA 6) when participants successfully inhibit a prepotent motor response tendency on “No-Go” trials of Go/No-Go and Stop-Signal tasks. Recent models of inhibitory control suggest that the premotor cortex may either be involved in motor planning during inhibition of a motor response or it may be involved in signaling cancellation of a motor response through an indirect pathway involving subcortical brain regions ( Aron, 2010 ;  Chambers, et al., 2009 ). One study investigated the role the premotor cortex may play in inhibition of a prepotent motor response tendency within the context of a transcranial magnetic stimulation study ( Chambers, et al., 2007 ). Administering repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and a Stop Signal Task to a group of healthy adults, the investigators found that stimulation of the left dorsal premotor cortex during performance of “No-Go” trials was not associated with worsening of Go-related reaction time or with longer SSRT, suggesting that the left premotor cortex may not be critically related to execution of a motor response or to inhibitory control. Garavan has remarked that TMS studies might be useful for identifying brain regions necessary but not sufficient for inhibitory control whereas functional neuroimaging studies might identify brain regions sufficient but not necessary for inhibitory control ( Garavan, et al., 2006 ). However, the brain region stimulated in the aforementioned study was ~20 mm superior to the brain region activated in the present study. Furthermore, in the present study, DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status only accounted for 4.8% of the variance in “No-Go” related BOLD % signal change in left premotor cortex. Thus, lower BOLD % signal change in the left premotor cortex of DRD4 VNTR 7R+ may not have been associated with worse performance during “No-Go” trials on our version of the Go/No-Go task because: 1) it may not be critically associated with response inhibition; 2) it may influence inhibitory control indirectly; 3) or it may not affect DRD4 VNTR status to the degree that it impairs performance on “No-Go” trials on this version of the Go/No-Go task. 
 While correctly inhibiting a prepotent motor response, our sample of 18-year-old DRD4 7R+ demonstrated lower BOLD % signal change than 7R− in a right occipital brain region that extended into the right cerebellum. Significant activation in the occipital lobe has been consistently observed when Go/No-Go tasks similar to the one used in the present study are administered to samples of healthy adults ( Simmonds, et al., 2008 ). Recruitment of occipital lobe during “No-Go” trials was likely related to identification of a task-relevant stimulus. Although our group of DRD4 VNTR 7R+ demonstrated significantly lower BOLD % signal change than 7R−, DRD4 7-repeat status only accounted for 6.02% of the inhibition-related BOLD response, consistent with the observation that 7R+ and 7R− did not differ in “No-Go” trial accuracy. However, because the functional ROI that was examined included areas of the cerebellum as well as the occipital lobe, an association that was located in the cerebellum may have driven differences in the task-related BOLD response observed within this fROI. 
 Our sample of 18-year-old DRD4 7R+ also demonstrated lower BOLD % signal change than 7R− in a brain region located exclusively within the right cerebellum while correctly inhibiting a prepotent motor response tendency. Gilsbach and colleagues also observed an association between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and lower BOLD response in the cerebellum when their sample of children and adolescents performed an fMRI task requiring the estimation and comparison of time epochs ( Gilsbach, et al., 2012 ). Consistent with the results of the present study, those investigators observed that 7R+ demonstrated less BOLD response in the cerebellum than 7R− during performance of this task despite equivalent task performance. A meta-analysis of studies using versions of the Go/No-Go task similar to our own reported that healthy adults activate the cerebellum during correct inhibition of a prepotent motor response even under conditions involving limited working memory demand ( Simmonds, et al., 2008 ) suggesting that the cerebellum plays a fundamental role in inhibitory control. Greater recruitment of the cerebellum during inhibition of a motor response has been observed in adults compared to children ( Rubia, et al., 2007 ) and in cocaine dependent samples compared to healthy controls ( Hester & Garavan, 2004 ). These findings suggest that BOLD response in the cerebellum during motor inhibition is sensitive to changes in development and task difficulty. Follow-up analyses within the present study suggested that 5.66% of the variance in BOLD % signal change observed during correct inhibition of a prepotent motor response could be accounted for by DRD4 7-repeat status within the context of equivalent age and performance on the task. Thus, the role of the cerebellum in inhibitory control remains unclear although aspects of timing related to inhibitory control remain an interesting area of investigation for future studies. 
 There are notable limitations to this study. Although our sample size was large for a typical neuropsychology or fMRI study, it was small by behavioral genetics standards. We attempted to balance control of possible confounds ( i.e ., possible similarity in task-related brain response between family members or the possible influence of ethnic heterogeneity or sex differences on task-related brain response) with consideration of issues related to sample size and maximal power surrounding our genetic association analyses. Future studies should attempt to replicate our findings in studies with higher sample sizes. Higher sample sizes would also allow for more precise characterization of family-related, ethnicity-related, and sex-related influences on the neural correlates of inhibitory control. Despite these limitations, it is remarkable that associations between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and lower BOLD % signal change were observed in prefrontal brain regions during the performance of “No-Go” trials of our Go/No-Go task as was predicted by our hypotheses. Also,  Gilsbach and colleagues (2012)  reported associations between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and lower BOLD response in similar brain regions ( i.e ., inferior frontal gyrus, left middle frontal gyrus, and cerebellum) when a sample of children and adolescents performed an executive function task. This suggests that the association between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and the neural correlates of inhibitory control may remain stable from childhood into young adulthood. 
 Some authors have advanced hypotheses suggesting that neural functioning related to inhibitory control may depend greatly on DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and its interaction with specific environmental factors ( Belsky, et al., 2009 ;  Neuman, et al., 2007 ) or that its effects are accentuated depending on a particular genetic background ( Congdon, et al., 2008 ) or that different loci within the DRD4 gene may also have an influence ( e.g ., DRD4 −521C/T SNP) or that variation in entirely different genes may have a comparable influence ( e.g ., COMT). Our sample was relatively small (n=62) and was ascertained from a general population sample. Furthermore, there was limited molecular genetic information collected in relation to those individuals who participated in the longitudinal design. Due to these limitations, we were unable to appropriately address the latter hypotheses within a more atheoretical approach. Thus, we acknowledge the possibility that variation at other loci within the DRD4 gene, in other genes, in relation to gene-environment interactions, or due to gene-gene interactions might also be associated with the neural correlates of inhibitory control within 18-year-olds. 
 For example, a previous study reported that when a sample of healthy adults between the ages of 18 and 30 performed the Stop Signal Task, greater BOLD response could be observed in the right inferior frontal gyrus of individuals who possessed at least one Met allele in the COMT gene compared to a group that was homozygous for the Val allele ( Congdon, Constable, Lesch, & Canli, 2009 ). The authors interpreted the lower BOLD response in those with two Val alleles to reflect sub-optimal availability of dopamine for neurotransmission due to the greater activity of the enzyme produced by the Val allele in degrading dopamine compared to that of the enzyme produced by the Met allele. They also noted that the COMT gene’s association with the BOLD response within the right inferior frontal gyrus was not just related to the inhibitory-control-related “Stop” trials. The association could also be observed in relation to BOLD response during “Go” trials suggesting that it was related to the function of more general attentional or motor systems. In the present study, associations between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and task-related BOLD response were observed during inhibitory-control-related “No-Go” trials, but when the possibility of an association between BOLD response and DRD4 7-repeat status during “Go” trials was examined within the spatial extent of brain regions activated during correct “No-Go” trials no such association was found. This suggests a specific association between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and neurophysiological response during inhibitory control. 
 In the present study, possessing at least one allele in which there were 7-repeats in the VNTR of the DRD4 gene was associated with lower BOLD response in prefrontal and cerebellar brain regions during “No-Go” trials, but no differences in behavioral performance of the Go/No-Go task were observed between carriers and non-carriers of this allele. Also, there were no correlations observed between task-related BOLD response observed during “No-Go” trials and indices of performance on the Go/No-Go task. In the absence of such correlations or differences in behavioral performance on the task, less recruitment of prefrontal and cerebellar brain regions could be interpreted as evidence of greater “neural efficiency” in DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat carriers as these individuals recruited prefrontal and cerebellar regions to a lesser degree while achieving a similar level of accuracy on the Go/No-Go task. Considering literature reporting an association between DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status and 1) dysfunctional dopamine D4 receptor G-protein coupling; 2) inability to heterodimerize with D2 receptors; and 3) a variety of disinhibited neuropsychiatric presentations, we consider this explanation to be less likely. Nevertheless, this hypothesis cannot be ruled out based on the results of the present study, and future studies should explore this hypothesis using methods that can more directly measure receptor function and neural efficiency. 
 Investigation of all of these hypotheses within future studies will be important as these studies may one day elucidate how genetic and environmental factors combine to produce risk for psychiatric phenotypes at the neurobiological level. However, we believe that reports such as our own are also important as they are hypothesis-driven and might reveal specific information regarding the effect size, neuroanatomical expression, and direction of effects associated with the DRD4 7-repeat gene in relation to regional brain function ultimately helping to explain the mechanisms by which variation at these loci increase the risk for associated neuropsychiatric disorders. 
 In summary, we observed that DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status was associated with lower BOLD % signal change in prefrontal areas and in occipital/cerebellar brain regions during inhibition of a premotor motor response tendency in a sample of 18-year-old twins recruited from a general population-based sample. This difference in brain activity was not associated with differences in behavioral performance or with differences in age, sex, zygosity, IQ, trait impulsivity, the number of alcoholic drinks reportedly consumed per year, the ratio of smokers to non-smokers in the sample, or the ratio of those who ever tried to those who never tried marijuana in the sample. Although inhibitory-control-related brain response was associated with DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status in a brain region that is considered critical for inhibitory control (right IFG), it only accounted for approximately 5% of the variance in this brain region, and there were no differences in behavioral performance of a Go/No-Go task between 7R+ and 7R− groups. fMRI brain response in prefrontal brain regions during inhibitory control may be influenced by DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status, but this may not penetrate to the level of behavior in a general population sample. Whether the level of contribution from this genetic variant might change under varying environmental conditions or in certain clinical populations remains an important area for future research that may ultimately inform personalized treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 We would like to thank Arpana Agrawal, Ph.D. and Blythe Janowiak, Ph.D. for their very helpful comments in relation to the genetic and biochemical models associated with this project. This study was supported by grants from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) R01 DA01889, K02 DA027096, and R03 DA27125 to A.A., the McDonnell Center for Systems Neuroscience (McDCSN) to A.R., NIDA grant T32 DA007261 (T.Cicero), NIDA grant R25 DA027995 (P. Madden & J. Rice), and a grant from the ABMRF: The Foundation for Alcohol Research to S.K. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Altink 
 ME 
 
 
 Rommelse 
 NN 
 
 
 Slaats-Willemse 
 DI 
 
 
 Vasquez 
 AA 
 
 
 Franke 
 B 
 
 
 Buschgens 
 CJ 
 
 
 Fliers 
 EA 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Sergeant 
 JA 
 
 
 Oosterlaan 
 J 
 
 
 Buitelaar 
 JK 
 
 
 The dopamine receptor D4 7-repeat allele influences neurocognitive functioning, but this effect is moderated by age and ADHD status: an exploratory study 
 World J Biol Psychiatry 
 2011 
 13 
 293 
 305 
 22111665 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anokhin 
 AP 
 
 
 Golosheykin 
 S 
 
 
 Grant 
 JD 
 
 
 Heath 
 AC 
 
 
 Developmental and genetic influences on prefrontal function in adolescents: a longitudinal twin study of WCST performance 
 Neurosci Lett 
 2010 
 472 
 119 
 122 
 20132870 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 From reactive to proactive and selective control: developing a richer model for stopping inappropriate responses 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2010 
 69 
 e55 
 e68 
 20932513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 Sahakian 
 BJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Stop-signal inhibition disrupted by damage to right inferior frontal gyrus in humans 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2003 
 6 
 115 
 116 
 12536210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Asghari 
 V 
 
 
 Sanyal 
 S 
 
 
 Buchwaldt 
 S 
 
 
 Paterson 
 A 
 
 
 Jovanovic 
 V 
 
 
 Van Tol 
 HH 
 
 
 Modulation of intracellular cyclic AMP levels by different human dopamine D4 receptor variants 
 J Neurochem 
 1995 
 65 
 1157 
 1165 
 7643093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Dissociating working memory from task difficulty in human prefrontal cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1997 
 35 
 1373 
 1380 
 9347483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barkley 
 RA 
 
 
 Smith 
 KM 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 Navia 
 B 
 
 
 An examination of the behavioral and neuropsychological correlates of three ADHD candidate gene polymorphisms (DRD4 7+, DBH TaqI A2, and DAT1 40 bpVNTR) in hyperactive normal children followed to adulthood 
 Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 
 2006 
 141B 
 487 
 498 
 16741944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belsky 
 J 
 
 
 Jonassaint 
 C 
 
 
 Pluess 
 M 
 
 
 Stanton 
 M 
 
 
 Brummett 
 B 
 
 
 Williams 
 R 
 
 
 Vulnerability genes or plasticity genes? 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 2009 
 14 
 746 
 754 
 19455150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bidwell 
 LC 
 
 
 McClernon 
 FJ 
 
 
 Kollins 
 SH 
 
 
 Cognitive enhancers for the treatment of ADHD 
 Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
 2011 
 99 
 262 
 274 
 21596055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Borroto-Escuela 
 DO 
 
 
 Van Craenenbroeck 
 K 
 
 
 Romero-Fernandez 
 W 
 
 
 Guidolin 
 D 
 
 
 Woods 
 AS 
 
 
 Rivera 
 A 
 
 
 Haegeman 
 G 
 
 
 Agnati 
 LF 
 
 
 Tarakanov 
 AO 
 
 
 Fuxe 
 K 
 
 
 Dopamine D2 and D4 receptor heteromerization and its allosteric receptor-receptor interactions 
 Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
 2011 
 404 
 928 
 934 
 21184734 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Trainor 
 RJ 
 
 
 Orendi 
 JL 
 
 
 Schubert 
 AB 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 A Developmental Functional MRI Study of Prefrontal Activation during Performance of a Go-No-Go Task 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1997 
 9 
 835 
 847 
 23964603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celone 
 KA 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Atri 
 A 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 DePeau 
 K 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Selkoe 
 DJ 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Alterations in memory networks in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: an independent component analysis 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 10222 
 10231 
 17021177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Gould 
 IC 
 
 
 English 
 T 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 McNaught 
 E 
 
 
 Kamke 
 M 
 
 
 Mattingley 
 JB 
 
 
 Dissociable mechanisms of cognitive control in prefrontal and premotor cortex 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2007 
 98 
 3638 
 3647 
 17942624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Insights into the neural basis of response inhibition from cognitive and clinical neuroscience 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2009 
 33 
 631 
 646 
 18835296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 FM 
 
 
 Kidd 
 JR 
 
 
 Livak 
 KJ 
 
 
 Pakstis 
 AJ 
 
 
 Kidd 
 KK 
 
 
 The world-wide distribution of allele frequencies at the human dopamine D4 receptor locus 
 Hum Genet 
 1996 
 98 
 91 
 101 
 8682515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christ 
 SE 
 
 
 White 
 DA 
 
 
 Mandernach 
 T 
 
 
 Keys 
 BA 
 
 
 Inhibitory control across the life span 
 Dev Neuropsychol 
 2001 
 20 
 653 
 669 
 12002099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 The “Task B problem” and other considerations in developmental functional neuroimaging 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2010 
 31 
 852 
 862 
 20496376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JR 
 
 
 Cohen 
 P 
 
 
 West 
 S 
 
 
 Aiken 
 LS 
 
 
 Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences 
 2003 
 3rd edition ed. 
 Mahwah, N.J 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MS 
 
 
 Parametric analysis of fMRI data using linear systems methods 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 6 
 93 
 103 
 9299383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colzato 
 LS 
 
 
 van den Wildenberg 
 WP 
 
 
 Van der Does 
 AJ 
 
 
 Hommel 
 B 
 
 
 Genetic markers of striatal dopamine predict individual differences in dysfunctional, but not functional impulsivity 
 Neuroscience 
 2010 
 170 
 782 
 788 
 20678555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Congdon 
 E 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 A neurogenetic approach to impulsivity 
 J Pers 
 2008 
 76 
 1447 
 1484 
 19012655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Congdon 
 E 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Lesch 
 KP 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Influence of SLC6A3 and COMT variation on neural activation during response inhibition 
 Biol Psychol 
 2009 
 81 
 144 
 152 
 19482231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Congdon 
 E 
 
 
 Lesch 
 KP 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Analysis of DRD4 and DAT polymorphisms and behavioral inhibition in healthy adults: implications for impulsivity 
 Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 
 2008 
 147B 
 27 
 32 
 17525955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 1996 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cummins 
 TD 
 
 
 Hawi 
 Z 
 
 
 Hocking 
 J 
 
 
 Strudwick 
 M 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Wagner 
 J 
 
 
 Chambers 
 CD 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Dopamine transporter genotype predicts behavioural and neural measures of response inhibition 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 2012 
 17 
 1086 
 1092 
 21876545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Das 
 D 
 
 
 Tan 
 X 
 
 
 Easteal 
 S 
 
 
 Effect of model choice in genetic association studies: DRD4 exon III VNTR and cigarette use in young adults 
 Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 
 2010 
 156B 
 346 
 351 
 21438142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diamond 
 A 
 
 
 Developmental time course in human infants and infant monkeys, and the neural bases of, inhibitory control in reaching 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1990 
 608 
 637 
 669 
 discussion 669–676 
 2075965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ding 
 YC 
 
 
 Chi 
 HC 
 
 
 Grady 
 DL 
 
 
 Morishima 
 A 
 
 
 Kidd 
 JR 
 
 
 Kidd 
 KK 
 
 
 Flodman 
 P 
 
 
 Spence 
 MA 
 
 
 Schuck 
 S 
 
 
 Swanson 
 JM 
 
 
 Zhang 
 YP 
 
 
 Moyzis 
 RK 
 
 
 Evidence of positive selection acting at the human dopamine receptor D4 gene locus 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2002 
 99 
 309 
 314 
 11756666 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dirnberger 
 G 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 Executive dysfunction in Parkinson's disease: a review 
 J Neuropsychol 
 2013 
 7 
 193 
 224 
 24007368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drewe 
 EA 
 
 
 Go - no go learning after frontal lobe lesions in humans 
 Cortex 
 1975 
 11 
 8 
 16 
 1149469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engels 
 WR 
 
 
 Exact tests for Hardy-Weinberg proportions 
 Genetics 
 2009 
 183 
 1431 
 1441 
 19797043 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Perlis 
 RH 
 
 
 Doyle 
 AE 
 
 
 Smoller 
 JW 
 
 
 Goralnick 
 JJ 
 
 
 Holmgren 
 MA 
 
 
 Sklar 
 P 
 
 
 Molecular genetics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2005 
 57 
 1313 
 1323 
 15950004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magn Reson Med 
 1995 
 33 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Fassbender 
 C 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Individual differences in the functional neuroanatomy of inhibitory control 
 Brain Res Mol Brain Res 
 2006 
 1105 
 130 
 142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 Right hemispheric dominance of inhibitory control: an event-related functional MRI study 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1999 
 96 
 8301 
 8306 
 10393989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilsbach 
 S 
 
 
 Neufang 
 S 
 
 
 Scherag 
 S 
 
 
 Vloet 
 TD 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Herpertz-Dahlmann 
 B 
 
 
 Konrad 
 K 
 
 
 Effects of the DRD4 genotype on neural networks associated with executive functions in children and adolescents 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2012 
 2 
 417 
 427 
 22727763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gizer 
 IR 
 
 
 Ficks 
 C 
 
 
 Waldman 
 ID 
 
 
 Candidate gene studies of ADHD: a meta-analytic review 
 Hum Genet 
 2009 
 126 
 51 
 90 
 19506906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 TE 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 Genes and the parsing of cognitive processes 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2004 
 8 
 325 
 335 
 15242692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gonzalez 
 S 
 
 
 Rangel-Barajas 
 C 
 
 
 Peper 
 M 
 
 
 Lorenzo 
 R 
 
 
 Moreno 
 E 
 
 
 Ciruela 
 F 
 
 
 Borycz 
 J 
 
 
 Ortiz 
 J 
 
 
 Lluis 
 C 
 
 
 Franco 
 R 
 
 
 McCormick 
 PJ 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 Rubinstein 
 M 
 
 
 Floran 
 B 
 
 
 Ferre 
 S 
 
 
 Dopamine D4 receptor, but not the ADHD-associated D4.7 variant, forms functional heteromers with the dopamine D2S receptor in the brain 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 2012 
 17 
 650 
 662 
 21844870 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heinzel 
 S 
 
 
 Dresler 
 T 
 
 
 Baehne 
 CG 
 
 
 Heine 
 M 
 
 
 Boreatti-Hummer 
 A 
 
 
 Jacob 
 CP 
 
 
 Renner 
 TJ 
 
 
 Reif 
 A 
 
 
 Lesch 
 KP 
 
 
 Fallgatter 
 AJ 
 
 
 Ehlis 
 AC 
 
 
 COMT × DRD4 epistasis impacts prefrontal cortex function underlying response control 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2012 
 23 
 1453 
 1462 
 22617852 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Executive dysfunction in cocaine addiction: evidence for discordant frontal, cingulate, and cerebellar activity 
 J Neurosci 
 2004 
 24 
 11017 
 11022 
 15590917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Working memory and executive function: the influence of content and load on the control of attention 
 Mem Cognit 
 2005 
 33 
 221 
 233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Beyond common resources: the cortical basis for resolving task interference 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 202 
 212 
 15325367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iversen 
 SD 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 Perseverative interference in monkeys following selective lesions of the inferior prefrontal convexity 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 1970 
 11 
 376 
 386 
 4993199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Kelly 
 SP 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 Barry 
 E 
 
 
 Mulligan 
 A 
 
 
 Daly 
 M 
 
 
 Lambert 
 D 
 
 
 McDonnell 
 C 
 
 
 Connor 
 TJ 
 
 
 Hawi 
 Z 
 
 
 Gill 
 M 
 
 
 Bellgrove 
 MA 
 
 
 Absence of the 7-repeat variant of the DRD4 VNTR is associated with drifting sustained attention in children with ADHD but not in controls 
 Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 
 2008 
 147B 
 927 
 937 
 18361436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 AS 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 NL 
 
 
 Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition 
 2004 
 Bloomington, MN 
 Pearson, Inc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kebir 
 O 
 
 
 Joober 
 R 
 
 
 Neuropsychological endophenotypes in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a review of genetic association studies 
 Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 
 2011 
 261 
 583 
 594 
 21409419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Hester 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Foxe 
 JJ 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Prefrontal-subcortical dissociations underlying inhibitory control revealed by event-related fMRI 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 2004 
 19 
 3105 
 3112 
 15182319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kidd 
 KK 
 
 
 Pakstis 
 AJ 
 
 
 Yun 
 L 
 
 
 An historical perspective on “The world-wide distribution of allele frequencies at the human dopamine D4 receptor locus” 
 Hum Genet 
 2014 
 133 
 431 
 433 
 24162668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kieling 
 C 
 
 
 Roman 
 T 
 
 
 Doyle 
 AE 
 
 
 Hutz 
 MH 
 
 
 Rohde 
 LA 
 
 
 Association between DRD4 gene and performance of children with ADHD in a test of sustained attention 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2006 
 60 
 1163 
 1165 
 16781678 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Konrad 
 K 
 
 
 Dempfle 
 A 
 
 
 Friedel 
 S 
 
 
 Heiser 
 P 
 
 
 Holtkamp 
 K 
 
 
 Walitza 
 S 
 
 
 Sauer 
 S 
 
 
 Warnke 
 A 
 
 
 Remschmidt 
 H 
 
 
 Gilsbach 
 S 
 
 
 Schafer 
 H 
 
 
 Hinney 
 A 
 
 
 Hebebrand 
 J 
 
 
 Herpertz-Dahlmann 
 B 
 
 
 Familiality and molecular genetics of attention networks in ADHD 
 Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 
 2010 
 153B 
 148 
 158 
 19418498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kramer 
 UM 
 
 
 Rojo 
 N 
 
 
 Schule 
 R 
 
 
 Cunillera 
 T 
 
 
 Schols 
 L 
 
 
 Marco-Pallares 
 J 
 
 
 Cucurell 
 D 
 
 
 Camara 
 E 
 
 
 Rodriguez-Fornells 
 A 
 
 
 Munte 
 TF 
 
 
 ADHD candidate gene (DRD4 exon III) affects inhibitory control in a healthy sample 
 BMC Neurosci 
 2009 
 10 
 150 
 20021692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kudlicka 
 A 
 
 
 Clare 
 L 
 
 
 Hindle 
 JV 
 
 
 Executive functions in Parkinson's disease: systematic review and meta-analysis 
 Mov Disord 
 2011 
 26 
 2305 
 2315 
 21971697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaHoste 
 GJ 
 
 
 Swanson 
 JM 
 
 
 Wigal 
 SB 
 
 
 Glabe 
 C 
 
 
 Wigal 
 T 
 
 
 King 
 N 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 JL 
 
 
 Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 1996 
 1 
 121 
 124 
 9118321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Langley 
 K 
 
 
 Marshall 
 L 
 
 
 van den Bree 
 M 
 
 
 Thomas 
 H 
 
 
 Owen 
 M 
 
 
 O'Donovan 
 M 
 
 
 Thapar 
 A 
 
 
 Association of the dopamine D4 receptor gene 7-repeat allele with neuropsychological test performance of children with ADHD 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2004 
 161 
 133 
 138 
 14702261 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lessov-Schlaggar 
 CN 
 
 
 Lepore 
 RL 
 
 
 Kristjansson 
 SD 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Madden 
 PA 
 
 
 Heath 
 AC 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging study in identical twin pairs discordant for regular cigarette smoking 
 Addict Biol 
 2012 
 18 
 98 
 108 
 22340136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lezak 
 MD 
 
 
 Howiesen 
 DB 
 
 
 Bigler 
 ED 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Neuropsychological assessment 
 2012 
 USA 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 D 
 
 
 Sham 
 PC 
 
 
 Owen 
 MJ 
 
 
 He 
 L 
 
 
 Meta-analysis shows significant association between dopamine system genes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
 Hum Mol Genet 
 2006 
 15 
 2276 
 2284 
 16774975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lichter 
 JB 
 
 
 Barr 
 CL 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 JL 
 
 
 Van Tol 
 HH 
 
 
 Kidd 
 KK 
 
 
 Livak 
 KJ 
 
 
 A hypervariable segment in the human dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene 
 Hum Mol Genet 
 1993 
 2 
 767 
 773 
 8353495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McGeary 
 J 
 
 
 The DRD4 exon 3 VNTR polymorphism and addiction-related phenotypes: a review 
 Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
 2009 
 93 
 222 
 229 
 19336242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meador-Woodruff 
 JH 
 
 
 Damask 
 SP 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Haroutunian 
 V 
 
 
 Davis 
 KL 
 
 
 Watson 
 SJ 
 
 
 Dopamine receptor mRNA expression in human striatum and neocortex 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 1996 
 15 
 17 
 29 
 8797188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitsis 
 GD 
 
 
 Iannetti 
 GD 
 
 
 Smart 
 TS 
 
 
 Tracey 
 I 
 
 
 Wise 
 RG 
 
 
 Regions of interest analysis in pharmacological fMRI: how do the definition criteria influence the inferred result? 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 40 
 121 
 132 
 18226552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 Schafer 
 JG 
 
 
 Abrams 
 MT 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 MC 
 
 
 Flower 
 AA 
 
 
 Boyce 
 A 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Kraut 
 MA 
 
 
 Denckla 
 MB 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 fMRI evidence that the neural basis of response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 2003 
 17 
 419 
 430 
 12880912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mulcrone 
 J 
 
 
 Kerwin 
 RW 
 
 
 The regional pattern of D4 gene expression in human brain 
 Neurosci Lett 
 1997 
 234 
 147 
 150 
 9364519 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mulligan 
 RC 
 
 
 Knopik 
 VS 
 
 
 Sweet 
 LH 
 
 
 Fischer 
 M 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 M 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Neural correlates of inhibitory control in adult attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Evidence from the Milwaukee longitudinal sample 
 Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 
 2011 
 194 
 119 
 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Artifactual fMRI group and condition differences driven by performance confounds 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 219 
 228 
 14741659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neuman 
 RJ 
 
 
 Lobos 
 E 
 
 
 Reich 
 W 
 
 
 Henderson 
 CA 
 
 
 Sun 
 LW 
 
 
 Todd 
 RD 
 
 
 Prenatal smoking exposure and dopaminergic genotypes interact to cause a severe ADHD subtype 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2007 
 61 
 1320 
 1328 
 17157268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 653 
 660 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nielson 
 KA 
 
 
 Langenecker 
 SA 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Differences in the functional neuroanatomy of inhibitory control across the adult life span 
 Psychol Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 56 
 71 
 11931287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patton 
 JH 
 
 
 Stanford 
 MS 
 
 
 Barratt 
 ES 
 
 
 Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale 
 J Clin Psychol 
 1995 
 51 
 768 
 774 
 8778124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Picton 
 TW 
 
 
 Stuss 
 DT 
 
 
 Alexander 
 MP 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Binns 
 MA 
 
 
 Gillingham 
 S 
 
 
 Effects of focal frontal lesions on response inhibition 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 826 
 838 
 16699079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Region of interest analysis for fMRI 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2007 
 2 
 67 
 70 
 18985121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Control-related systems in the human brain 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2013 
 23 
 223 
 228 
 23347645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Scanning patients with tasks they can perform 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1999 
 8 
 102 
 108 
 10524600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raudenbush 
 SW 
 
 
 Bryk 
 AS 
 
 
 Hierarchical linear models, applications and data analysis methods 
 2002 
 2nd ed. ed. 
 Thousand Oaks, CA 
 Sage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raudenbush 
 SW 
 
 
 Bryk 
 AS 
 
 
 Congdon 
 R 
 
 
 HLM 7 for Windows 
 2011 
 Skokie, IL 
 Scientific Software International, Inc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 van der Molen 
 MW 
 
 
 Mental resources, processing speed, and inhibitory control: a developmental perspective 
 Biol Psychol 
 1997 
 45 
 241 
 261 
 9083652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 GM 
 
 
 Nestor 
 L 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Learning and memory deficits in ecstasy users and their neural correlates during a face-learning task 
 Brain Res 
 2009 
 1292 
 71 
 81 
 19631624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Smith 
 AB 
 
 
 Taylor 
 E 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Linear age-correlated functional development of right inferior fronto-striato-cerebellar networks during response inhibition and anterior cingulate during error-related processes 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2007 
 28 
 1163 
 1177 
 17538951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Brown 
 TT 
 
 
 Lugar 
 HM 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomical differences between adults and school-age children in the processing of single words 
 Science 
 2002 
 296 
 1476 
 1479 
 12029136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmonds 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Mostofsky 
 SH 
 
 
 Meta-analysis of Go/No-go tasks demonstrating that fMRI activation associated with response inhibition is task-dependent 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 224 
 232 
 17850833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snijders 
 TAB 
 
 
 Bosker 
 RJ 
 
 
 Multilevel analysis: An introduction to basic and advanced multilevel modeling 
 1999 
 Thousand Oaks, CA 
 Sage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strauss 
 E 
 
 
 Sherman 
 EMS 
 
 
 Spreen 
 O 
 
 
 A compendium of neuropsychological tests: administration, norms, and commentary 
 2006 
 Third Edition ed. 
 New York, New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swanson 
 J 
 
 
 Baler 
 RD 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 Understanding the effects of stimulant medications on cognition in individuals with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a decade of progress 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2011 
 36 
 207 
 226 
 20881946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swanson 
 J 
 
 
 Oosterlaan 
 J 
 
 
 Murias 
 M 
 
 
 Schuck 
 S 
 
 
 Flodman 
 P 
 
 
 Spence 
 MA 
 
 
 Wasdell 
 M 
 
 
 Ding 
 Y 
 
 
 Chi 
 HC 
 
 
 Smith 
 M 
 
 
 Mann 
 M 
 
 
 Carlson 
 C 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 JL 
 
 
 Sergeant 
 JA 
 
 
 Leung 
 P 
 
 
 Zhang 
 YP 
 
 
 Sadeh 
 A 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Whalen 
 CK 
 
 
 Babb 
 KA 
 
 
 Moyzis 
 R 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder children with a 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor D4 gene have extreme behavior but normal performance on critical neuropsychological tests of attention 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2000 
 97 
 4754 
 4759 
 10781080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talaraich 
 J 
 
 
 Tourneaux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain 
 1988 
 New York 
 Thieme Medical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Tol 
 HH 
 
 
 Wu 
 CM 
 
 
 Guan 
 HC 
 
 
 Ohara 
 K 
 
 
 Bunzow 
 JR 
 
 
 Civelli 
 O 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 J 
 
 
 Seeman 
 P 
 
 
 Niznik 
 HB 
 
 
 Jovanovic 
 V 
 
 
 Multiple dopamine D4 receptor variants in the human population 
 Nature 
 1992 
 358 
 149 
 152 
 1319557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 Tomasi 
 D 
 
 
 Wang 
 GJ 
 
 
 Telang 
 F 
 
 
 Fowler 
 JS 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 RZ 
 
 
 Klein 
 N 
 
 
 Wong 
 C 
 
 
 Swanson 
 JM 
 
 
 Shumay 
 E 
 
 
 Association between dopamine D4 receptor polymorphism and age related changes in brain glucose metabolism 
 PLoS One 
 2013 
 8 
 e63492 
 23717434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 E 
 
 
 Ding 
 YC 
 
 
 Flodman 
 P 
 
 
 Kidd 
 JR 
 
 
 Kidd 
 KK 
 
 
 Grady 
 DL 
 
 
 Ryder 
 OA 
 
 
 Spence 
 MA 
 
 
 Swanson 
 JM 
 
 
 Moyzis 
 RK 
 
 
 The genetic architecture of selection at the human dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene locus 
 Am J Hum Genet 
 2004 
 74 
 931 
 944 
 15077199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 ET 
 
 
 Kodama 
 G 
 
 
 Baldi 
 P 
 
 
 Moyzis 
 RK 
 
 
 Global landscape of recent inferred Darwinian selection for Homo sapiens 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2006 
 103 
 135 
 140 
 16371466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Go/No-Go task 
 On this version of the Go/No-Go task, participants were required to respond with a button press whenever specific target letters (“x” and “y”) were presented, but were required to withhold their response whenever nonalternating target letters were presented (“x” followed by “x” or “y followed by “y”). Response to targets (“x” or “y” alternating) constituted the “Go” condition of this task whereas the presentation of “lure” letters to which a prepotent response has been practiced but becomes inappropriate constituted the “No-Go” condition. There were 5 more times as many “No-Go” trials as “Go” trials to maintain prepotent responding. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Brain Regions Activated During Correct “No-Go” Trials 
 Colored areas indicate brain regions (fROIs) demonstrating significantly greater BOLD % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials than at baseline (voxelwise α = 1.0 × 10 −5 ; minimum cluster volume threshold = 200 µl; < 0.1 % chance that any fROI identified through this method is a false positive). Each distinct fROI that was identified through this method was assigned a separate color and number. Regions are numbered as in  Table 2  and  Figure 3 . Axial slices display the functional data in stereotaxic space ( Talaraich & Tourneaux, 1988 ) moving from inferior to superior in 8 mm increments to show subcortical as well as cortical activity patterns associated with correct “No-Go” trials. Distance from the anterior commissure in mm (z) is depicted below each slice. Functional data is overlayed on a group-averaged T1 image to reflect inter-individual variability in brain anatomy. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Effects of DRD4 VNTR 7-Repeat status on BOLD % Signal Change During Correct “No-Go” trials 
 Parameter estimates are displayed for each fROI indicating the magnitude and direction of the effect of 7-repeat status on BOLD % signal change (± 95% confidence intervals) during correct “No-Go” trials. A negative parameter estimate indicates lower % signal change during “No-Go” trials in the presence of a 7-repeat allele. Numbers on the x-axis correspond to parameter estimates provided by the multilevel model after correcting for possible non-independence between twins ( γ 10 ). Numbers and labels on the y-axis correspond to fROI information provided in  Table 2  and  Figure 2 . Those regions whose 95% confidence intervals did not overlap with 0 were significantly associated with DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status ( Table 2 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral and self-report measures in 18-year-old DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat noncarriers (7R−) and carriers (7R+) 
 
 
 
 
 
 7R− (n=39) 
 7R+ (n=23) 
 
 
 
 
 K-BIT 2 IQ (Standard Scores) 
 
 
 
 
     Verbal 
 102.7 (10.9) 
 105.7 (14.8) 
 
 
     Nonverbal 
 100.6 (12.8) 
 106.8 (20.3) 
 
 
 % Accuracy (Go) 
 78.9 (9.9) 
 79.6 (11.4) 
 
 
 % Accuracy (No-Go) 
 77.5 (14.2) 
 82.3 (12.6) 
 
 
 Go reaction time (ms) 
 441.9 (54.1) 
 436.0 (49.7) 
 
 
 BIS-11 (total) 
 59.2 (9.4) 
 59.4 (9.9) 
 
 
 Alcohol Drinking Volume (drinks/year) 
 181.0 (379.1) 
 160.3 (250.1) 
 
 
 No. of smokers (100+ cigarettes lifetime) 
 3 
 2 
 
 
 No. ever smoked marijuana 
 8 
 6 
 
 
 No. of Caucasians 
 37 
 20 
 
 
 No. of African-Americans 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Means (SD) are provided. There were no significant differences between 7R− and 7R+ on any of the measures listed. p < 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Modulation of BOLD % signal change during “No-Go” trials by 7-repeat carrier status. 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 µl 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 γ 10 
 
 
 SE 
 
 
 df 
 
 
 t 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “No-Go” > Baseline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (1) R Anterior Prefrontal Cortex/IFG (BA 10/47) 
 2894 
 39 
 52 
 1 
 −0.11 
 0.05 
 34 
 −2.14 
 0.04 * 
 
 
 (2) L Anterior Prefrontal Cortex (BA 10) 
 670 
 −33 
 60 
 −4 
 −0.05 
 0.06 
 34 
 −0.95 
 0.35 
 
 
 (3) L IFG (BA 47, orbitalis) 
 688 
 −44 
 20 
 0 
 −0.08 
 0.05 
 34 
 −1.75 
 0.09 
 
 
 (4) R IFG (BA 45, triangularis) 
 235 
 49 
 27 
 1 
 −0.09 
 0.05 
 34 
 −1.83 
 0.08 
 
 
 (5) R Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 6/8) 
 4854 
 47 
 15 
 39 
 −0.04 
 0.03 
 34 
 −1.70 
 0.10 
 
 
 (6) L Middle Frontal Gyrus (BA 6) 
 2450 
 −32 
 −8 
 45 
 −0.05 
 0.02 
 34 
 −2.32 
 0.03 * 
 
 
 (7) R Medial Frontal Gyrus (BA 6 pre-SMA/SMA) 
 670 
 1 
 −4 
 61 
 −0.04 
 0.03 
 34 
 −1.43 
 0.16 
 
 
 
 Subcortical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (8) R Caudate/Putamen 
 4115 
 21 
 −6 
 18 
 −0.01 
 0.02 
 34 
 −0.74 
 0.46 
 
 
 (9) L Caudate 
 1893 
 −21 
 −10 
 21 
 −0.02 
 0.02 
 34 
 −1.41 
 0.17 
 
 
 
 Parietal/Temporal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (10) R Parietal/Temporal Gyrus (BA 7/40/22/21) 
 29217 
 26 
 −67 
 50 
 −0.05 
 0.02 
 34 
 −1.97 
 0.06 
 
 
 (11) L Parietal/Temporal Gyrus (BA 7/40/22/21) 
 22001 
 −27 
 −60 
 43 
 −0.04 
 0.02 
 34 
 −1.84 
 0.07 
 
 
 
 Occipital/Cerebellar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (12) L Occipital Gyrus/Cerebellum (BA 18/17) 
 41741 
 −27 
 −88 
 −5 
 −0.05 
 0.03 
 34 
 −1.72 
 0.10 
 
 
 (13) R Occipital Gyrus/Cerebellum (BA 18/17) 
 20536 
 26 
 −85 
 −1 
 −0.07 
 0.03 
 34 
 −2.22 
 0.03 * 
 
 
 (14) R Cerebellum 
 629 
 29 
 −37 
 −51 
 −0.08 
 0.04 
 34 
 −2.16 
 0.04 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Brain regions are defined by voxelwise comparison of BOLD % signal change during correct “No-Go” trials with baseline (non-target letters). All brain regions listed passed a voxelwise α of p < 1.0 × 10 −5 , and a cluster threshold of 200 µl. Regions of interest are labeled and numbered as in  Figure 2  and  3  and follow the convention of the Talaraich atlas ( Talaraich and Tourneaux, 1988 ). Coordinates represent distance in mm from anterior commissure: × right (+)/left(−); y anterior (+)/posterior (−); z superior (+)/inferior (−). Abbreviations used in the table are as follows: R = right; L = Left, BA = Brodmann areas; IFG = Inferior Frontal Gyrus; SMA = Supplementary Motor Area.  γ 10  is the parameter estimate of the effects of DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status on BOLD % signal change (±SE, df) during correct “No-Go” trials. Statistical significance (t- and p-values ) was computed after controlling for potential non-independence between twins as in  Figure 3 . Negative t values represent 7R+ < 7R−. 
 
 
 * 
 p <.05. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We recruited a sample of 62 18-year-old twins from a general population sample. 
 
 
 DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status is not associated with Go/No-Go task performance. 
 
 
 DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat status is associated with fMRI BOLD % signal change. 
 
 
 DRD4 7-repeat carriers exhibit lower BOLD % signal change during “No-Go” trials. 
 
 
 Lower BOLD % signal change is observed in prefrontal and cerebellar brain regions. 
 
 
 
 
