
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 25245813 
 4312259 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.09.029 
 NIHMS630084 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The Reference Ability Neural Network Study: Motivation, Design, and
Initial Feasibility Analyses 
 
 
 
 
 Stern 
 Yaakov 
 
 ys11@columbia.edu 
 * 
 a 
 
 
 
 Habeck 
 Christian 
 
 ch629@columbia.edu 
 * 
 a 
 
 
 
 Steffener 
 Jason 
 
 js2746@columbia.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 Barulli 
 Daniel 
 
 djb2168@columbia.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 Gazes 
 Yunglin 
 
 yl2107@columbia.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 Razlighi 
 Qolamreza 
 
 qr2108@columbia.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 Shaked 
 Danielle 
 
 ds3203@columbia.edu 
 a 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 Timothy 
 
 ts4v@virginia.edu 
 b 
 
 
 a Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology
and Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer’s Disease and The Aging Brain,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 W 168 th  St,
P&S Box 16, New York, NY 10032 
 b Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, 102
Gilmer Hall PO Box 400400, Charlottesville, VA 22904 
 
 Corresponding Author: Yaakov Stern (212) 342-1350, Cognitive
Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology and Taub Institute for Research
on Alzheimer’s Disease and The Aging Brain, Columbia University College
of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 W 168 th  St, P&S Box 16, New
York, NY 10032 
 
 * 
 Shared first authorship. These authors contributed equally to the
manuscript. 
 
 
 
 24 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 20 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 12 
 2014 
 
 
 01 
 12 
 2015 
 
 103 
 139 
 151 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 We introduce and describe the Reference Ability Neural Network Study and
provide initial feasibility data. Based on analyses of large test batteries
administered to individuals ranging from young to old, four latent variables, or
reference abilities (RAs) that capture the majority of the variance in
age-related cognitive change have been identified: episodic memory, fluid
reasoning, perceptual speed, and vocabulary. We aim to determine whether spatial
fMRI networks can be derived that are uniquely associated with the performance
of each reference ability. 
 We plan to image 375 healthy adults (50 per decade from age 20 to 50; 75
per decade from age 50 to 80) while performing a set of 12 cognitive tasks. Data
on 174 participants are reported here. Three tasks were grouped  a
priori  into each of the four reference ability domains. 
 We first assessed to what extent both cognitive task scores and
activation patterns readily show convergent and discriminant validity, i.e.
increased similarity between tasks within the same domain and decreased
similarity between tasks between domains, respectively. Block-based time-series
analysis of each individual task was conducted for each participant via general
linear modeling. We partialled activation common to all tasks out of the imaging
data. For both test scores and activation topographies, we then calculated
correlations for each of 66 possible pairings of tasks, and compared the
magnitude of correlation of tasks within reference ability domains to that of
tasks between domains. For the behavioral data, globally there were
significantly stronger inter-task correlations within than between domains. When
examining individual abilities, 3 of the domains also met these criteria but
memory reached only borderline significance. Overall there was greater
topographic similarity within reference abilities than between them
(p<0.0001), but when examined individually, statistical significance was
reached only for episodic memory and perceptual speed. 
 We then turned to a multivariate technique, linear indicator regression
analysis, to derive four unique linear combinations of Principal Components (PC)
of imaging data that were associated with each RA. We investigated the ability
of the identified PCs to predict the reference domain associated with the
activation of individual subjects for individual tasks. Median accuracy rates
for associating component task activation with a particular reference ability
were quite good: memory: 82%; reasoning: 87%; speed:
84%; vocabulary: 77%. 
 These results demonstrate that even using basic GLM analysis, the
topography of activation of tasks within a domain is more similar than tasks
between domains. The follow-up regression analyses suggest that all tasks with
each RA rely on a common network, unique to that RA. Our ultimate goal is to
better characterize these RA neural networks and then study how their expression
changes across the age span. Our hope is that by focusing on these networks
associated with key features of cognitive aging, as opposed to task-related
activation associated with individual tasks, we will be able to advance our
knowledge regarding the key brain changes that underlie cognitive aging. 
 
 
 Cognitive aging 
 fMRI 
 convergent/discriminant validity 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 There is a divergence of methods in the study of cognitive aging, with
different approaches pursued by researchers within cognitive neuroimaging and
cognitive psychologists interested in the structure of cognition. In an attempt to
understand the neural underpinnings of age-related differences within a specific
cognitive domain, neuroimaging researchers typically evaluate age differences in
neural activation associated with the performance of a selected task that
purportedly taps that domain. In contrast, cognitive psychologists have repeatedly
demonstrated the advantages of parsimoniously representing batteries of diverse
cognitive tests by sets of latent variables that each summarize performance across
multiple tests. For example, based on analyses of large test batteries administered
to individuals ranging from young to old, Salthouse and colleagues have consistently
identified latent variables, or reference abilities (RAs) that capture the majority
of the variance in age-related cognitive change across four domains: episodic
memory, fluid reasoning, perceptual speed, and vocabulary ( Salthouse, 2005 ,  2009 ;
 Salthouse et al., 2008 ). Based on these
findings, Salthouse et al. have argued that a productive and efficient approach to
cognitive aging research is to try to understand how aging impacts performance of
this small set of RAs, rather than on specific tasks ( Salthouse and Ferrer-Caja, 2003 ). Similarly, we suggest that a
more productive approach to cognitive neuroimaging research in aging is to shift the
emphasis from evaluating age-related differences in brain activation during
performance on an individual task to studying a set of task-independent neural
networks postulated to underlie the reference abilities for the four cognitive
domains. This would allow us to more reliably explore the neural basis of
aging’s influence on key cognitive abilities. 
 In this report we introduce the Reference Ability Neural Network (RANN)
Study. The RANN Study is designed to identify networks of brain activity uniquely
associated with performance across adulthood of each of the four reference abilities
described above. Using analytic approaches that parallel those used to derive latent
variables from cognitive, psychometric data, we aim to determine whether spatial
fMRI networks can be derived that serve as the neural substrate for the latent
cognitive structure of the reference abilities as derived from behavioral data. The
desired structure of relationships between reference abilities and their neural
substrates is shown in  Figure 1 . 
 Just as a reference ability can be considered to represent the common
cognitive ability underlying disparate tasks, “reference ability neural
networks” (RANNs) are hypothesized to represent the common neural network
that underlies the performance of each of the RAs. As in the analysis of the
psychometric data, we expect the RANNs to demonstrate both convergent validity (for
tasks within each cognitive domain) as well as discriminant validity (i.e. limited
expression during performance of tasks in other cognitive domains). Ideally these
RANNs would consist of a unique network of brain areas that are activated for each
RA. Further, it would be compelling if the degree of expression or activation of a
RANN was correlated with performance on the constituent tasks in that RA. Successful
identification of these RANNs has the potential of contributing to a paradigm shift
in research on the neural bases of age differences in cognition by emphasizing the
broad and replicable aspects common to several tasks rather than the possibly
idiosyncratic features of individual tasks. 
 The RAs that we are studying were identified in studies of several thousand
individuals across the adult lifespan who have been administered extensive batteries
of cognitive tasks ( Salthouse, 2009 ). They
have been modeled as latent constructs defined in terms of the common variance in
four different sets of cognitive tasks representing: 1) episodic memory, 2) fluid
reasoning, 3) perceptual speed, and 4) vocabulary. Although performance on the tasks
that make up these RAs, and thus the levels of the abilities, differ across age, the
latent constructs have been found to remain invariant across the adult lifespan.
Further, although the modeled RAs are derived from performance of a limited set of
tasks, these latent constructs have been found to account for the age-related
performance differences on numerous other cognitive tasks ( Salthouse, 2009 ;  Salthouse and
Davis, 2006 ;  Salthouse et al.,
2008 ). In the RANN study, we selected 12 tasks, three from each domain,
that have reliably been associated with that RA. In turn, we hope to identify four
RANNs, one for each cognitive ability. Once the RANNs are identified, we can
investigate whether they too remain invariant over age despite different levels of
performance. We can then explore the common and unique effects associated with
chronological age on each of the RANNs. We also intend to examine the potential
influence of several measures of structural and functional age-related brain changes
on the integrity of the RANNs across the age range. 
 This paper introduces the RANN study, reviewing its design and
implementation. We present behavioral data derived from the 12 cognitive tasks as
modified for use in the MRI scanner and examine their construct validity, i.e. both
(1) convergent validity, implying high correlation within reference domains, and (2)
discriminant validity, implying low correlation between reference domains. We then
used a straightforward GLM approach to test whether the topographies of the
task-related activation of the 12 tasks also cluster by RA. Finally, we used
linear-indicator regression to generate unique spatial brain maps, or RANN, for each
cognitive ability, and tested the predictive utility of these RANNs for accurately
classifying activation maps into the appropriate RA domain in left-out data. 
 
 
 2. Material and Methods 
 
 2.1 Subjects 
 In the RANN study we plan to image 375 healthy adults (50 per decade
from age 20 to 50; 75 per decade from age 50 to 80) while performing a set of 12
cognitive tasks representing four RAs (3 per cognitive domain): episodic memory,
fluid reasoning, perceptual speed, and vocabulary. In this report, we present
data from 174 healthy adults who have completed the study procedures.
Demographic features of these participants are summarized in  Table 1 . 
 All subjects were required to be native English speakers, strongly
right-handed, and have at least a fourth grade reading level. Subjects were
screened for MRI contraindications and hearing or visual impairment that would
impede testing. Subjects were free of medical or psychiatric conditions that
could affect cognition. Careful screening ensured that the elder subjects did
not meet criteria for dementia or Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). A score
greater than 135 was required on the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale ( Mattis, 1988 ). Further, performance was
required to be within age-adjusted normal limits on a list-learning test, and
participants were required to have no or minimal complaints on a functional
impairment questionnaire ( Blessed et al.,
1968 ). 
 
 
 2.2 Procedure 
 All subjects completed screening for dementia or MCI prior to
participating in the remainder of the study. They participated in two 2.5-hour
scanning sessions. Six tasks were administered in each session in the context of
fMRI studies. One session presented three Vocabulary tasks and three Perceptual
Speed tasks interspersed in a fixed order: Synonyms, Digit-Symbol, Antonyms,
Letter Comparison, Picture Naming, and Pattern Comparison; and the other session
presented three Episodic Memory tasks and three Fluid Reasoning tasks, also
interspersed in a fixed order: Logical Memory, Paper Folding, Word Order
Recognition, Matrix Reasoning, Paired Associates, Letter Sets. The order of
tasks within session was not varied, but the order of the two sessions was
counterbalanced across subjects, with equal numbers having each order. We used a
fixed task order because we intend to focus on individual differences in several
analyses. The fixed order avoids confounding what the individual brings to the
testing situation with how he/she is treated. In other words, if the order of
tasks were to vary then it would be difficult to distinguish order effects from
individual differences. The activation tasks were supplemented with other
imaging procedures described below. At a separate session subjects completed a
battery of neuropsychological tests as well as a set of questionnaires. These
will not be discussed in the current report. 
 
 2.2.1 Stimulus presentation 
 Task stimuli were back-projected onto a screen located at the foot
of the MRI bed using an LCD projector. Participants viewed the screen via a
mirror system located in the head coil and, if needed, had vision corrected
to normal using MR compatible glasses (manufactured by SafeVision, LLC.
Webster Groves, MO). Responses were made on a LUMItouch response system
(Photon Control Company). Task administration and collection of reaction
time (RT) and accuracy data were controlled by EPrime running on a PC
computer. Task onset was electronically synchronized with the MRI
acquisition computer. 
 
 
 2.2.2 Reference Ability tasks 
 In the scanner, participants performed a battery of twelve
computerized tasks based on the cognitive tasks that have been used to
derive the RAs that are addressed in this report. Paper and pencil versions
of these tasks have been found to have high internal consistency and
test-retest reliabilities (i.e., .7 or greater), and moderate to large
(i.e., .7 or greater) loadings on their respective RAs. In order to
accommodate testing in the scanner, as well as to optimize power for image
analysis, some changes in test structure and presentation were required.
Prior to the scan session, computerized training was administered for the
six tasks to be administered in that session. At the completion of training
for each task, participants had the option of repeating the training. Each
of the tasks and its implementation for use in the scanner is described
below. For all tasks, except picture naming, responses were differential
button presses. During training, responses were on the computer keyboard and
during scans they were made on the LUMItouch response system. 
 
 2.2.2.1 Vocabulary Tests 
 
 2.2.2.1.1 Synonyms ( Salthouse and
Kersten, 1993 ) 
 This task requires subjects to match a given word to its
synonym, or to the word most  similar  in meaning.
The probe word is presented in all capital letters at the top of the
screen, and four numbered choices are presented below. Subjects are
instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as possible.
Pre-training consisted of two blocks, with two and three questions
in each block, respectively. Response consisted of pressing one of
four buttons corresponding to the word of choice. The entire scan
was six minutes and 26 seconds long, with three items in each of 5
blocks for fifteen total items. The task began with a 36-second
fixation cross, had five 42-second task blocks interspersed with
28-second fixation blocks. Each item was presented for 13.5 seconds
with a 500 ms interstimulus interval (ISI) between items. The
primary dependent variable was proportion of correctly identified
synonyms. 
 
 
 2.2.2.1.2 Antonyms ( Salthouse and
Kersten, 1993 ) 
 This task requires participants to match a given word to its
antonym, or to the word most  different  in meaning.
The probe word is presented in all capital letters at the top of the
screen, and four numbered choices are presented below. The training,
structure and timing of this task was identical to that for
synonyms. The primary dependent variable was proportion of correctly
identified antonyms. 
 
 
 2.2.2.1.3 Picture Naming 
 This task requires subjects to verbally name pictures.
Target pictures consisted of 40 colored bitmap images, adapted from
the picture naming task of the WJ-R Psycho-Educational battery
( Salthouse, 1998 ;  Woodcock et al., 1989 ).
Pre-training consisted of 2 blocks, with three and two pictures in
each block, respectively. For the test phase, subjects were given
VisuaStim digital headphones, and their responses in the scanner
were recorded. Subjects were instructed to speak loudly and clearly,
and to produce a response for every picture. The entire scan was six
minutes and 16 seconds long, containing five 40-second blocks, with
eight pictures in each block. The task began with a 36-second
fixation-cross and there was a 28-second fixation time between
blocks. Each picture was presented for 4.5 seconds with a 500-ms ISI
between items. Audio recordings were filtered using a custom
adaptive noise filtering procedure, and then transcribed and scored
by researchers. A strict criterion for correct responses was used,
with each response categorized as correct or incorrect, based on
fixed criteria ( Salthouse,
1998 ). There were two exceptions to this rule. First, a
response received credit if the correct word was included in the
subject’s response; for example, if the subject said
“printing press” for the word
“press”. Second, a slight mispronunciation of the
correct word also received credit (e.g. “cumberbund“
for cummerbund). The primary dependent variable was proportion of
correctly named pictures. 
 
 
 
 2.2.2.2 Perceptual Speed Tests 
 
 2.2.2.2.1 Digit Symbol 
 In this task, a code table is presented on the top of the
screen, consisting of numbers one through nine, each paired with an
associated symbol. Below the code table an individual number/symbol
pair is presented. Subjects are asked to indicate whether the
individual pair is the same as that in the code table using a
differential button press. Subjects are instructed to respond as
quickly and accurately as possible. Pre-training consisted of 2
blocks, with three and two items in each block, respectively. The
entire scan was seven minutes and 4 seconds long, containing 5
blocks, with eighteen items in each block for a total of ninety
items. The task began with a 36-second fixation-cross and there was
a 28-second fixation time between blocks. Each item was presented
for 2.5 seconds with a 250-ms ISI between items. Accuracy for all
three perceptual speed tasks was quite high so most of the
performance variance is in the RT. 
 
 
 2.2.2.2.2 Letter Comparison ( Salthouse and Babcock, 1991 ) 
 In this task, two strings of letters, each consisting of
three to five letters, are presented alongside one another. Subjects
indicate whether the strings are the same or different using a
differential button press. Subjects are instructed to respond as
quickly and accurately as possible. Pre-training consisted of 2
blocks, with three and two items in each block, respectively. The
entire scan was six minutes and 26 seconds long, containing 5 blocks
(42-second each), with twelve items in each block for a total of
sixty items. The task began with a 36-second fixation-cross and
there was a 28-second fixation time between blocks. Each item was
presented for 3 seconds with a 500-ms ISI between items. The primary
dependent variable is RT. 
 
 
 2.2.2.2.3 Pattern Comparison ( Salthouse and Babcock, 1991 ) 
 In this task, two figures consisting of varying numbers of
lines connecting at different angles are presented alongside one
another. Subjects indicated whether the figures were the same or
different by a differential button press. Pre-training consisted of
two blocks, with three and two items in each block, respectively.
Following the practice trial, subjects were given the option of
undergoing the same practice trial again. The timing and item
structure was the same as the letter comparison task. The primary
dependent variable is RT. 
 
 
 
 2.2.2.3 Fluid Reasoning Tests 
 
 2.2.2.3.1 Paper Folding ( Ekstrom
et al., 1976 ) 
 This fluid reasoning task requires subjects to select from
five options a pattern of holes that would result from a sequence of
folds in a piece of paper, through which a hole is then punched. The
sequence is given on the top of the screen, and the six options are
given across two rows (three options in each row) below. Response
consisted of pressing 1 of 6 buttons corresponding to the chosen
solution. Before undergoing the pre-training, the researcher
reviewed a practice problem with the participant and explained the
task and the correct solution as needed. Pre-training consisted of a
minimum of four additional practice problems, with an option of
answering two extra problems for more practice. Following each
practice problem, the correct answer was presented on the screen,
along with a description explaining why it was the correct answer.
Additionally, if a subject incorrectly answered a practice problem,
the researcher demonstrated the problem with a physical piece of
paper and a hole punch. The entire scan was 14 minutes and 26
seconds long, containing a variable number of questions, depending
on rate of task performance. Each trial began with a 24-second
fixation-cross, followed by the stimulus. If a response was made in
the first 11 seconds, the stimulus terminated at the 11 second mark.
However, if a response was made after 11 seconds, the stimulus was
terminated immediately after the response. If no response was made,
the stimulus terminated after 85 seconds. Time-outs were coded as no
response. The minimum number of trials presented was seven, which
occurred when the participant required 85 seconds per trial, or a
time-out occurred for every trial. The maximum number of trials
presented was 18, which occurred when the participant required 11 or
less seconds per trial. There was a 35–second ISI between
items. This timing protocol allowed participants to solve these
complex problems at their own rate, leading to a variable number of
trials per participant. It does, however, place lower and upper
bounds on the RTs to ensure an acceptable balance of task engagement
and inter-trial interval rest times across the experiment. As the
main objectives of the neuroimaging aspect of this study were the
neural underpinnings of cognitive engagement, it was imperative to
keep subjects engaged, especially the fast responders. The primary
dependent variable is number of correct trials completed. 
 
 
 2.2.2.3.2 Matrix Reasoning (adapted from ( Raven, 1962 )) 
 This task requires subjects to discern a pattern from a
series of figures displayed in a matrix. Subjects are given a matrix
that is divided into nine cells, in which the figure in the bottom
right cell is missing. Below the matrix, they are given eight figure
choices, and they are instructed to evaluate which of the figures
would best complete the missing cell. Training procedures were the
same as for the paper folding task (except for the physical paper
example). Timing and item structure were the same as the paper
folding task. The primary dependent variable is number of correct
trials completed. 
 
 
 2.2.2.3.3 Letter Sets ( Ekstrom et
al., 1976 ) 
 In this task, subjects select a set of letters that do not
fit with the others. Subjects are presented with five sets of
letters, where four out of the five sets have a common rule (i.e.
have no vowels), with one of the sets not following this rule.
Subjects are instructed to select the unique set. Response consisted
of pressing the one of five buttons corresponding to the chosen set.
Training procedures were the same as the other fluid reasoning
tasks, however before undergoing the pre-training, the researcher
reviewed two practice problems with the subject as opposed to one.
Timing and item structure were the same as the paper folding task.
The primary dependent variable is number of correct trials
completed. 
 
 
 
 2.2.2.4 Episodic Memory Tests 
 Note that for the episodic memory tasks, both the study and test
phases were imaged. 
 
 2.2.2.4.1 Logical Memory 
 This task requires subjects to remember specific details
from stories presented on the computer screen. The subject is asked
to answer detailed multiple-choice questions about the story, with
four possible answer choices. Response consisted of pressing one of
four buttons corresponding to the chosen answer. Pre-training
consisted of one story, with two probe questions following the
presentation of the story. Subjects were instructed to respond as
quickly and accurately as possible. The entire scan was seven
minutes long, containing two stories, with ten questions per story.
The task began with a 30-second fixation-cross and there was a
30-second fixation time between stories. The story was divided into
three 1 to 2 sentence sections, with each section displayed for
10-seconds. Ten seconds after completion of the story, the questions
were presented for 10-seconds with a 2.5-second ISI between items.
The primary dependent variable is proportion of correctly answered
questions. 
 
 
 2.2.2.4.2 Word Order Recognition 
 In this task a list of twelve words is presented one at a
time on the screen, and subjects are instructed to remember the
order in which the words are presented. Following the word list they
are given a probe word at the top of the screen, and four additional
word choices below. They are instructed to choose out of the four
options the word that  immediately  followed the word
given above. Pre-training consisted of two lists of words, with the
first list containing six words followed by five probe questions and
the second list containing twelve words followed by ten probe
questions. The entire scan was seven minutes and 2 seconds long,
containing two word lists, with ten questions following each list.
The task began with a 30-second fixation-cross and there was a
30-second fixation time between lists. Following the fixation-cross
the first word list was presented, with each word lasting 4-seconds,
with a varying ISI between words, ranging from 700 ms – 11.4
seconds. Following the word list, was a 10-second fixation break,
which was then followed by the questions. Each question was
terminated after 6 seconds and at the end of the response period was
a 2-second ISI between items. The primary dependent variable is the
proportion of correctly answered questions. 
 
 
 2.2.2.4.3 Paired Associates 
 In this task, six pairs of words are presented, one at a
time, on the screen, and subjects are instructed to remember the
pairs. Following the pairs, they were given a probe word at the top
of the screen and four additional word choices below. Subjects were
asked to choose the word that was originally paired with the probe
word. Subjects were instructed to respond as quickly and accurately
as possible. Pre-training consisted of one list of six pairs of
words, followed by two probe questions. The entire scan was three
minutes and 24 seconds long, containing two lists of pairs, with six
probe questions for each list. The task began with a 30-second
fixation-cross and there was a 10-second fixation time between
lists. Following the fixation-cross the six pairs of words were
presented, with each pair lasting 2 seconds, and with a varying ISI
between words, ranging from 200 ms – 5.6 seconds. Following
the list of pairs, was a 10-second fixation break, which was then
followed by the questions. Each question was terminated after five
seconds and at the end of the response period was a 2-second ISI
between items. The primary dependent variable is proportion of
correctly answered questions. 
 
 
 
 
 2.2.3 Image acquisition procedures 
 All MR images were acquired on a 3.0T Philips Achieva Magnet. There
were two, 2-hour MR imaging sessions to accommodate the twelve fMRI tasks as
well as the additional imaging modalities. At each session, first a scout,
T1-weighted image was acquired to determine patient position. All scans used
a 240 mm field of view. For the EPI acquisition, the parameters were: TE/TR
(ms) 20/2000; Flip Angle (deg) 72°; In-plane resolution (voxels)
112×112; Slice thickness/gap (mm) 3/0; Slices 41. In addition,
MPRAGE, FLAIR, DTI, ASL and a 7 minute resting BOLD scan were acquired. A
neuroradiologist reviewed each subject’s scans. Any significant
findings were conveyed to the subject’s primary care physician. 
 
 
 2.2.4 Behavioral performance variables 
 Behavioral performance was recorded while subjects executed the
tasks in the scanner. When proportion correct trials was calculated for each
task, trials where the participant did not respond (i.e. timed out) were not
considered in the calculation. To ensure that we included data only from
instances where subjects were performing the task, we eliminated data from
any task where the participant’s performance was at chance or lower.
For the perceptual speed tasks, we required accuracy of 75% or
greater because the focus was on the speed of performance as represented by
reaction time. Z-scores were computed for all twelve behavioral variables
based on the entire study group. For the perceptual speed tasks, the
behavioral Z-scores were reversed in sign, such that an increasing value of
the behavioral Z-score implied better performance. 
 
 
 2.2.5 Image analysis pre-processing procedures 
 Each individual’s 12 fMRI scans was pre-processed in the
same manner using the SPM8 software (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging)
before inclusion in the analyses described below. The processing of the
functional imaging data involved two basic steps: 1) standard initial
processing steps including slice timing correction, realignment,
transformation into standardized (MNI) space, and smoothing and 2)
statistical analysis of individual subjects’ data. 
 Statistical analysis of individual subjects’ data for the
twelve cognitive tasks consisted of block-based time-series analysis of each
individual task as a whole for each subject via general linear modeling of
the fMRI time-series data. These data, along with the predictor variables,
were high-pass filtered and pre-whitened to explicitly correct for intrinsic
autocorrelations in the data. The predictor variables comprising the first
level design matrix were composed of epochs representing each unique
experimental task relative to rest (i.e. no-performance, fixation periods)
and were convolved with a double-gamma model of the hemodynamic impulse
response function. 
 Confound regression for motion parameters was not performed at the
subject level; however, for our RANN activation patterns we checked at the
group level that pattern expression in any task did not correlate with
subject motion. 
 
 
 2.2.6 Construct Validity of Behavioral and Imaging Data 
 Construct validity (CV) quantifies how behavioral data and
activation patterns associated with each of twelve tasks manifest both
convergent and discriminant validity. Convergent validity is indicated by
strong relations among measures hypothesized to represent the same RA.
Discriminant validity is high when the relations among measures hypothesized
to represent different RAs, across domains, are low. A measure of CV
summarizes both validity requirements as:  CV = Ẑ within  –
Ẑ between  Here Ẑ within  denotes the average Fisher-Z
correlation coefficient for all within-domain task pairings and
Ẑ between  denotes the average Fisher-Z correlation
coefficient for all between-domain task pairings. For behavioral data, task
performance values were correlated between tasks, across subjects. For the
neuroimaging data, mean task activation maps, explained below, were
correlated between tasks, across voxels. In this manner, we derived
 behavioral  and  topographic  CV
measures. We first calculated this CV across all twelve tasks, comparing the
12 within-domain correlations to the 54 between domain correlations
(“global construct validity”). Subsequently, we tested the
CV-difference for each cognitive domain separately (“domain-specific
construct validity’). In that case, we compared the 3 within-domain
correlations to the 27 between-domain correlations. 
 We illustrate the CV difference with a mock example for 3 tasks with
each of 2 RA domains in  Figure 2 . 
 In order to assess the significance of CV coefficients, we performed
a permutation test. For this test, task assignments were permuted randomly,
but subject assignments were left intact. This means that the behavioral and
topographic correlation matrix for any task pair undergoes a random
reassignment of rows and columns with a subsequent computation of the
CV-difference on this permuted Z-matrix. This was done for 10,000
iterations. The p-level was calculated as the fraction of the 10,000 null
(i.e. permuted) CV values that exceed the CV value found for the point
estimate, i.e. the value obtained with the correct task assignment. 
 
 
 2.2.7 Analysis of Functional Neuroimaging Data 
 
 2.2.7.1 Evaluation of Topographic Similarity 
 This analysis was intended to derive the topography of
activation for each task in the most direct manner, in order to subject
these topographies to the CV analysis derived above. This approach
assesses whether task-related activation is inherently more similar
within than between domain. We used straightforward GLM derive a pattern
of activation for each task. Because we are interested in identifying
patterns of activation that are unique to each of the four RAs, we began
by attempting to identify and eliminate activation that was common to
all 12 tasks. Such common activation could stem from similarities across
tasks such as visual stimulation, noise, and motor demands, as well as
from deactivation of networks active at rest. In order to identify
common activation and de-activation across tasks we computed the 12
mean, across-subject, task-related activation patterns, i.e. one task
activation map per task. That is, for every subject and task, a
first-level General Linear Model regression computed a parametric
activation map. These maps were then averaged across subjects for every
task. The 12 subject-averaged task-activation maps were submitted to a
spatial Principal Component (PC) Analysis. This means that PCA was
performed on the data array  Y , where the number of rows
equals the number of voxels n and the number of columns equals the
number of tasks (or subject-averaged task-activation maps = 12). Since
the true data rank of  Y  is 12, there will be 12 Principal
Components in total. Each PC is a weighted linear combination of all 12
original inputs,  V 12×n  =
 W 12×12 × Y 12×n ,
where each column of the weighting matrix  W  is an
eigenvector of the covariance matrix of the data array
 Y . 
 The influence of the first PC,  V 1  (the
first row of the  PC  matrix) is removed as follows:
 Y par = ( I - V 1 t V 1 ) Y  where  I  denotes the n × n unit
matrix, and  V 1  is the first component that has
all-positive/all-negative loading on all the subject-averaged
task-activation maps in the weighting matrix  W  thus
considered here as the common activation/deactivation map across all 12
tasks.  V 1 t V 1  is an n × n projection matrix that only
retains the component along  PC 1  of any vector it
is applied to. ( I - V 1 t V 1 ) is thus a residual projection matrix that removes
from all mean images in  Y  the component alongside
 V 1 . 
 We then calculated topographic correlations for each pair of
tasks on the residualized task mean activation maps by calculating the
correlation value across voxel locations. For a mean task activation map
Y 1  for task 1 and Y 2  for task 2, which are
columns vectors with as many rows as voxels in the brain, the simple
Pearson correlation is computed as between both vectors across loadings.
For instance, for a simplistic brain with just 3 voxel locations and two
maps Y 2 =[1,−1,1] and Y 2 =[1,1,−1],
we would obtain a spatial correlation coefficient of R=(Y 1 ,
Y 2 )= 0.50. This correlation captures the spatial
similarity of the activation pattern for two tasks. 
 We also tested for age-related differences in CV in both
topographic and behavioral data. For age comparisons, the permutation
test mixed up age-group membership along a median age-split, while
leaving task-domain assignments intact. The p-level was calculated as
the fraction of the 10,000 null (i.e. permuted) CV-difference values
that exceed the CV-difference between the unpermuted age groups for the
point estimate. 
 
 
 2.2.7.2 Derivation of RANNs with linear-indicator regression 
 The subsequent analysis intended to use a multivariate approach
to derive 4 RANNs that were best associated with the 3 tasks in each RA.
Consistent with our initial goal to use a method that used as few
constraints as possible to derive RANNS, we used a linear-indicator
regression approach ( Hastie et al.,
2009 ). This approach decomposes activation in each task to a
set of PCs and then derives the optimal combination of PCs that
discriminates between the 3 tasks in a RA and the other 9 tasks. First,
a PC Analysis was run on all 174*12=2088 subject-and-task parametric
maps, and the individual pattern scores, or Subject Scaling Factors
(SSF), for the first 500 PCs were obtained by an inner product of all
500 PCs with the 2088 subject and task maps. Concretely, the pattern
score matrix  SSF  is computed with the following
multiplication,  SSF (i,k)=  Y i 
V k t  where  i  denotes the subject-task index runs
from 1 to 2088,  Y i  now represents the activation
maps (=row vector) for each particular task and subject, and
 k  indicates the PC index, running from 1 to 500.
The SSFs were then used as independent variables in a subsequent
linear-indicator regression( Hastie et
al., 2009 ) to predict an indicator matrix  I .
 I  had 2088 rows and 4 columns and places a value of 1
in the appropriate column depending on the RA domain that the scan
indexed by the row position belongs to. Each column in indicator matrix
 I  thus contained 3*174=522 unit entries on different
rows, and each row contained only a single unit entry. Summing over all
entries in  I  recovers the total number of scans in the
analysis: 2088. The regression equation can be written as  I  = [ SSF (:,1:k)  1] B
+  error  where SSF(:,1:k) is the array of pattern scores for the first
 k  PCs, and  1  denotes an intercept
term.  B  is an array of regression weights of format
( k+1)  × 4. The corresponding 4 RANNs were
constructed by applying the regression weights to the PCs according to
 RANN  =  V (:,1:k)
 B (:,1:4)  where  V  contains the PCs as column vectors and has
as many rows as voxels in the analysis. 
 To select an optimum set of PCs, i.e. the best number
 k  of included PCs, we used a goodness-of-fit
measure, the AIC criterion ( Burnham and
Burnham, 2002 ), computed for each of the 4 dependent
variables in the indicator matrix to arrive at an average value for each
set of PCs. AIC picks an optimal bias-variance tradeoff and minimizes
the residual sum of squares, while keeping the number of parameters in
the model at a minimum. We picked  k  according to the
AIC criterion, i.e. we varied  k  from 1 to 500, running
the linear-indicator regression each time, and chose the optimal for
 k  according to the result of the regression. For
the case that several very similar local minima in the AIC curve were
present, we had decided beforehand to take the set with the minimum
number of PCs, to keep the variance contribution in the data as large as
possible. 
 Once  k  was determined, we performed the
linear-indicator regression for the full sample and computed the RANNs.
To determine the robustness of RANN voxel-loadings, we performed a
semi-parametric bootstrap resampling procedure ( Efron and Tibshirani, 1993 ) with 500 iterations,
which resampled from the full 2088 scans with replacement, each time
performing the derivation of the RANNs. The variability of the voxel
loadings in the bootstrap resampling procedure around the point estimate
values can be approximated as a Z value at voxel location ×
according to the formula  Z(x) = RANN(x) / bootstrap-STD(x)  Robust loadings fulfill |Z| > 2 and are
visualized in the four RANN images. 
 Next, we investigated the ability of the derived RANNs to
predict the underlying RA domain for any individual subject’s
activation out of sample, using repeated randomized 10-fold
cross-validation ( Hastie et al.,
2009 ). In this procedure, the reference-domain label is
predicted for a portion of the data (10%) that have been left
out of the derivation of the 4 RANNs in a training subset that contains
90% of the data. If scan  y  was left out of the RANN
derivation, a prediction of the reference label can be made according to
 L = [y V (1:k,:)’ 1]
 B . 
 L  is 1 × 4 row vector and contains the degree to
which the scan loads onto each RANN, while  V  and
 B  were determined from the training-data fold. The
biggest loading determines the predicted reference-domain label. The
procedure was repeated 100 times for different random assignments of
training and test data. Two confusion matrices are computed: (1) a
domain-wise 4 × 4 confusion matrix for which rows indicate the
gold-standard reference-domain label and for which columns denote the
predicted label; (2) a 12 × 4 confusion matrix where rows
indicate the gold-standard knowledge of task identity and columns,
again, indicate the predicted reference-domain label. Both types of
confusion matrix are helpful: (1) gives a global view of the level and
type of misprediction for each reference domain; (2) gives such
information at the task-level and can identify particularly problematic
tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral results 
 The number of participants whose behavioral data was either missing or
below chance accuracy was as follows: Logical Memory – 3; Word Order
– 16; Pair Associates – 11; Matrix Reasoning – 21;
Letter Sets – 3; Paper Folding – 16; Digit Symbol – 9;
Letter Comparison – 26; Pattern Comparison – 4; Antonyms
– 15; Picture Naming – 15; Synonyms – 10. 
 There were strong age-relationships for all RAs. Examining the mean
Z-score for tests within each cognitive domain, there was a significant decline
with age on performance of episodic memory (correlation with age,
r=−0.34, p<0.0001) and fluid reasoning tasks (r= −0.25,
p=0.0027). Similarly RT on the perceptual speed tasks increased with age
(r=0.58, p<0.0001). In contrast performance on the vocabulary tasks
increased with age (r=0.40, p<0.0001). These results are compatible with
previous observations ( Salthouse and Davis,
2006 ). 
 Figure 3  summarizes the inter-task
correlations of the behavioral data. The global CV value averaged over all RAs
was 0.6221, indicating stronger within- than between-domain correlations. In a
permutation test for 10,000 iterations, this CV was highly significant at
p<0.0001, indicating that, overall, the clustering of behavioral
performance into RA domains is very unlikely to have occurred by chance. We then
examined domain-specific CV for each individual ability comparing the three
within-domain correlations to the 27 across-domain values. From the visual
inspection of the Z-matrix, the episodic memory domain displays substantial
overlap with the fluid reasoning domain, suggesting poor discriminant validity.
This was born out in the permutation test, which gave the following CV values
and associated p-levels: episodic memory: 0.31 (p=0.0790); fluid reasoning: 0.63
(p=0.0059); perceptual speed: 0.9629 (p<0.0002); vocabulary: 0.59
(p=0.0102). 
 In order to determine whether behavioral CV was present in both younger
and older subjects, we divided the subjects into two groups based on median age
and assessed CV within and between the two age groups. The results are
summarized in  Table 2 . Global CV was
present in both groups, but the coefficient was stronger in young than in old.
There were some differences between young and old in the strength of
within-domain CVs for individual RAs. This was most notable for perceptual speed
and fluid reasoning, which were both stronger in the younger group. 
 
 
 3.2 Imaging Analyses 
 
 3.2.1 GLM Analysis 
 As described above, we first used GLM analyses to derive 12
subject-averaged activation maps, 1 for each task. These 12 maps were then
submitted to PCA that produced 12 PCs. We removed the influence of the first
PC from all subject and task imaging data, surmising that task-related
activation and de-activation common to all tasks would be removed from the
data in a non-differential manner. Details of task-timing and the proportion
of time per block that occupies task performance should not influence the
topographic of the first principal components, but might influence the level
of pattern manifestation. 
 After removing the influence of the first PC from all subject and
task maps, the residual maps can be averaged across subjects within task to
produce 12 mean images with the common activation removed. We then computed
the topographic correlations across all possible task-pairs, and these
correlations summarize the spatial similarity of task-related activation
between any pair of tasks. These topographic correlations are summarized in
 Figure 4 . 
 The CV that summarizes global CV yielded a value of 0.6297,
indicating greater topographic similarity within RAs than between them. A
permutation test with 10,000 iterations using CV as a test statistic yielded
highly significant results (p<0.0001). We then examined comparing
the 3 within-domain correlations to the 27 across-domain values. The
domain-specific CV values were as follows: episodic memory: 0.92 (p=0.01);
fluid reasoning: 1.01 (p=0.005); perceptual speed: 0.30 (=0.15); vocabulary:
0.29 (p=0.17). The lack of significant topographic CV for the speed and
vocabulary domain is evident visually from the Z-matrix: both domains have
poor CV and with large correlations between the Letter Comparison and
Pattern Comparison tasks on one side, and the Antonyms and Synonyms tasks on
the other side. 
 In order to determine whether topographic CV was present in both
younger and older subjects, we again divided the subjects into two groups
based on median age and assessed CV within and between the two age groups.
The results are summarized in  Table
2 . Global CV was present in both groups. Also there were no
significant differences between young and old for domain-specific CV. 
 
 
 3.2.2 Linear-indicator regression analysis 
 
 3.2.2.1 RANN Derivation 
 Linear-indicator regression analysis was used to derive a PC
associated specifically with each of the four RAs. The first 174 PCs
(out of 2088) were chosen to construct the four RANN patterns because
they yielded a local minimum of the Akaike Information Criterion, while
securing good performance in the randomized 10-fold cross-validation
procedure. The four RANNs are illustrated in  Figure 5  and described in  Tables 3 ,  4 ,
 5 ,  6 . 
 
 
 3.2.2.2 Prediction of RA membership 
 We next investigated the ability of the identified RANNs to
predict the RA associated with the activation of individual subjects for
individual tasks. These data were derived from a 10-fold cross
validation procedure in which RANNs were derived from 90% of all
subject-task data, and used to predict the RA associated with the
remaining 10% of subject-task data. Median accuracy rates for
associating component task activation with a particular RA were as
follows: episodic memory: 82%; fluid reasoning: 87%;
speed: 84%; vocabulary: 77%. We also examined the
breakdown of RA attribution for each individual task. That is, the
percentage of time that activation for an individual task was labeled
with the appropriate RA, versus the percentage of time labeled with one
of the other three RAs. These findings are summarized in  Table 7 . Individual scans were
associated with the correct RA between 74 and 87% of the time.
Classification appeared to be most consistent for the fluid reasoning
domain. It is of interest to observe the patterns of misclassifications.
For example, fluid reasoning misclassifications did not systematically
fall in any other domain. In contrast, when episodic memory tasks were
misclassified, they were most often mislabeled as fluid reasoning. In
addition vocabulary tasks were most often misidentified as perceptual
speed. To some degree the perceptual speed tasks were also misidentified
most often as belonging to the vocabulary domain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 This report introduces the Reference Ability Neural Network (RANN) study, an
ambitious project designed to establish the neural substrates of four cognitive RA
domains. Within the cognitive psychology literature it has previously been
demonstrated that age-related variance in the majority of cognitive tasks can be
accounted for using the latent variables representing four RAs: episodic memory,
fluid reasoning, perceptual speed, and vocabulary. Performance on tasks within each
RA is more highly correlated than is performance on tasks across RAs. We reason that
this pattern of convergent and discriminant validity must have a neural basis, and
hypothesize that we can identify unique brain networks associated with each RA. The
current study was designed to detect these RANNs. In addition, the RANN study aims
to delineate whether and how the RA neural networks change in expression or
composition with age and in turn whether these network changes account for
age-related changes in their corresponding cognitive domains. 
 We chose to focus on these specific four reference abilities because studies
by Salthouse and others, conducted on several thousand individuals, have
demonstrated that the twelve selected tasks represent four latent constructs (RAs)
whose structure remains stable across aging with excellent convergent and
discriminant validity. This provides us the ideal conditions to identify the neural
networks underlying these RAs. It should be noted that similar structure of latent
cognitive abilities has been found with variables from the Woodcock Johnson test
( Salthouse, 1998 ), WAIS-IV and WMS-IV
batteries ( Salthouse, 2009 ), and other
assorted variables ( Salthouse & Davis,
2005 ), indicating that these latent variables effectively describe
cognitive aging. Further, although the modeled RAs are based on performance of
twelve specific tasks, these latent constructs have been found to account for the
age-related performance differences on numerous other cognitive tasks ( Salthouse, 2009 ;  Salthouse and Davis, 2006 ;  Salthouse et al., 2008 ) including tasks often assumed to reflect
executive functioning such as the Wisconsin Card Sort Test, Tower of Hanoi, figural,
letter, and category fluency, Stroop, flanker, stop-signal, anti-cue, zoo map,
mazes, and both complex span and updating working memory tasks. In subsequent
studies we can assess the degree to which other types of tasks, including executive
function tasks, are represented by the 4 RAs. Alternately, we could attempt to
develop RANNs for other potential RAs. 
 In the current report, we describe the RANN study design and procedures, and
present some preliminary data supportive of the idea that RANNs can be identified.
Our intention was to begin by investigating whether expected behavioral and brain
activation relationships could emerge naturally from the data without the use of
brain-behavioral constraints. Thus we first examined the statistical correlation of
behavioral performance within RA domains compared to that across domains. Overall,
we found that the behavioral variables within each RA domain showed a statistically
larger correlation within than between RA domains. While this clustering of the
behavioral data within domains was expected based on extensive previous studies, all
of the tasks had been modified to suit the demands of presentation in the scanner
and to maximize power of the analysis of the BOLD data. This included inserting
large gaps of time between items and blocks. Further, some tasks were more radically
altered. Most notably, the form of all of the episodic memory tasks differed from
their standard paper and pencil presentations. For example, for Word Order we
replaced simple verbal recall with multiple-choice items querying the order of words
in the lists. When we examined CV for each individual domain, comparing the 3
within-domain correlations to the 27 across-domain values, we found significant CV
for fluid reasoning, perceptual speed and vocabulary, while CV for episodic memory
reached only borderline significance. This may be due to stronger than expected
correlation between performance in some memory and fluid reasoning tasks. No within
domain-correlation was significant only in one age group. Global CV was significant
in both young and old, without showing a significant age-related difference. The
same findings occurred for Fluid Reasoning, Perceptual Speed, and Vocabulary. We
will continue to monitor these associations as we collect more data. We will also
consider alternate scoring schemes for the episodic memory tasks; at this point we
simply compute the proportion correct. Finally, as more data is collected, we will
use more advanced structural equation approaches to model these data. 
 We next attempted to see if good CV could also be demonstrated in activation
maps using the most straightforward image-analytic and statistical approaches. The
idea was to see how well CV emerged with the minimum amount of statistical
constraints. That is, our initial approaches did not force CV, and minimized
manipulation of the imaging data. For our initial examination of this issue we
simply derived an activation map for each task using GLM with a block design after
removing task-invariant activation from the total data array. The topography of the
activation maps of tasks within-domain were more strongly related to each other that
those of tasks across-domain. However when we examined the domain-specific CV of
each RA by comparing the 3 within-domain correlations to the 27 across-domain
values, only episodic memory and fluid reasoning showed significant validity. There
appeared to be large cross-domain relationships between the topography of activation
for the perceptual speed and vocabulary tasks. This suggests that simple analytic
approaches may hint at segregation of activation within each of the RAs, more
advanced multivariate approaches are required to these derive the RANNs. After
dividing the subjects into two groups based on median age, we found good global
topographic CV in each group, and the domain-specific CVs did not differ by age.
This suggests that we should be able to identify RANNs that are stable across
age. 
 It should be noted that our CV measure for the behavioral measures reflects
the degree to which different people exhibit more similar levels of performance for
tasks within the same domain than for tasks between different domains, whereas for
the task activation it reflects the degree to which different voxels exhibit more
similar average levels of activation (collapsed across people) for tasks within the
same domain than for tasks between different domains. This is potentially important
because not only are different types of measures being evaluated (performance vs.
average activation), but the comparisons are across different types of entities
(people vs. voxels). We did do an analysis assessing CV for activation which yielded
similar results, but we felt that it was too complex to present here. 
 Because the basic GLM analysis did not yield good domain-specific CV for
each RA, we moved to a more directed approach at deriving a unique RANN for each RA.
We chose linear-indicator regression analysis for this purpose because it simply
tries to derive a linear combination of PCs that best associated with each RA, and
does not require used of behavioral data. The regression analyses were successful in
identifying a unique pattern associated with each of the four RAs. Each contained
areas that were very reliably associated with its RA. 
 Significant regions in the four RANNs showed good correspondence with the
respective processes involved in performing each RA. Broca’s area (Brodmann
area 44) was part of the vocabulary pattern, as expected for a skill heavily reliant
on language ( Bak et al., 2001 ). Also,
bilateral insular activation ( Oh et al.,
2014 ). Oh and colleagues conducted a meta-analyses of language-related fMRI
studies showing that insular activation, predominantly in the left hemisphere, was
found for expressive language. The largest cluster of activation in the episodic
memory pattern resided in the cerebellum. Involvement of the cerebellum in higher
cognitive function has been well documented in both human ( Stoodley et al., 2012 ;  Strick
et al., 2009 ) and animal studies ( Schmahmann, 1996 ). In one study ( Stoodley et al., 2012 ), cerebellar activation was found for an n-back
task, a task that relies heavily on memory processes. The perceptual speed pattern
is dominated by activation in the cerebellum and bilateral thalamus and visual
cortices. Note that visuomotor processes were necessary for the speeded tasks. The
thalamus ( Saalmann and Kastner, 2011 ) and
visual cortices ( Wurtz and Kandel, 2000 )
participate in various levels of visual processes that are essential to translating
visual stimuli into appropriate motor response. For the fluid reasoning pattern,
activation was found in the dorsal anterior and posterior cingulate cortex. The
anterior cingulate has been associated with cognitive control towards achieving a
goal ( Shenhav et al., 2013 ) and the dorsal
anterior cingulate was found to specifically monitor changes in the environment to
allow efficient adaptation to task at hand ( Sheth et
al., 2012 ).. The function of the posterior cingulate cortex has been
proposed to be control of arousal, internal or external direction of attention, and
attentional focus ( Leech and Sharp,
2014 ). 
 It is important to note that the RANN patterns were derived for maximal
discriminability among the RAs, which is different from the usual functional
analysis that derives a set of brain regions with greater activity than at rest.
Thus, brain regions with activities that are distinct to the RA are more likely to
be shown in the ability patterns, while brain regions common to more than one of the
abilities are less likely to be significant. For example, it is expected that the
medial temporal lobe participates in memory tasks, and activation in this area was
significant in univariate t-tests in the GLM contrasts for each memory task (not
reported here). However, activation in this area may not have discriminated memory
from the other each RAs well, perhaps due to activation of this region in some other
tasks. Other analytic approaches may allow for RANNs that fully incorporate areas
important for mediating their RA while still maintaining discriminant validity. 
 We next tested these “RANN candidates" using a leave one out
procedure, by re-deriving them in 90% of the data and assessing for each
scan in the remaining 10% of data the RANN that it loaded on to. This
procedure was repeated multiple times and the frequencies with which each scan was
successfully identified or summarized. Overall, the derived RANNs were quite
successful in identifying the RA membership of individual scans. The
misidentifications were also informative. The vocabulary tasks were most often
mislabeled as perceptual speed tasks. Perhaps some subjects felt the need to respond
quickly to the multiple-choice tasks. Notably, this is compatible with the observed
correlations between performance on vocabulary and speed tasks in the behavioral
data. Episodic memory tasks were most often mislabeled as fluid reasoning tasks. One
could speculate that the recognition items had some strategic demands similar to
those in the fluid reasoning tasks. More generally these misidentifications can
represent the shared cognitive demands across RAs that is removed in structural
equation modeling analyses by including a common latent variable. Future analyses
could take two directions. First, we could initially remove common variance across
task-related activation as we did in the GLM analyses. Alternately, we could adjust
the RANN indicators based on shared or unique variance. 
 Previous reports have investigated cognitive aging fMRI-tasks and sought to
provide unifying explanations with domain-specific networks that otherwise show
invariance with respect to content generalized beyond particular tasks ( Burianova et al. ). One recent study ( Hampshire et al., 2012 ) administered a set of 12
distinct cognitive tasks in a small fMRI study (n=16). A factor model of the mean
images from the 12 tasks yielded two functional networks roughly corresponding to
working memory and fluid reasoning components. A similar factor structure was noted
in behavioral data from the same tasks administered online to a large sample of
subjects. This approach differs from our attempt to identify a RANN underlying a
predetermined set of latent variables. Several studies have focused on tasks within
the domain of memory. One study ( Nyberg et al.,
2002 ) used a partial least squares (PLS) technique with 3 memory fMRI
tasks administered to 13 young adults to extract spatial patterns of activity
associated with latent variables thought to reflect distinct memory systems
including working memory, episodic memory, and autobiographical memory. Another
study ( Grady et al., 2006 ) similarly used a
voxel-wise contrast of covariance between fMRI signal from memory tasks and age in a
sample of 35 healthy adults spanning from 20 to 87 years of age and found that they
could derive a common network of activation that covaries with age. The same group
( Burianova and Grady, 2007 ) again
conducted a study of the common fMRI networks underlying autobiographical, episodic,
and semantic memory, as well as the distinct neural networks associated with each of
these functions using PLS on a sample of 12 (21–37 years old). They ( St-Laurent et al., 2011 ) later showed that
while the common activation pattern expressed with these three components of memory
persists across age, the unique spatial covariance patterns associated with each
express themselves less with age. A larger study ( Salami et al., 2012 ) also investigated the common and distinct spatial
patterns of brain activity associated with the encoding and retrieval phases of a
face-name paired associates task using PLS; 292 healthy adults ranging from 25 to 80
participated, and two distinct networks corresponding to encoding functions and more
general cognitive control functions were extracted and described. All of these past
studies demonstrate the recognition of a need to more clearly summarize which
aspects of task-related activity are common, which are unique, and how these shared
and unique networks change with age. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the
first that will directly attempt to identify multiple RANNs in one study using
several representative tasks for each RA, and further, the first to demonstrate good
CV for the topography of the task-related activation across these tasks. 
 We consider these results are preliminary and subject to change. While the
initial GLM analyses were instructive, our preferred analytic strategy is
multivariate. In addition the multivariate linear-indicator regression used in this
study, we intend to perform multivariate analyses that use both tenets of good CV
and robust brain-behavioral correlation as simultaneous constraints to help derive
the RANNs as multivariate activation patterns. We will continue to work with the
linear indicator regression analysis. Another promising strategy to employ for this
objective is PLS ( Lobaugh et al., 2001 ;  McIntosh, 1999 ;  McIntosh et al., 1996 ). For the 3 tasks within each RA domain,
behavioral seeds can be used to compute three correlational images that can then be
submitted to PC analysis. The resulting first PC would capture the major source of
variance across these three correlational images. Since it will be dominated in
large part by the mean correlational image, it can be used as a first approximation
of the RANN for the RA domain under consideration. Pattern scores can be computed
for each constituent task in any reference domain by forming the inner product
between the RANN for that particular reference domain with any subject’s
activation map for the task in question. This procedure will generate subject
pattern scores for 4 RANNs in 12 tasks that serve as candidates for the RANNs. CV of
within-domain convergence and between-domain divergence can be investigated for the
pattern scores in a similar manner to the procedure outlined in the present report.
Eventually we would like to derive four patterns, one for each RA, that meet the
criteria shown in  Figure 1 . Ideally the
patterns would show appropriate convergent and add discriminant validity. In
addition, it would be ideal if subject pattern scores (i.e. expression of each
pattern) was associated with performance of the related RA. While RANN derivation
could be designed to force this relationship, our hope is that it will emerge
naturally as we better delineate the individual RANNs. 
 When sufficient data is available, we hope to derive these multivariate
RANNs in a data-pool of at least 100 younger participants (age < 40 years),
with a subsequent prospective application to data from each remaining decade, i.e.,
40–50, … ,70–80 in order to systematically evaluate how the
composition and expression of these RANNs may change with aging. CV and
brain-behavioral correlations can likewise be ascertained. This approach will allow
us to make inferences about the nature of the neural substrates of age-related
cognitive changes. For example, we hypothesize that the same covariance patterns
(i.e., RANNs) exist in all age groups, while the level of expression of the RANNs
(the pattern score) can vary with age group. This would parallel the observation
that the RAs and their underlying neural networks remain invariant across aging
while the level of performance declines over age for most of these abilities, and
could reflect changes in the efficiency or capacity of the RANNs. Alternatively, we
may find that the RANNs in younger adults do not forward apply to the older
groups’ imaging data, or that the forward applied RANN does not predict RA
scores well. In that case we will repeat the process of deriving the RANNs from the
older group’s data. There are several possible outcomes to this process. We
may find that the young RANNs are still present, but additional age-specific neural
networks are necessary to predict RA scores. We have defined this outcome as
 compensation  in previous published reports ( Steffener et al., 2008 ;  Stern, 2009 ). We may find that we are able to extract fewer
than four RANNs (after testing for convergent and discriminant validity) across the
four RAs. This is suggestive of  dedifferentiation , or loss of
functional specificity of neural networks. Finally, with aging we may find a unique
RANN for each reference ability, indicative of functional reorganization without
dedifferentiation. 
 We also intend to integrate data from other imaging modalities and
investigate how the framework outlined in  Figure
1  might change, not only with age, but also with physiological substrates
of age, obtained from imaging modalities such as gray-matter volume and cortical
thickness, perfusion, white-matter integrity and resting-BOLD functional
connectivity. 
 Another advantage to identifying RANNs using multivariate approaches is that
these multivariate patterns could be readily forward applied to other functional
imaging data sets. After assuring conventions regarding standardized sampling space
and masking, a contrast of interest for a task would be calculated using standard
GLM procedures, resulting in one parametric map per subject. The inner product
between each RANN covariance pattern and the contrast map yields the
subject’s expression score for that RANN. These calculations can be
informative in several ways: at the group level, investigation of the mean subject
RANN expression can clarify the differential contribution of the 4 RANNs to
task-specific networks. This would provide a standard metric for classifying any
task in terms of the 4 RANNs. In addition, the investigator could explore whether
subject expression of the RANN is correlated with indices of task performance. This
would help determine the degree to which the 4 latent RAs contribute to task
performance. 
 In summary, we have initiated an ambitious study that aims to identify four
unique neural networks, each underlying a key RA that characterizes cognitive aging.
Our hope is that by focusing on these RANNs, as opposed to task-related activation
associated with individual tasks, we will be able to advance our knowledge regarding
the key brain changes that underlie cognitive aging. More generally, the networks
that we will develop will represent key aspects of cognitive function throughout the
lifespan. The preliminary analyses presented here strongly suggest that we will be
able to identify and fully characterize these networks. 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited
manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging
(AG038465, PI Dr. Stern). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. The sponsors had
no role in the study design, data collection, analysis or interpretation, writing of
the report, or decision to submit the article for publication. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Bak 
 TH 
 
 
 O'Donovan 
 DG 
 
 
 Xuereb 
 JH 
 
 
 Boniface 
 S 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Selective impairment of verb processing associated with
pathological changes in Brodmann areas 44 and 45 in the motor neurone
disease-dementia-aphasia syndrome 
 Brain 
 2001 
 124 
 103 
 120 
 11133791 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blessed 
 G 
 
 
 Tomlinson 
 BE 
 
 
 Roth 
 M 
 
 
 The association between quantitative measures of senile change in
the cerebral grey matter of elderly subjects 
 British Journal of Psychology 
 1968 
 114 
 797 
 811 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Common and unique neural activations in autobiographical,
episodic, and semantic retrieval 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2007 
 19 
 1520 
 1534 
 17714013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 A common functional brain network for autobiographical, episodic,
and semantic memory retrieval 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 865 
 874 
 19744566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burnham 
 KP 
 
 
 Burnham 
 KP 
 
 
 Model selection and multimodel inference : a practical
information-theoretic approach 
 2002 
 2nd ed 
 New York 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Efron 
 B 
 
 
 Tibshirani 
 R 
 
 
 An introduction to the bootstrap 
 1993 
 New York 
 Chapman & Hall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ekstrom 
 RB 
 
 
 French 
 JW 
 
 
 Harman 
 HH 
 
 
 Dermen 
 D 
 
 
 Manual for kit of factor-referenced cognitive tests 
 1976 
 Princeton 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Springer 
 MV 
 
 
 Hongwanishkul 
 D 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Age-related changes in brain activity across the adult
lifespan 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2006 
 18 
 227 
 241 
 16494683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampshire 
 A 
 
 
 Highfield 
 RR 
 
 
 Parkin 
 BL 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 Fractionating human intelligence 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 76 
 1225 
 1237 
 23259956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hastie 
 T 
 
 
 Tibshirani 
 R 
 
 
 Friedman 
 JH 
 
 
 The elements of statistical learning : data mining, inference, and
prediction 
 2009 
 2nd ed 
 New York 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leech 
 R 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in cognition and
disease 
 Brain 
 2014 
 137 
 12 
 32 
 23869106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lobaugh 
 NJ 
 
 
 West 
 R 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Spatiotemporal analysis of experimental differences in
event-related potential data with partial least squares 
 Psychophysiology 
 2001 
 38 
 517 
 530 
 11352141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mattis 
 S 
 
 
 Dementia Rating Scale (DRS) 
 1988 
 Odessa, FL 
 Psychological Assessment Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Mapping cognition to the brain through neural
interactions 
 Memory 
 1999 
 7 
 523 
 548 
 10659085 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Bookstein 
 FL 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Spatial pattern analysis of functional brain images using partial
least squares 
 Neuroimage 
 1996 
 3 
 143 
 157 
 9345485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Forkstam 
 C 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 Brain imaging of human memory systems: between-systems
similarities and within-system differences 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 2002 
 13 
 281 
 292 
 11958972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oh 
 A 
 
 
 Duerden 
 EG 
 
 
 Pang 
 EW 
 
 
 The role of the insula in speech and language
processing 
 Brain Lang 
 2014 
 135C 
 96 
 103 
 25016092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raven 
 JC 
 
 
 Advanced progressive matrices, set II 
 1962 
 London, UK 
 H.K. Lewis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saalmann 
 YB 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Cognitive and perceptual functions of the visual
thalamus 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 71 
 209 
 223 
 21791281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salami 
 A 
 
 
 Eriksson 
 J 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Opposing effects of aging on large-scale brain systems for memory
encoding and cognitive control 
 J Neurosci 
 2012 
 32 
 10749 
 10757 
 22855822 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Independence of age-related influences on cognitive abilities
across the life span 
 Dev Psychol 
 1998 
 34 
 851 
 864 
 9779733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Relations between cognitive abilities and measures of executive
functioning 
 Neuropsychology 
 2005 
 19 
 532 
 545 
 16060828 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Decomposing age correlations on neuropsychological and cognitive
variables 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 2009 
 15 
 650 
 661 
 19570312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Babcock 
 RL 
 
 
 Decomposing adult age differences in working
memory 
 Developmental Psychology 
 1991 
 27 
 763 
 776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Davis 
 HP 
 
 
 Organization of cognitive abilities and neuropsychological
variables across the lifespan 
 Developmental Review 
 2006 
 26 
 31 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Ferrer-Caja 
 E 
 
 
 What needs to be explained to account for age-related effects on
multiple cognitive variables? 
 Psychol Aging 
 2003 
 18 
 91 
 110 
 12641315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Kersten 
 AW 
 
 
 Decomposing adult age differences in symbol
arithmetic 
 Mem Cognit 
 1993 
 21 
 699 
 710 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Pink 
 JE 
 
 
 Tucker-Drob 
 EM 
 
 
 Contextual analysis of fluid intelligence 
 Intelligence 
 2008 
 36 
 464 
 486 
 19137074 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmahmann 
 JD 
 
 
 From movement to thought: anatomic substrates of the cerebellar
contribution to cognitive processing 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1996 
 4 
 174 
 198 
 20408197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shenhav 
 A 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 The expected value of control: an integrative theory of anterior
cingulate cortex function 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 79 
 217 
 240 
 23889930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheth 
 SA 
 
 
 Mian 
 MK 
 
 
 Patel 
 SR 
 
 
 Asaad 
 WF 
 
 
 Williams 
 ZM 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 DD 
 
 
 Bush 
 G 
 
 
 Eskandar 
 EN 
 
 
 Human dorsal anterior cingulate cortex neurons mediate ongoing
behavioural adaptation 
 Nature 
 2012 
 488 
 218 
 221 
 22722841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 St-Laurent 
 M 
 
 
 Abdi 
 H 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Influence of aging on the neural correlates of autobiographical,
episodic, and semantic memory retrieval 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 23 
 4150 
 4163 
 21671743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steffener 
 J 
 
 
 Brickman 
 AM 
 
 
 Rakitin 
 BC 
 
 
 Gazes 
 Y 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 The impact of structure on age-related changes in working memory
functional activity 
 Brain Imaging and Behavior 
 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 Cognitive reserve 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 2015 
 2028 
 19467352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoodley 
 CJ 
 
 
 Valera 
 EM 
 
 
 Schmahmann 
 JD 
 
 
 Functional topography of the cerebellum for motor and cognitive
tasks: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 1560 
 1570 
 21907811 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 Dum 
 RP 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Cerebellum and nonmotor function 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2009 
 32 
 413 
 434 
 19555291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woodcock 
 RW 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MB 
 
 
 Mather 
 N 
 
 
 Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational
Battery--Revised 
 DLM Teaching Resources 
 1989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wurtz 
 RH 
 
 
 Kandel 
 ER 
 
 
 
 
 Kandel 
 ER 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 JH 
 
 
 The central visual pathways 
 Principles of Neural Science 
 2000 
 4th ed 
 New York, NY 
 McGraw-Hill 
 523 
 547 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic sketch of brain-behavioral framework for the Reference Ability
Neural Networks study: quantities given in rectangular or trapezoidal shapes are
recorded in the study, while round shapes indicate both reference abilities and
reference ability neural networks. The figure illustrates that not only are
meaningful latent constructs expected on the basis of common patterns of fMRI
activation across tasks representing the cognitive ability, but that those
constructs are hypothesized to be related to the corresponding constructs
defined on the basis of the correlations among behavioral performance in those
same tasks. The upper boxes indicate that we expect that the effect of age on
cognitive performance might be mediated by specific measures of brain aging.
Further, brain changes may influence expression of the reference ability neural
networks, yielding observed age-related cognitive changes. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Schematic demonstration of good and bad Construct Validity (CV) for 2
reference domains, each described by 3 tasks. Left: very good global CV,
performance of tasks  within  a reference domain are more similar
than  between -reference domains. The Z-matrix reveals a
block-diagonal structure. The observed CV statistic, the difference of mean Z-
values within a reference ability to mean Z-values between reference ability
values quite high. Right: poor global CV, pairs of tasks within and between
reference domains show equal similarity, thus yielding CV value close to zero.
The diagonal elements in every Z matrix have been set to zero since for perfect
correlation Z becomes infinite. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Investigation of behavioral Construct Validity (CV). The matrix of
inter-task performance correlations (=Z) is plotted on the left. Note that for
the most part correlations are stronger between tasks within a reference ability
than across tasks in different reference abilities. The observed CV statistics,
the differences of mean Z- values  within  a reference domain to
 between  -reference domains are displayed below the
Z-matrix. Null-histograms for a permutation tests with 10,000 iterations are
displayed on the right, with the point estimates marked by a thin blue line. All
domains show significantly higher- within versus between-domain correlations,
apart from the episodic memory domain. One can appreciate cross-talk from the
Z-matrix; the permutation test bears this out with a marginal p-value of
0.0571. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Investigation of topographic construct validity of mean univariate
task-activation patterns, similar to display of behavioral construct validity in
 Figure 3 . For the mean activation
patterns, the SPEED and VOCAB domains yielded poor convergent and discriminant
validity, resulting in non-significant p-levels. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Topographic activation patterns derived from the linear-indicator
regression. Shown are the robustness Z-maps obtained from a bootstrap procedure
with 500 iterations. Shown in blue are areas with loadings Z<−2,
indicating negative task-activation, while areas with loadings Z>2,
indicating positive task-activation, are shown in red. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participant Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 Decade 
 N 
 % F 
 Education 
 DRS 
 AMNART IQ 
 
 
 
 
 20–29 
 38 
 63 
 15.29 (±1.96) 
 139.61 (±2.96) 
 114.51 (±8.34) 
 
 
 30–39 
 33 
 64 
 15.91 (±2.47) 
 139.39 (±2.65) 
 114.88 (±10.60) 
 
 
 40–49 
 23 
 48 
 15.70 (±2.40) 
 139.67 (±2.61) 
 115.83 (±7.57) 
 
 
 50–59 
 24 
 42 
 16.10 (±1.50) 
 139.83 (±3.41) 
 115.37 (±8.19) 
 
 
 60–69 
 34 
 44 
 16.03 (±2.69) 
 140.15 (±2.57) 
 117.44 (±9.69) 
 
 
 70–79 
 22 
 41 
 17.86 (±2.59) 
 139.29 (±2.66) 
 121.60 (±7.01) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  %F = Percent female. DRS = score on
the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale. AMNART IQ = IQ score estimated based on
the American National Adult Reading Test. Education is measured in years.
Values for EDU, DRS, and AMNART IQ are the mean (± standard
deviation). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Age-specific findings for global and within-domain construct validity
(CV), for behavior and topography of activation. Age groups were divided at
median age Also provided in a test of the difference in magnitude of the CV
between young and old CV (ΔCV), Significant results at p<0.05
are in bold. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Memory 
 Fluid 
 Speed 
 Vocabulary 
 Global 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behavioral construct
validity 
 
 
 
 Old CV 
 0.25, p=0.08 
 
 0.44,p=0.02 
 
 
 0.74,p<0.01 
 
 
 0.58, p<0.01 
 
 
 0.50, p<0.01 
 
 
 
 Young CV 
 0.19, p=0.21 
 
 0.64, p<0.01 
 
 
 0.99, p<0.01 
 
 
 0.44, p=0.02 
 
 
 0.56, p<0.01 
 
 
 
 Young-Old ΔCV 
 −0.06, p=0.70 
 0.20, p=0.06 
 0.25, p=0.10 
 −0.14, p=0.83 
 0.21, p=0.41 
 
 
 
 Topographic construct
validity 
 
 
 
 Old CV 
 
 0.82, p=0.01 
 
 
 0.99, p<0.01 
 
 0.32, p=0.12 
 0.17, p=0.23 
 
 0.57, p<0.01 
 
 
 
 Young CV 
 
 0.63, p=0.03 
 
 
 0.76, p=0.02 
 
 0.39, p=0.06 
 0.27, p=0.17 
 
 0.51, p<0.01 
 
 
 
 Young-Old ΔCV 
 −0.19, p=0.82 
 −0.23, p=0.80 
 0.08, p=0.38 
 0.10, p=0.29 
 −0.06, p=0.73 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain regions for the Perceptual Speed pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Brain Structure 
 BA 
 Z- value 
 CS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 −24 
 46 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 4.83 
 328 
 
 
 14 
 −50 
 −22 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 6.22 
 290 
 
 
 12 
 −74 
 −4 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 5.20 
 162 
 
 
 −12 
 −22 
 12 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 5.34 
 145 
 
 
 8 
 −26 
 −4 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 4.12 
 132 
 
 
 −10 
 −80 
 0 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 5.03 
 123 
 
 
 44 
 0 
 10 
 Insula 
 13 
 3.01 
 94 
 
 
 −42 
 −24 
 14 
 Transverse Temporal Gyrus 
 41 
 3.38 
 89 
 
 
 −28 
 −58 
 −12 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 3.50 
 62 
 
 
 −18 
 −70 
 24 
 Precuneus 
 31 
 3.08 
 57 
 
 
 −8 
 10 
 36 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 2.59 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 −10 
 −54 
 −18 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −5.82 
 360 
 
 
 2 
 −72 
 4 
 Cuneus 
 30 
 −4.41 
 256 
 
 
 44 
 −16 
 10 
 Insula 
 13 
 −3.64 
 217 
 
 
 8 
 −20 
 48 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 −4.74 
 192 
 
 
 −4 
 30 
 36 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 9 
 −3.93 
 118 
 
 
 −2 
 −36 
 38 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 −2.82 
 96 
 
 
 −6 
 −30 
 6 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 −3.13 
 83 
 
 
 18 
 −64 
 −18 
 Declive of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.84 
 53 
 
 
 −18 
 −46 
 −4 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 30 
 −2.67 
 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. X, Y, Z are the MNI coordinates. BA = Brodmann Area, CS =
cluster size, 
 
 
 * 
 BA not available. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Brain regions for the Episodic Memory pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Brain Structure 
 BA 
 Z- value 
 CS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 −20 
 −48 
 −24 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 5.99 
 572 
 
 
 −14 
 −68 
 −6 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 2.97 
 ~ 
 
 
 −6 
 −42 
 38 
 dACC 
 31 
 4.41 
 205 
 
 
 −12 
 −62 
 20 
 Precuneus 
 31 
 4.07 
 186 
 
 
 6 
 4 
 42 
 dACC 
 32 
 3.50 
 124 
 
 
 8 
 −20 
 48 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 31 
 4.15 
 99 
 
 
 40 
 −14 
 12 
 Insula 
 13 
 3.60 
 98 
 
 
 −8 
 −30 
 −4 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 4.17 
 95 
 
 
 20 
 −40 
 −4 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 30 
 3.12 
 92 
 
 
 16 
 −50 
 −6 
 Culmen 
 
 * 
 
 2.90 
 92 
 
 
 −36 
 −8 
 6 
 Claustrum 
 
 * 
 
 3.58 
 74 
 
 
 46 
 2 
 6 
 Insula 
 13 
 4.21 
 68 
 
 
 8 
 −52 
 20 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 30 
 2.64 
 65 
 
 
 
 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 14 
 −52 
 −22 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −4.74 
 379 
 
 
 −38 
 −24 
 10 
 Insula 
 13 
 −3.03 
 186 
 
 
 8 
 −32 
 46 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 31 
 −3.27 
 153 
 
 
 22 
 −56 
 16 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 30 
 −3.06 
 142 
 
 
 16 
 −66 
 32 
 Precuneus 
 7 
 −2.81 
 ~ 
 
 
 2 
 −66 
 −4 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.09 
 101 
 
 
 0 
 −24 
 30 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 23 
 −3.11 
 88 
 
 
 12 
 −74 
 6 
 Cuneus 
 23 
 −3.56 
 68 
 
 
 −10 
 −40 
 −10 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.11 
 65 
 
 
 −4 
 −18 
 46 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 −2.88 
 64 
 
 
 4 
 −26 
 2 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 −2.84 
 57 
 
 
 40 
 14 
 2 
 Insula 
 13 
 −3.17 
 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. X, Y, Z are the MNI coordinates. BA = Brodmann Area, CS =
cluster size, 
 
 
 * 
 BA not available. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Brain regions for the Fluid Reasoning pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Brain Structure 
 BA 
 Z- value 
 CS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 −66 
 −4 
 Culmen of Vermis 
 
 * 
 
 3.22 
 269 
 
 
 12 
 −72 
 10 
 Cuneus 
 30 
 3.10 
 ~ 
 
 
 4 
 −54 
 6 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 30 
 2.79 
 ~ 
 
 
 0 
 −24 
 28 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 23 
 4.61 
 226 
 
 
 −12 
 −58 
 −18 
 Declive of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 4.49 
 137 
 
 
 14 
 −30 
 4 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 3.50 
 106 
 
 
 26 
 −48 
 −14 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 37 
 3.39 
 90 
 
 
 20 
 −58 
 14 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 30 
 3.08 
 86 
 
 
 36 
 12 
 8 
 Insula 
 13 
 2.93 
 76 
 
 
 0 
 30 
 30 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 32 
 2.84 
 55 
 
 
 2 
 −40 
 24 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 3.03 
 51 
 
 
 
 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −56 
 14 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 −3.61 
 276 
 
 
 −30 
 −50 
 −22 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.31 
 181 
 
 
 −6 
 −80 
 14 
 Cuneus 
 18 
 −2.98 
 124 
 
 
 −8 
 −44 
 36 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 31 
 −3.32 
 122 
 
 
 −6 
 −26 
 54 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 −4.04 
 116 
 
 
 −6 
 −30 
 −6 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 −3.69 
 109 
 
 
 6 
 −4 
 36 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 24 
 −2.62 
 99 
 
 
 16 
 −48 
 −4 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 19 
 −3.13 
 89 
 
 
 24 
 −58 
 −22 
 Declive of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.01 
 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. X, Y, Z are the MNI coordinates. BA = Brodmann Area, CS =
cluster size, 
 
 
 * 
 BA not available. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Brain regions for the Vocabulary pattern. 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Brain Structure 
 BA 
 Z- value 
 CS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −56 
 14 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 4.12 
 465 
 
 
 −16 
 −48 
 4 
 Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 30 
 3.61 
 ~ 
 
 
 0 
 −50 
 −16 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 3.56 
 ~ 
 
 
 −44 
 −40 
 20 
 Insula 
 13 
 4.49 
 165 
 
 
 14 
 −32 
 48 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 5 
 4.28 
 135 
 
 
 −42 
 14 
 22 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46 
 5.31 
 116 
 
 
 −52 
 −12 
 16 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 43 
 4.97 
 ~ 
 
 
 −48 
 6 
 16 
 Broca's area 
 44 
 4.19 
 ~ 
 
 
 54 
 −8 
 16 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 43 
 4.23 
 102 
 
 
 42 
 −14 
 20 
 Insula 
 13 
 2.73 
 ~ 
 
 
 18 
 −64 
 −18 
 Declive 
 
 * 
 
 4.17 
 85 
 
 
 −8 
 −32 
 8 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 3.14 
 57 
 
 
 
 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −36 
 46 
 Precuneus 
 7 
 −3.55 
 252 
 
 
 −2 
 −26 
 44 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 31 
 −3.22 
 ~ 
 
 
 14 
 −72 
 −6 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 −4.60 
 249 
 
 
 −14 
 −64 
 20 
 Precuneus 
 31 
 −3.74 
 143 
 
 
 −14 
 −50 
 −22 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.66 
 130 
 
 
 −12 
 −76 
 2 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 −4.12 
 115 
 
 
 8 
 −46 
 2 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −2.98 
 114 
 
 
 4 
 −56 
 10 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 29 
 −2.81 
 114 
 
 
 12 
 −24 
 8 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 −3.53 
 89 
 
 
 −42 
 −6 
 8 
 Insula 
 13 
 −3.64 
 86 
 
 
 4 
 −62 
 −16 
 Culmen of Cerebellum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.50 
 84 
 
 
 −12 
 −24 
 10 
 Thalamus 
 
 * 
 
 −3.57 
 82 
 
 
 0 
 −64 
 34 
 Precuneus 
 7 
 −3.37 
 76 
 
 
 36 
 −8 
 −10 
 Claustrum 
 
 * 
 
 −3.15 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. X, Y, Z are the MNI coordinates. BA = Brodmann Area, CS =
cluster size, 
 
 
 * 
 BA not available. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 7 
 
 Left-out data prediction success of the reference-domain label derived
from linear indicator regression. The first 2 columns give the gold-standard
identities of reference label and task. The last 4 columns give the fraction of
predictions for the 4 reference labels. Every row has been normalized such that
it sums to unity. Highlighted in bold face are correct predictions. For example
activation on the logical memory task was correctly identified as belonging to
the episodic memory domain 70% of the time, and was misclassified as
belonging to fluid reasoning 20% of the time. 
 
 
 
 
 Actual Domain and Task 
 Predicted Domain 
 
 
 Domain 
 Task 
 MEMORY 
 FLUID 
 SPEED 
 VOCABULARY 
 
 
 
 
 Memory 
 Logical Memory 
 
 75% 
 
 16% 
 3% 
 5% 
 
 
 Memory 
 Word Order 
 
 87% 
 
 10% 
 1% 
 3% 
 
 
 Memory 
 Paired Associate 
 
 86% 
 
 7% 
 2% 
 4% 
 
 
 Fluid 
 Matrix Reasoning 
 5% 
 
 84% 
 
 9% 
 1% 
 
 
 Fluid 
 Letter Sets 
 9% 
 
 87% 
 
 2% 
 2% 
 
 
 Fluid 
 Paper Folding 
 6% 
 
 84% 
 
 9% 
 1% 
 
 
 Speed 
 Digit Symbol 
 4% 
 4% 
 
 87% 
 
 5% 
 
 
 Speed 
 Letter Comparison 
 2% 
 5% 
 
 83% 
 
 10% 
 
 
 Speed 
 Pattern Comparison 
 2% 
 7% 
 
 83% 
 
 8% 
 
 
 Vocabulary 
 Antonyms 
 6% 
 6% 
 14% 
 
 74% 
 
 
 
 Vocabulary 
 Picture Naming 
 3% 
 4% 
 7% 
 
 85% 
 
 
 
 Vocabulary 
 Synonyms 
 0% 
 5% 
 9% 
 
 86% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
