
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0045503 
 1920 
 Brain Res 
 Brain Res. 
 
 Brain research 
 
 0006-8993 
 1872-6240 
 
 
 25264353 
 4377125 
 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.09.045 
 NIHMS631279 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Sensitivity of Negative Subsequent Memory and Task-Negative Effects to Age and Associative Memory Performance 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 Marianne 
 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 
 Mattson 
 Julia T. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 Tracy H. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Donley 
 Brian E. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 Michael D. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75235, USA 
 2 UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA 
 
 * Correspondence to: Marianne de Chastelaine, University of Texas at Dallas, Center for Vital Longevity, 1600 Viceroy Drive, Suite 800, Dallas, TX 75235. Phone: 972-883-3780,  mad106120@utdallas.edu 
 
 
 27 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 28 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 1 
 7 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 7 
 2016 
 
 1612 
 16 
 29 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The present fMRI experiment employed associative recognition to investigate the relationships between age and encoding-related negative subsequent memory effects and task-negative effects. Young, middle-aged and older adults (total n = 136) were scanned while they made relational judgments on visually presented word pairs. In a later memory test, the participants made associative recognition judgments on studied, rearranged (items studied on different trials) and new pairs. Several regions, mostly localized to the default mode network, demonstrated negative subsequent memory effects in an across age-group analysis. All but one of these regions also demonstrated task-negative effects, although there was no correlation between the size of the respective effects. Whereas negative subsequent memory effects demonstrated a graded attenuation with age, task-negative effects declined markedly between the young and the middle-aged group, but showed no further reduction in the older group. Negative subsequent memory effects did not correlate with memory performance within any age group. By contrast, in the older group only, task-negative effects predicted later memory performance. The findings demonstrate that negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects depend on dissociable neural mechanisms and likely reflect distinct cognitive processes. The relationship between task-negative effects and memory performance in the older group might reflect the sensitivity of these effects to variations in amount of age-related neuropathology. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 aging 
 associative recognition 
 memory encoding 
 recollection 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Episodic memory – memory for unique events – declines across the adult lifespan (e.g.,  Nilsson, 2003 ;  Park et al., 2002 ;  Salthouse, 2009 ). fMRI studies investigating the cognitive and neural bases of age-related episodic memory decline have focused on the neural correlates of both encoding and retrieval operations. Studies that have investigated age-related differences in the neural correlates of encoding (the focus of the present study) have typically utilized the subsequent memory procedure (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Gutchess et al., 2005 ;  Mattson et al., in press ;  Miller et al., 2008 ;  Morcom et al., 2003 ;  Mormino et al., 2012 ;  Park et al., 2013 ). In this procedure ( Paller and Wagner, 2002 ), blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) activity elicited by study items is contrasted according to performance on a later memory test. The most commonly reported subsequent memory effects are ‘positive’, taking the form of greater activity for study items attracting accurate rather than inaccurate memory judgments. Recently, however, there has been increased interest in the effects of age on ‘negative’ subsequent memory effects, that is, effects taking the form of relative decrements in study activity for items that go on to receive accurate as opposed to inaccurate judgments. Across studies employing a variety of different study tasks and memory tests, negative subsequent memory effects have consistently been reported to be attenuated (and sometimes reversed) in healthy older individuals (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al. 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Gutchess et al., 2005 ;  Mattson et al., in press ;  Miller et al. 2008 ;  Mormino et al. 2012 ;  Park et al., 2013 ). Furthermore, the magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects in older adults has been reported to correlate positively with their memory performance ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Mattson et al., in press ;  Miller et al., 2008 ;  Mormino et al., 2012 ; see  de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 , for similar findings in young individuals), suggesting that the effects reflect the engagement of processes that are of functional significance for memory encoding. 
 The earliest studies to describe negative subsequent memory effects ( Otten and Rugg, 2001 ;  Wagner and Davachi, 2001 ;  Wagner et al., 1998 ) identified them in inferior and medial parietal cortex, posterior cingulate and dorsolateral PFC. The effects were interpreted as reflecting allocation of attentional resources to processes unconnected with or, perhaps, detrimental to successful encoding (e.g., attention to response selection, or task-irrelevant stimulus features or thoughts). Subsequently, it was noted that several of the brain regions identified by negative subsequent memory contrasts fall within the ‘default mode network’ ( Daselaar et al., 2004 ). This network comprises a set of regions that exhibit greater activity during ‘rest’ than during task engagement (‘task-negative’ activity), and demonstrate strong inter-regional ‘resting-state’ connectivity (see  Buckner et al., 2008 , for a review). Task-negative activity has been consistently reported to be attenuated in older relative to younger individuals (e.g.,  Grady et al., 2006 ;  Lustig et al., 2003 ;  Persson et al., 2007 ;  Persson et al., 2014 ;  Park et al., 2013 ;  Sambataro et al., 2010 ). Whereas the default-mode network is reportedly functionally heterogeneous (e.g.,  Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010 ;  Gilbert et al., 2012 ;  Leech et al., 2011 ;  Lin et al., 2011 ), in general terms the network is held to support internally-directed processes that must be disengaged to permit optimal allocation of processing resources to an external event such as a study item (e.g.,  McKiernan et al., 2003 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). From this perspective, it is natural to conceive of negative subsequent memory effects as reflecting the extent to which a study event elicits the reallocation of processing resources away from internally directed ‘default mode processes’ to those supporting successful encoding (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Daselaar et al., 2004 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ). This raises the possibility that age-related attenuation of negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects have a common origin, namely, the tendency with increasing age to fail to fully disengage the default mode network when attention must be directed toward an external event. 
 Negative subsequent memory effects do not, however, simply reflect modulation of task-negative activity within the default-mode network, as the foregoing discussion might be taken to imply. Notably, the effects are typically found in only a small subset of task-negative regions (e.g.,  de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2014 ). Moreover, negative subsequent memory effects can also be identified in ‘task-positive’ regions that are not part of the default mode network. For example,  Daselaar et al. (2004)  and  Mattson et al. (in press)  both described robust negative subsequent memory effects in the anterior insula, despite the fact that the region exhibited a marked task-positive response with respect to baseline (see also  Reynolds et al., 2004 ,  Wagner and Davachi, 2001 ). Furthermore, it was recently reported that task-negative and negative subsequent memory effects can be dissociated by manipulation of the difficulty of the study task ( de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2014 ): Whereas the former effects were enhanced in the more difficult condition, difficulty had no effect on the magnitude of the negative subsequent memory effects elicited in the same brain regions. Together, these findings suggest that negative subsequent memory effects reflect processes additional to those reflected in task-induced modulations of the default mode network. 
 The aim of the present study was to build on prior studies from our group in which we reported both that negative subsequent memory effects were attenuated in older relative to young individuals, and that the magnitude of the effects was positively correlated with memory performance ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ). We employed the same combination of study task and subsequent associative recognition test that was used by  de Chastelaine et al., (2011) . This and similar experimental procedures have consistently been reported to elicit robust and widespread negative subsequent memory effects in young adults (e.g.,  de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ;  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Daselaar et al., 2004 ;  Park and Rugg, 2008 ) and are highly sensitive to increasing age (e.g.,  Bender et al., 2010 ;  Salthouse, 2009 ). Here, we went beyond our prior study ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ) in two ways. First, in addition to investigating new samples of young and older adults, we also included a middle-aged sample. To date, almost no investigations of age-differences in the neural correlates of episodic memory encoding (or, indeed, of cognitive processing more generally) have included middle-aged individuals. One important exception is the study of  Park et al. (2013)  in which subsequent memory effects for visually presented scenes were contrasted in a large sample that spanned the adult lifespan. As we describe in more detail in the Discussion, these authors reported that the effects of age on negative subsequent memory effects were most apparent in older adults, with relatively little difference evident between young and middle-aged individuals. The present study affords the opportunity to assess whether this pattern generalizes to associative memory. 
 In addition to the inclusion of a middle-aged sample, here we investigated the effects of age and memory performance on both negative subsequent memory effects and, also, task-negative effects. As was discussed previously, despite their shared sensitivity to increasing age, there are grounds for thinking that the two classes of effects reflect dissociable processes. Thus, it was of interest to determine whether there was any relationship between the magnitudes of the two effects (cf.  de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ), and whether they were similarly sensitive to increasing age. 
 
 
 2. Results 
 
 2.1. Neuropsychological data 
 Demographic and neuropsychological data for the 3 age groups are summarized in  Table 1 . One-way ANOVAs were conducted for each test, and followed up with t-tests as appropriate. As can be seen from the table, the older adults showed a typical pattern of age-related reduction and preservation of scores on the neuropsychological test battery ( Salthouse 2010 ). 
 
 
 2.2. Behavior 
 
 2.2.1. Study phase 
 Accuracy on the study task was indexed by the proportion of study pairs attracting the response judged the most plausible by the consensus of three experimenters. These judgments had been made, prior to any data collection, in the context of our previous experiment that used the same word pair pool ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). Accuracy was high in all 3 age groups, with means (standard deviations [SDs]) of 0.81 (0.09), 0.82 (0.07) and 0.80 (0.09) for the young, middle-aged and older groups, respectively. Neither accuracy nor reaction time (RT: 1913 (290) ms, 1805 (310) ms and 1849 (243) ms for young, middle-aged and older adults, respectively) differed significantly between the groups. 
 To parallel the fMRI negative subsequent memory analyses described later, study RTs for word pairs presented in the same pairing at test (intact pairs) were segregated according to later memory performance (subsequent associative hits versus subsequent associative misses). ANOVA revealed a main effect of subsequent memory (F1, 133 = 38.25, p < 0.001). The effect reflected faster study RTs for subsequent misses than for subsequent hits (collapsed across age-group, 1835 (279) ms and 1883 (285) ms respectively). There was no effect of age, and no evidence of an age group by subsequent memory interaction. 
 
 
 2.2.2 Test phase 
 Accuracy on the associative recognition test is summarized in  Table 2 . Associative recognition accuracy (pR) was indexed as the difference between the proportion of intact test pairs correctly endorsed as intact (associative hits) and the proportion of rearranged test pairs incorrectly judged intact (associative false alarms). Accuracy showed a graded decline with age, with means (SDs) of 0.48 (0.19), 0.39 (0.14) and 0.31 (0.15) for the young, middle-aged and older groups, respectively (F2, 135 = 12.80, p < 0.001). Pair-wise contrasts (t-tests, equal variances not assumed) revealed that young participants had higher pRs than both middle-aged (t64 = 2.25, p < 0.05) and older participants (t59 = 4.50, p < 0.001), and that middle-aged participants were more accurate than the older participants (t76 = 2.60, p < 0.025). 
 
 
 
 2.3. fMRI data 
 
 2.3.1. Across-group main negative subsequent memory effect 
 To assess the influence of age on negative subsequent memory effects, we first identified regions showing the unbiased, across-group main effect of negative subsequent memory (associative misses > associative hits).  Table 3  summarizes the outcome of this contrast, which revealed negative subsequent memory effects in right dorsolateral and superior frontal cortex, medial frontal cortex, left posterior cingulate / precuneus, right inferior temporal gyrus, right lateral parietal cortex, and the right insula (see  Fig. 1a ). Other than one cluster located in the cerebellum, we found no evidence for a group by subsequent memory interaction with a whole brain analysis thresholded at our pre-experimentally determined significance level of p < .001. We extracted mean parameter estimates for the BOLD responses elicited by items that went on to become associative hits and misses across all voxels within a 5 mm radius of each peak in the 8 regions identified by the negative subsequent memory contrast (see  Table 3 ), along with an additional sub-peak in the precuneus.  Figure 1b  shows the means of these parameter estimates for 4 representative regions according to age- group. All but one of the regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects also demonstrated below-baseline task effects (i.e., task-negative effects), the one exception being the anterior insula, where negative subsequent memory effects co-existed with task-positive effects (see  Fig. 1b ). To directly assess group differences in the magnitude of both negative subsequent memory and the task effects, each class of effect was subjected to a two-way mixed design ANOVA, with levels of group (3) and region (9). The data collapsed across region are illustrated in  Figure 2 . 
 ANOVA of the negative subsequent memory effects revealed a main effect of region (F6, 822 = 5.01, p <0.001, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected for non-sphericity), indicating differences in the size of negative subsequent memory effects across regions (largest in the left precuneus, smallest in the left medial frontal cortex). There was no group by region interaction (F < 1). A main effect of group (F2, 133 = 4.55, p <0.025) reflected a decline in the size of negative subsequent memory effects with age (young > middle > older; see  Fig. 2 ). T-tests (equal variances not assumed) revealed that there was a significant difference in the size of the effects between the young and older groups (t59 = 2.62, p < 0.025), the effects in the middle-aged group differing from neither of the other two groups. Additional t-tests revealed that, collapsed across regions, negative subsequent memory effects were independently reliable in each age group (all ps < 0.01). 
 ANOVA of the task effects revealed a main effect of region (F7, 880 = 77.04, p <0.001, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected for non-sphericity), indicative of differences in the size (and direction) of the effects across regions (task-negative effects were largest in right medial frontal cortex, smallest in right inferior temporal gyrus and, as already noted, a task-positive effect was evident in right anterior insula). There was also a main effect of group (F2, 133 = 5.45, p<0.01), but no group by region interaction (F < 1.1). Follow-up analyses (t-tests, equal variances not assumed) revealed that task-negative effects (see  Fig. 2 ) decreased in magnitude from the young to the middle-aged and older groups (young vs middle-aged: t70 = 3.31, p = 0.001; young vs older group: t87 = 2.99, p < 0.005), but did not differ between the middle-aged and older groups (t < 1). One-sample t-tests indicated that, collapsed across regions, the effects were significantly negative-going in each group, despite the inclusion of data from the insula (all ps < 0.001). 
 
 
 2.3.2. Relationship between negative subsequent memory and task effects 
 We investigated the relationship between the magnitudes of negative subsequent memory and task effects using the data collapsed across the 9 regions that were identified by the across-group main effect of negative subsequent memory. We found no relationship between the size of negative subsequent memory and task effects across all participants (partial correlation, controlling for age (entered as a continuous variable) and memory performance, of .03), and this remained the case when the correlation was computed for each group separately, and also for the simple rather than the partial correlation. Re-running the correlations using data derived only from the 8 task-negative regions did not change the results. We also re-ran the above analyses for each region separately (across and within group). No significant correlations were identified. 
 
 
 2.3.3. Relationship of negative subsequent memory and task effects with memory performance 
 In light of prior reports that the magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects covaries with memory performance ( de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Mattson et al., in press ;  Miller et al., 2008 ;  Mormino et al., 2012 ), we computed the across-participant partial correlation (controlling for age) between pR (associative recognition performance) and the magnitude of the negative subsequent memory effects (collapsed across the 9 regions described previously). The correlation was far from significant (r = .04), and the correlations remained non-significant when computed for each age group separately (all rs < 0.19). We re-ran the correlations for each of the 9 regions individually (across and within age-groups). In the young group only, associative memory performance was positively correlated with the size of the negative subsequent memory effects in the inferior temporal gyrus (r = .47, p < 0.005). No other region showed a significant correlation between negative subsequent memory effects and associative memory performance after Bonferroni correction. 
 In a second correlational analysis we addressed the question of whether the relationship between age and the magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects was independent of memory performance. The partial correlation (controlling for pR) between age and negative subsequent memory effects (collapsed across regions) was significant (r = −.233, p < .01), as would be expected given the lack of correlation between pR and the effects. 
 We then addressed the question of whether the magnitude of task effects in the regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects correlated with memory performance. The partial correlation (controlling for age) between task effects and memory performance was not significant when computed across all participants (r = 0.06). Within age groups, the partial correlation (controlling for within-group age differences) was significant in the older group (r = 0.307, p < 0.025), indicating that increased task-negative activity predicted better memory performance in these participants (see  Fig. 3 ). Removing the data from the insula did not alter any of the foregoing results. We conducted analogous analyses separately for each of the 9 regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects. For the older group only, task effects in one region - the supramarginal gyrus - demonstrated a correlation with Pr that survived Bonferroni correction (r = 0.362, p < 0.005). 
 In light of the finding of a reliable correlation between task effects and associative memory performance in the older, but not the young or middle-aged groups, we employed multiple regression analysis to directly assess the relative contributions of the variables of age, task effects, and their interaction to explaining variance in associative memory performance. The regression model accounted for a significant proportion of the variance in performance (F3, 135 = 13.12, p < 0.001, R 2  = 0.230). As is evident from  Table 4 , age was a significant predictor. Confirming the impression derived from the correlational analyses conducted on the separate age groups, the task effect was not a reliable predictor, but its interaction with age group was. Thus, the regression coefficients for the relationship between memory performance and task negative effects differed reliably across the age groups. 
 Finally, we addressed the question of whether the age-related differences in task-negative effects were mediated by differences between the age groups in memory performance. This was not the case: the partial correlation (controlling for pR) between age and the across-region mean of the task-negative effects was reliable (r = .211, p < .025), indicating that the influence of age on these effects cannot be explained by the relationship between age and memory performance. 
 
 
 2.3.4. Whole brain analysis of task negative effects 
 The foregoing analyses indicate that task-negative effects were attenuated with age and, among older participants only, correlated reliably with later associative recognition performance. We extended these findings by performing a series of whole brain analyses that identified task-negative effects and investigated their relationship with age and performance. As is evident from  Fig. 4A , task-negative effects were widespread throughout the brain, encompassing but extending well beyond regions typically identified within the default mode network. We investigated whether these effects varied across age groups by inclusively masking the main task-negative effect (thresholded at p < .001;  Fig. 4A ) with the pair-wise contrasts identifying where effects were greater in the young group relative to the middle-aged or older groups, and where effects were greater in the middle-aged than the older participants (each contrast was thresholded at p < .01, and preserved the 21 voxel cluster extent threshold). As is illustrated in  Figures 4B and 4C , larger task-negative effects were evident in the young than in either of the other two groups in numerous task-negative regions. Moreover, the patterning of the group-wise differences was very similar in each case. By contrast, differences between the middle-aged and older participants were limited to a single small cluster (25 voxels) in right posterior lateral temporal cortex. 
 In light of the findings reported above of a relationship in the older group between task-negative effects and memory performance, we performed whole-brain analyses to identify where task-negative effects correlated with memory performance at the voxel-wise level. For each age group, we generated a second-level GLM in which task-negative effects were regressed against memory performance and inclusively masked with the outcome of the across-participants task-negative main effect (thresholded at p<.001). The GLM was height thresholded at p < .005 with a cluster extent threshold of 47 voxels to give a cluster-wise corrected significance level of p < .05. This height threshold corresponds to a correlation coefficient of approximately .46 for the young and middle-aged groups, and to a correlation of about .35 for the analysis of the older group’s data. No clusters were identified where task-negative effects co-varied with behavior in either the young or middle-aged group (this remained the case when the threshold was reduced to p<.01, corresponding to a correlation of about .41). By contrast, 4 clusters were identified where the effects correlated with performance in the older group (see  Table 5  and  Fig. 5 ). 
 Together, these whole-brain findings complement those obtained from the analysis of the negative subsequent memory effects in demonstrating first, that task-negative effects declined substantially in magnitude between the young and middle-aged groups, but showed little further decline in the older group, and second, that the magnitude of these effects positively co-varied with later memory performance, but in the older group only. 
 
 
 
 
 3. Discussion 
 We used an associative recognition task to investigate the relationships between age, negative subsequent memory effects and task-negative effects in young, middle-aged and older participants. While most regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects also demonstrated task-negative effects (the exception being a task-positive region of the anterior insula), negative subsequent memory effects were identified in only a small subset of all task-sensitive voxels. We found no correlation between the magnitude of negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects, despite finding that both classes of effects were attenuated with age. The magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects was not associated with memory performance in the older or middle-aged groups, and existed for only one region in the young. In contrast, task-negative effects correlated positively with associative memory performance only in the older group. 
 
 3.1. Behavioral findings 
 As expected, associative recognition performance was higher in the young than in the older group. Performance in the middle-aged group also exceeded that of the older individuals, but was significantly worse than that of the young. This graded decline in associative memory performance with age is consistent with previous reports that associative memory declines continuously across the adult age-range ( Bender et al., 2010 ;  Salthouse, 2009 ; see for example  Nilsson, 2003 , and  Park et al., 2002 , for additional evidence that episodic memory declines continuously with age). The sensitivity of the present associative recognition test to increasing age stands in contrast to the null effects of age on one of our standardized memory tests (WMS), and to its modest effects on the other test (the CVLT). The findings are well accommodated by the proposal that the ability to encode and retrieve associative information is especially sensitive to increasing age ( Naveh-Benjamin, 2000 ). 
 In contrast to the findings for associative recognition performance, there were no differences between the age groups in the accuracy or speed with which the study task was performed, or in the relationship between study RT and subsequent memory performance. Therefore, any between-group differences in fMRI subsequent memory or task effects are unlikely to be accounted for by gross differences between the groups in the efficiency with which study pairs were processed. Of potential importance, study RTs differed according to later associative memory performance (items going on to become associative hits were responded to more slowly than those that became associative misses) regardless of age group. As we elaborate below, analogous differences were not evident in our earlier study that employed the same experimental materials and very similar study and test procedures ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ; see Introduction). 
 
 
 3.2. fMRI findings 
 Negative subsequent associative memory effects were evident in several of the cortical regions where such effects have been reported previously (e.g.,  Chua et al., 2007 ;  de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ;  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Daselaar et al., 2004 ;  Miller et al.. 2008 ;  Park and Rugg, 2008 ; see also  Mattson et al., in press ). The effects were restricted mainly to regions that also demonstrated task-negative effects, consistent with the proposal that negative subsequent memory effects primarily reflect modulation of task-negative activity ( Daselaar et al., 2004 ;  de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ). As was also reported by  de Chastelaine and Rugg (2014) , negative subsequent memory effects were evident in only a subset of task-negative regions (compare  Figs. 1  and  4a ). Notably, among the task-negative regions that failed to show negative subsequent memory effects were some core members of the default mode network, such as bilateral angular gyrus. Thus, the present findings add to the evidence that associative encoding benefits from the disengagement of only some default-mode processes ( de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ). Additionally, we found no correlation between the magnitudes of negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects (despite the fact that the two effects were derived from the same voxels). This result is consistent with prior findings suggesting that the factors modulating subsequent memory and task-negative effects are at least partially independent ( de Chastelaine and Rugg, 2014 ). 
 As has been reported in numerous prior studies of the encoding of both single study items ( Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Gutchess et al., 2005 ;  Morcom et al., 2003 ;  Mormino et al., 2012 ;  Park et al., 2013 ) and inter-item associations ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ), the present negative subsequent memory effects were significantly smaller in the older than in the young age group. By contrast, the effects in the middle-aged group did not significantly differ from those of the young. However, since the effects in this group also failed to differ from those of the older group, it is not possible to draw a strong conclusion about the profile of age-related differences in negative subsequent memory effects. In this respect, the findings are reminiscent of those reported by  Park et al. (2013) , who investigated subsequent memory effects elicited by later recognized and forgotten visually presented scenes in young, middle-aged and older participants. In this study too, negative subsequent memory effects were graded in magnitude as a function of age-group. Unlike in the present case, however, the effects in the middle-aged group differed reliably from those of both young and older participants, albeit in only two of the five regions where effects were identified. 
 While the majority of previous studies have reported age-related declines in negative subsequent memory effects, a recent study by  Mattson et al. (in press)  reported that negative subsequent source memory effects (differences in the activity elicited by later recognized study items according to whether the items attracted incorrect or correct source memory judgments) did not differ in magnitude between young and older individuals. In light of these findings, it might seem puzzling that the magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects declined with age in the present and our prior studies since, in both cases, a memory test held to be strongly dependent on recollection was employed. Importantly, though, in the study of  Mattson et al. (in press)  the subsequent memory contrast only included items that went on to receive correct and highly confident ‘old’ judgments. These items were segregated according to whether they also received a correct and highly confident source judgment or an inaccurate judgment (correct source judgments made with low confidence were excluded). Therefore, the subsequent source memory effects were generated from items that differed little between the two age groups with respect to the strength of the memory signal supporting the source judgments (cf.  Wixted and Mickes, 2010 ). In discussing the findings from our prior experiment ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ),  Mattson et al. (in press)  suggested that, had the strength of associative recognition been equated across age groups by restricting the subsequent memory contrast to associative hits made with high confidence, the resulting negative subsequent memory effects might have been age-invariant. By this view, therefore, the age-related reduction in the magnitude of negative subsequent associative memory effects in both our present and prior studies might be a consequence not of age  per se , but of an age-associated reduction in the strength of the recollection signal supporting accurate associative recognition judgments. 
 Whereas this proposal cannot be ruled out, it sits uncomfortably with the present failure to identify a relationship between the magnitude of negative subsequent memory effects and associative recognition performance. If negative subsequent associative memory effects reflect the strength of the recollection signal elicited at test, and if in turn recollection strength is associated with overall associative recognition performance, then a relationship between negative subsequent memory effects and performance should have been evident. Such a relationship was reported in our prior study ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ), however, and it is unclear why that finding was not replicated here. One possibility is that this disparity between the two studies reflects subtle differences between the respective samples of older adults, although there is little evidence to support this possibility in respect of either patterns of performance on the neuropsychological test battery, or performance on the experimental task. A more likely possibility is that the disparity reflects differences between the studies in the nature of the study processing associated with successful encoding. Unlike in our prior study, here study RTs demonstrated a sizeable (ca. 50 ms) and statistically robust subsequent memory effect, such that study items that went on to become associative hits were responded to more slowly than those destined to become associative misses. Why this effect should have been evident in the present but not the prior study is unclear, although one possible explanation might lie in the very different test conditions of the two studies (outside versus inside the scanner, and unpaced versus paced retrieval tests, in the prior and present studies respectively). Whatever the reason, we conjecture that the additional processing time accorded later remembered versus later forgotten items in the present study modulated or added variance to the resulting subsequent memory effects in a manner that over-shadowed any relationship with overall memory performance. 
 As already noted, the present negative subsequent memory effects were not localized exclusively to regions demonstrating task-negative effects, but were evident also in the anterior insula, where task effects were positive. Similar findings were reported in a previous study that employed associative recognition ( Daselaar et al., 2004 ), and negative subsequent memory effects in the insula have also been reported in studies employing other types of memory test ( Kukolja et al., 2009 ;  Mattson et al., in press ;  Otten and Rugg 2001 ;  Reynolds et al., 2004 ;  Wagner and Davachi 2001 ). The anterior insula is held to be a component of the ‘salience network’, and is thought to be important for the initiation of cognitive control in response to salient events ( Ham et al., 2013 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ). Thus, negative subsequent memory effects in this region might reflect the allocation of processing resources to salient but mnemonically irrelevant aspects of a study event or the experimental environment ( Mattson et al., in press ; see also  Uncapher and Wagner, 2009 , for a similar suggestion with respect to negative subsequent memory effects in the temporoparietal junction). This proposal highlights the possibility that, whether found in task-negative or task-positive regions, negative subsequent memory effects reflect processes that compete or interfere with those supporting successful encoding. The more these processes are disengaged (in the case of regions belonging to the default mode network) or are not engaged (in the case, for example, of the insula) during the study event, the greater the probability of successful encoding. 
 In contrast to the effects of age on negative subsequent memory effects, there was considerably less ambiguity with respect to task-negative effects. Whether the effects were defined only for the regions where negative subsequent memory effects were evident, or at the whole brain level, the influence of age demonstrated a clear step-function. While reliable in each age group separately, task-negative effects were greater in the young than the middle-aged group, but showed no further decline in the older group 1 . The difference between young and older individuals in the magnitudes of their task-negative effects replicates numerous prior findings (e.g.,  Grady et al., 2006 ;  Lustig et al., 2003 ;  Persson et al., 2007 ; see  Hafkemeijer et al., 2012 , for a review). Additionally, a reduction in task-negative effects from young to middle-aged individuals during memory encoding has also been reported previously ( Grady et al., 2006 ). In that study, however, the effects demonstrated a graded decline with increasing age. 
 While our findings of a decline in task-negative effects indicated a clear step-function with age (young > middle-age = older), associative memory performance showed a graded decline with increasing age. Given that the decline in the magnitude of task-negative effects (relative to the young) was as great for the middle-aged group as it was for the older group, the relationship between task-negative effects and memory performance does not appear to be straightforward. Indeed, task-negative effects and associative memory performance were significantly correlated across participants in the older group only. This difference between the age groups in the strength of the relationship between task negative effects and performance was confirmed statistically in a multiple regression analysis (see  Table 4 ). 
 What might account for the age-specificity of this relationship? A possible clue comes from reports that task-negative effects are reduced in healthy older adults in whom there is evidence of beta-amyloid deposition as assessed by Positron Emission Tomography (e.g.,  Kennedy et al., 2012 ;  Sperling et al. 2009 ;  Vannini et al., 2012 ), along with evidence that amyloid deposition is also associated with episodic memory decline (e.g.,  Ellis et al., 2013 ;  Hedden et al., 2012 ,  2013 ;  Lim et al., 2014 ). In light of these observations, one speculative account of the present correlation between task-negative effects and memory performance in our older group is that the correlation was mediated by individual differences in amyloid deposition among the members of this group. 
 The foregoing account does not however address the more general question of why task-negative effects decline with increasing age. Such declines are evident in older individuals with no evidence of amyloid deposition (e.g.,  Sperling et al., 2009 ) and, at least in the present case, are already present by middle-age. These age-related differences in the magnitude of task-negative effects were independent of the accuracy and speed of the study judgments and, as was noted above, of subsequent memory performance. Addtionally, there were no correlations between the effects and any of the scores on the neuropsychological test battery, either within or across groups. Thus the functional significance of age-related decline in task-negative effects remains elusive. 
 
 
 
 4. Experimental procedure 
 
 4.1. Participants 
 Participants included 36 young adults (17 female) aged 18–29 yrs (M = 22 yrs; SD = 3.0 yrs), 36 middle-aged adults (19 female) aged 43–55 yrs (M = 49 yrs; SD = 3.4 yrs) and 64 older adults (35 female) aged 63–76 yrs (M = 68 yrs; SD = 3.6 yrs). Data collected from 12 additional individuals were excluded because of inadequate behavioral performance either at study or test (2 young, 1 middle-aged and 2 older), abnormalities in their anatomical scan (2 older), technical problems during scanning (1 middle-aged) or insufficient trial numbers (i.e., less than 10 trials) for fMRI analysis in one of the critical conditions (3 young and 1older). When participants did not provide sufficient numbers of trials for the fMRI analysis, this was always because of too few associative misses. For those who were excluded due to insufficient associative miss trials, the memory performance of three of these participants was above the mean for their group (2 young and 1 older), whereas for one young participant performance was below the mean. 
 Participants were recruited from the University of Texas at Dallas and surrounding communities. All were healthy, right-handed, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and had learned English before age 5. They had no history of cardiovascular, neurological, or psychiatric disease and were not taking central nervous system-active medication. Exclusion criteria based on neuropsychological test scores are described below. All participants gave informed consent according to the procedures approved by the UT Dallas and University of Texas Southwestern Institutional Review Boards. They were compensated at $30 per hour. 
 
 
 4.2. Neuropsychological testing 
 A battery of standardized neuropsychological tests was administered to all participants in a separate experimental session. The battery assessed a range of cognitive functions known to either decline or be maintained with age. The Mini-Mental State Examination was employed to screen participants for dementia – a cutoff score of 27/30 was adopted. The remainder of the battery comprised the California Verbal Learning Test-II (CVLT;  Delis et al. 2000 ), the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-IV), the Digit Span Forward and Backward test of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Revised (WAIS-R) ( Wechsler 2001 ), the Digit/Symbol Coding test of the WAIS-R, Trail Making Tests A and B, letter and category fluency tests, the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR;  Wechsler 2001 ) and the Raven’s Progressive Matrices (short version). Potential participants were excluded if they scored 1.5 standard deviations (SD) below their age-appropriate norm on the CVLT or the WMS, below an estimated full-scale IQ of 100 as given by performance on the WTAR, or more than 1.5 SD below the age-appropriate norm on any 2 of the other neuropsychological tests. As CVLT recall scores were highly correlated with each other, a composite CVLT score was calculated by averaging across the 4 tests (immediate and delayed free and cued recall) and was used for all further analysis (see Results). For the same reason, a composite WMS score was also computed by averaging the scores on WMS 1 and WMS 2. 
 
 
 4.3. Experimental materials 
 Experimental items comprised 320 semantically unrelated, visually-presented word pairs. The words were selected from the word association norms compiled by  Nelson et al. (2004)  – each was a concrete noun and ranged in length from 3 to 9 letters. The items were randomly divided into 4 lists of 80 word pairs. Lists were rotated so that, across each set of yoked participants (1 young, 1 middle-aged and 1 or 2 older participants), each list provided the items for all 3 of the experimental word-pair categories: intact, rearranged, and new (see below). For each set of yoked participants, word pairs from 3 of the lists were pseudo-randomly ordered to form the study list. Critical study pairs were intermixed with 80 null trials. The test list included 320 critical word pairs – 160 of the test pairs had been presented at study (intact pairs), 80 of the pairs were studied items that had been repaired from study (rearranged pairs) and 80 were unstudied pairs (new pairs). Critical test pairs were intermixed with 106 null trials. Two buffer pairs were placed at the start and 2 in the middle of each of the 2 study blocks and 3 test blocks (see below). The different categories of word pairs in the study and test lists were pseudo-randomly ordered such that the same category did not occur more than 3 times in succession. Practice study and test lists were formed from items additional to those used to create the experimental lists. 
 
 
 4.4. Procedure 
 Prior to scanning, participants were given instructions and practice sessions for both the study task and the memory test and were therefore aware that their memory for the study items would be tested. The experimental study and test phases were run in separate scanning sessions. During the first scanning session, participants made judgments about each of the study pairs, which were presented in 2 consecutive blocks separated by a short rest interval. The study task was to indicate with a button press which of the 2 objects denoted by the words was more likely to fit into the other. After completion of the study task, participants exited the scanner for 15 min. They returned to the scanner to complete an associative memory test in 3 consecutively administered blocks. One of 3 key press responses was required to indicate whether each test pair was intact, rearranged, or new. Participants were required to respond ‘intact’ when they recognized both words and had a specific memory of the 2 words having been presented together at study. A ‘rearranged’ response was required when both words were recognized from the study phase but there was no specific memory of the words being paired together previously. A ‘new’ response was required when neither or only one word was recognized. The test phase concluded with DTI and structural scans. Participants were instructed to respond ‘intact’ only when they were confident that the words had been studied together. 
 At both study and test, the words were presented for a duration of 2 s just above and below fixation in white uppercase Helvetica 30 point font against a black background. The word pairs subtended an approximate vertical visual angle of 1.8 deg. and a maximum horizontal visual angle of 5.1 deg. at a 56.6 cm viewing distance. Participants viewed the experimental items via a mirror placed directly above their eyes. Each pair was preceded by a red fixation cross for 0.5 s and replaced with a white fixation cross for 1 s at study, and for 2 s at test. Null trials consisted of the presentation of a white fixation cross against a black background for 3.5 s and 4.5 s at study and test respectively. A 30 s break occurred halfway through each study and test block, while inter-block intervals were approximately 2 min in duration. Experimental control, including stimulus display, was implemented in the ‘Cogent’ software package ( http://www.vislab.ucl.ac.uk/cogent.php ). 
 Study and test instructions emphasized the need for both accuracy and speed. 
 
 
 4.5. MRI data acquisition 
 Functional and anatomical images were acquired with a Philips Achieva 3T MR scanner (Philips Medical System, Andover, MA USA) equipped with a 32 channel parallel imaging head coil. A T1-weighted anatomical image was acquired with a 3D magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) pulse sequence (FOV= 256×224, voxel size 1×1×1 mm, 160 slices, sagittal acquisition). Functional scans were acquired with a T 2 * –weighted echo-planar image (EPI) (TR 2 s, TE 30 ms, flip angle 70°, FOV 240×240, matrix size 80×78). Each EPI volume comprised 33×3 mm slices (1 mm inter-slice gap) with an in-plane resolution of 3×3 mm. Slices were acquired in ascending order, oriented parallel to the AC–PC line and positioned for full coverage of the cerebrum and most of the cerebellum. The functional data were acquired using a sensitivity encoding (SENSE) reduction factor of 2. fMRI data were acquired during both study and test phases (311 and 351 volumes for each study and test block, respectively). The first 5 volumes of each block were discarded to allow tissue magnetization to achieve a steady state. For the GLM analyses, study sessions were concatenated to form a single time-series. 
 
 
 4.6. MRI data processing 
 Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), run under Matlab R2008a (MathWorks) was employed for MRI data analysis. Functional images were motion and slice-time corrected, realigned, and spatially normalized using a sample-specific template. The template was created by first normalizing ( Ashburner and Friston 1999 ) the mean volume of each participant’s functional time series (separately for study and test) with reference to a standard EPI template based on the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) reference brain ( Cocosco et al. 1997 ). The normalized mean images were separately averaged within each age group and the resulting 3 mean images were then averaged to generate a template that was equally weighted with respect to the 3 age groups. This template was used to normalize all other volumes, which were also resampled into 3 mm isotropic voxels and smoothed with an isotropic 8 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel. T1 anatomical images were normalized with a procedure analogous to that applied to the functional images, but using as an initial template the standard T1-weighted MNI reference brain. 
 For each participant, item-elicited neural activity was modeled by a delta function and convolved with 2 hemodynamic response functions (HRFs) using a GLM. These functions consisted of a canonical ( Friston et al. 1998 ) and an orthogonalized, delayed HRF ( Andrade et al. 1999 ), the latter generated by shifting the canonical HRF one TR (2 s) later in time. As results from the late HRF did not add anything of theoretical significance to the present findings, we report only the effects detected with the canonical HRF. 
 As noted in the Introduction, we focus here on fMRI findings from the study phase pertaining to negative subsequent memory and stimulus-elicited effects. The fMRI data were analyzed in two stages. In the first stage, separate GLMs were constructed for each participant. Two events of interest were included in the design matrix: study pairs that went on to be correctly endorsed as intact ( subsequent associative hits ) and pairs that were later incorrectly identified as rearranged ( subsequent associative misses ) on the subsequent associative recognition test. The average number (and range) of trials included as subsequent associative hits and misses were, respectively, 100 (42–144) and 41 (12–85) for the young adults, 99 (30–134) and 42 (14–78) for the middle-aged adults, and 89 (25–142) and 46 (11–97) for the older adults. Study pairs later incorrectly identified as new, buffer pairs and the two 30 s breaks interposed during the study list were also modeled, along with 6 regressors representing motion-related variance and 2 constants representing means across each scan session. The time series in each voxel were high-pass filtered to 1/128 Hz to remove low-frequency noise and scaled within session to a grand mean of 100 across voxels and scans. 
 In the second stage of the analysis, the participant-specific parameter estimates for subsequent hits and misses were taken forward to a 3 × 2 mixed-design analysis of variance (ANOVA) with factors of age group (young, middle-aged, older) and subsequent memory (associative hits, associative misses) using an ANOVA model implemented within SPM8 (and hence employing a single pooled error term). Negative subsequent memory effects were identified in a manner unbiased with respect to age group by using the across-group pairwise directional contrast (subsequent misses > subsequent hits) derived from the ANOVA model. Effects exceeding a height threshold of p < 0.001 (one-sided) and comprising clusters of 21 or more contiguous voxels were considered reliable. The cluster extent threshold was determined by a Monte Carlo simulation implemented in AlphaSim ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni ) to give a corrected cluster-wise significance level of p < 0.05. Parameter estimates extracted from regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects were interrogated in order to identify any differences in the magnitude of these effects due to age. We also investigated the effects of age on the magnitude of task-negative effects; these effects were identified by contrasting the activity elicited by all studied pairs (i.e. subsequent hits and misses) with respect to the implicit baseline of the GLM (contrast weights of −1 −1 0) 2 . 
 For the purposes of visualizing the fMRI findings, Caret software ( Van Essen et al., 2001 ) was used to map fMRI effects of interest onto inflated fiducial brains derived from the PALS-B12 atlas ( Van Essen 2002 ,  2005 ) in SPM5 space. Results were also visualized using sections from the across-group averaged T1 structural image. 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 It is worth noting that the contrast we employed to identify task negative effects gave equal weight to study items that went on to receive accurate or inaccurate associative recognition judgments. Therefore, the impact of age on these effects is not confounded with the influence of age that was evident in negative subsequent memory effects. 
 
 
 2 
 The ‘0’ in this contrast refers to the GLM’s implicit baseline measure (as opposed to a regressor specified in the GLM). If we had included rest blocks as a regressor in the GLM, for example, we would have used contrast weights of −1 −1 2. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIH 1R01AG039103). 
 We acknowledge the contributions of Hannah Stanton and Kay Moolenijzer for their assistance with participant recruitment and neuropsychological data collection, and Erin Horne for her help with manuscript preparation. We also thank the staff of the UTSW Advanced Imaging Center for their assistance with MRI data collection. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Andrade 
 A 
 
 
 Paradis 
 AL 
 
 
 Rouquette 
 S 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Ambiguous results in functional neuroimaging data analysis due to covariate correlation 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 10 
 483 
 486 
 10493904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Reidler 
 JS 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Poulin 
 R 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 65 
 550 
 562 
 20188659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Nonlinear spatial normalization using basis functions 
 Hum. Brain Mapp 
 1999 
 7 
 254 
 266 
 10408769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bender 
 AR 
 
 
 Naveh-Benjamin 
 M 
 
 
 Raz 
 N 
 
 
 Associative deficit in recognition memory in a lifespan sample of healthy adults 
 Psychol. Aging 
 2010 
 25 
 4 
 940 
 948 
 20822256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease 
 Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 
 2008 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chua 
 EF 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rand-Giovannetti 
 E 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Evidence for a specific role of the anterior hippocampal region in successful associative encoding 
 Hippocampus 
 2007 
 17 
 11 
 1071 
 1080 
 17604351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cocosco 
 CA 
 
 
 Kollokian 
 V 
 
 
 Kwan 
 RKS 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Brainweb: online interface to a 3D MRI simulated brain database 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 5 
 425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 When less means more: deactivations during encoding that predict subsequent memory 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 921 
 927 
 15528092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 The relationship between task-related and subsequent memory effects 
 Hum. Brain Mapp 
 2014 
 35 
 3687 
 3700 
 24615858 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 Minton 
 B 
 
 
 Muftuler 
 LT 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 The effects of age, memory performance, and callosal integrity on the neural correlates of successful associative encoding 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 2166 
 2176 
 21282317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delis 
 DC 
 
 
 Kramer 
 JH 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 E 
 
 
 Ober 
 BA 
 
 
 California verbal learning test 
 2000 
 2nd ed. 
 San Antonio (TX) 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duverne 
 S 
 
 
 Motamedinia 
 S 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 The relationship between aging, performance, and the neural correlates of successful memory encoding 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 733 
 744 
 18653664 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ellis 
 KA 
 
 
 Lim 
 YY 
 
 
 Harrington 
 K 
 
 
 Ames 
 D 
 
 
 Bush 
 AI 
 
 
 Darby 
 D 
 
 
 Martins 
 RN 
 
 
 Masters 
 CL 
 
 
 Rowe 
 CC 
 
 
 Savage 
 G 
 
 
 Szoeke 
 C 
 
 
 Villemagne 
 VL 
 
 
 Maruff 
 P 
 
 
 Decline in cognitive function over 18 months in healthy older adults with high amyloid-β 
 J. Alzheimer’s Dis 
 2013 
 34 
 4 
 861 
 871 
 23302660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Holmes 
 A 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI: characterizing differential responses 
 Neuroimage 
 1998 
 7 
 30 
 40 
 9500830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 SJ 
 
 
 Bird 
 G 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Does “task difficulty” explain “task-induced deactivation?” 
 Front. Psychol 
 2012 
 3 
 125 
 22539930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Springer 
 MV 
 
 
 Hongwanishkul 
 D 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Age-related changes in brain activity across the adult lifespan 
 J. Cogn. Neurosci 
 2006 
 18 
 227 
 241 
 16494683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gutchess 
 AH 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Bangert 
 A 
 
 
 Minear 
 M 
 
 
 Liu 
 LL 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Aging and the neural correlates of successful picture encoding: frontal activations compensate for decreased medial-temporal activity 
 J. Cogn. Neurosci 
 2005 
 17 
 1 
 84 
 96 
 15701241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hafkemeijer 
 A 
 
 
 van der Grond 
 J 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Imaging the default mode network in aging and dementia 
 Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
 2012 
 1822 
 3 
 431 
 441 
 21807094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ham 
 T 
 
 
 Leff 
 A 
 
 
 de Boissezon 
 X 
 
 
 Joffe 
 A 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Cognitive control and the salience network: an investigation of error processing and effective connectivity 
 J. Neurosci 
 2013 
 33 
 7091 
 7098 
 23595766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Mormino 
 EC 
 
 
 Amariglio 
 RE 
 
 
 Younger 
 AP 
 
 
 Schultz 
 AP 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Cognitive profile of amyloid burden and white matter hyperintensities in cognitively normal older adults 
 J. Neurosci 
 2012 
 32 
 46 
 16233 
 16242 
 23152607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Oh 
 H 
 
 
 Younger 
 AP 
 
 
 Patel 
 TA 
 
 
 Meta-analysis of amyloid-cognition relations in cognitively normal older adults 
 Neurology 
 2013 
 80 
 1341 
 1348 
 23547267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Devous 
 MD 
 Sr 
 
 
 Hebrank 
 AC 
 
 
 Bischof 
 GN 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Effects of beta-amyloid accumulation on neural function during encoding across the adult lifespan 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 62 
 1 
 1 
 8 
 22569063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kukolja 
 J 
 
 
 Thiel 
 CM 
 
 
 Wilms 
 M 
 
 
 Mirzazade 
 S 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Ageing-related changes of neural activity associated with spatial contextual memory 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 2009 
 30 
 4 
 630 
 645 
 17905481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leech 
 R 
 
 
 Kamourieh 
 S 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fractionating the default mode network: Distinct contributions of the ventral and dorsal posterior cingulate cortex to cognitive control 
 J. Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 3217 
 3224 
 21368033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lim 
 YY 
 
 
 Maruff 
 P 
 
 
 Pietrzak 
 RH 
 
 
 Ames 
 D 
 
 
 Ellis 
 KA 
 
 
 Harrington 
 K 
 
 
 Lautenschlager 
 NT 
 
 
 Szoeke 
 C 
 
 
 Martins 
 RN 
 
 
 Masters 
 CL 
 
 
 Villemagne 
 VL 
 
 
 Rowe 
 CC 
 
 
 Effect of amyloid on memory and non-memory decline from preclinical to clinical Alzheimer's disease 
 Brain 
 2014 
 137 
 Pt. 1 
 221 
 231 
 24176981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lin 
 P 
 
 
 Hasson 
 U 
 
 
 Jovicich 
 J 
 
 
 Robinson 
 S 
 
 
 A neuronal basis for task-negative responses in the human brain 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 821 
 830 
 20805236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Bhakta 
 M 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 KC 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 M 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Functional deactivations: change with age and dementia of the Alzheimer type 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
 2003 
 100 
 14504 
 14509 
 14608034 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mattson 
 JT 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Effects of age on negative subsequent memory effects associated with the encoding of item and item–context information 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 in press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKiernan 
 KA 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 JN 
 
 
 Kucera-Thompson 
 J 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging 
 J. Cogn. Neurosci 
 2003 
 15 
 394 
 408 
 12729491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Celone 
 K 
 
 
 DePeau 
 K 
 
 
 Diamond 
 E 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Rentz 
 D 
 
 
 Pihlajamäki 
 M 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Age-related memory impairment associated with loss of parietal deactivation but preserved hippocampal activation 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
 2008 
 105 
 2181 
 2186 
 18238903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morcom 
 AM 
 
 
 Good 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Age effects on the neural correlates of successful memory encoding 
 Brain 
 2003 
 126 
 213 
 229 
 12477708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mormino 
 EC 
 
 
 Brandel 
 MG 
 
 
 Madison 
 CM 
 
 
 Marks 
 S 
 
 
 Baker 
 SL 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 Aβ Deposition in aging is associated with increases in brain activation during successful memory encoding 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 1813 
 1823 
 21945849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Naveh-Benjamin 
 M 
 
 
 Adult age differences in memory performance: tests of an associative deficit hypothesis 
 J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn 
 2000 
 26 
 1170 
 1187 
 11009251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 DL 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 CL 
 
 
 Schreiber 
 TA 
 
 
 The University of Sounth Florida free association, rhyme, and word fragment norms 
 Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 
 2004 
 36 
 402 
 407 
 15641430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Memory function in normal aging 
 Acta. Neurol. Scand. Suppl 
 2003 
 179 
 7 
 13 
 12603244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 When more means less: neural activity related to unsuccessful memory encoding 
 Curr. Biol 
 2001 
 11 
 1528 
 1530 
 11591321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Observing the transformation of experience into memory 
 Trends Cogn. Sci 
 2002 
 6 
 93 
 102 
 15866193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Hebrank 
 A 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 An fMRI study of episodic encoding across the lifespan: changes in subsequent memory effects are evident by middle-age 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2013 
 51 
 3 
 448 
 456 
 23219676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Lautenschlager 
 G 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Davidson 
 NS 
 
 
 Smith 
 AD 
 
 
 Smith 
 PK 
 
 
 Models of visuospatial and verbal memory across the adult life span 
 Psychol Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 2 
 299 
 320 
 12061414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Neural correlates of successful encoding of semantically and phonologically mediated inter-item associations 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 43 
 165 
 172 
 18675362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Lustig 
 C 
 
 
 Nelson 
 JK 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 Age differences in deactivation: a link to cognitive control? 
 J. Cogn. Neurosci 
 2007 
 19 
 1021 
 1032 
 17536972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Pudas 
 S 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Longitudinal assessment of default-mode brain function in aging 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 2014 
 35 
 9 
 2107 
 2117 
 24767950 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
 2001 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Item- and task-level processes in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: positive and negative correlates of encoding 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 21 
 1472 
 1483 
 15050572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 When does age-related cognitive decline begin? 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2009 
 30 
 4 
 507 
 514 
 19231028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salthouse 
 TA 
 
 
 Selective review of cognitive aging 
 J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc 
 2010 
 16 
 5 
 754 
 760 
 20673381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sambataro 
 F 
 
 
 Murty 
 VP 
 
 
 Callicott 
 JH 
 
 
 Tan 
 HY 
 
 
 Das 
 S 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 DR 
 
 
 Mattay 
 VS 
 
 
 Age-related alterations in default mode network: impact on working memory performance 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 2010 
 31 
 839 
 852 
 18674847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control 
 J. Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 2349 
 2458 
 17329432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Laviolette 
 PS 
 
 
 O’Keefe 
 K 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 J 
 
 
 Rentz 
 DM 
 
 
 Pihlajamaki 
 M 
 
 
 Marshall 
 G 
 
 
 Hyman 
 BT 
 
 
 Selkoe 
 DJ 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Keith 
 A 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Amyloid deposition is associated with impaired default network function in older persons without dementia 
 Neuron 
 2009 
 63 
 178 
 188 
 19640477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Posterior parietal cortex and episodic encoding: Insights from fMRI subsequent memory effects and dual-attention theory 
 Neurobiol. Learn. Mem 
 2009 
 91 
 139 
 154 
 19028591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Dickson 
 J 
 
 
 Harwell 
 J 
 
 
 Hanlon 
 D 
 
 
 Anderson 
 CH 
 
 
 Drury 
 HA 
 
 
 An integrated software system for surface-based analyses of cerebral cortex 
 J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc 
 2001 
 41 
 1359 
 1378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Windows on the brain. The emerging role of atlases and databases in neuroscience 
 Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 
 2002 
 12 
 574 
 579 
 12367638 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 A population-average, landmark- and surface-based PALS atlas of human cerebral cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 635 
 662 
 16172003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vannini 
 P 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Becker 
 JA 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 C 
 
 
 Putcha 
 D 
 
 
 Rentz 
 D 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Age and amyloid-related alterations in default network habituation to stimulus repetition 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2012 
 33 
 7 
 1237 
 1252 
 21334099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Cognitive neuroscience: forgetting of things past 
 Curr. Biol 
 2001 
 11 
 R964 
 R967 
 11728323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Building memories: Remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity 
 Science 
 1998 
 281 
 1188 
 1191 
 9712582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 Wechsler test of adult reading 
 2001 
 San Antonio (TX) 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Mickes 
 L 
 
 
 A continuous dual-process model of remember/know judgments 
 Psychol. Rev 
 2010 
 117 
 4 
 1025 
 1054 
 20836613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Regions demonstrating negative subsequent memory effects across age groups. (A) Effects displayed on the right lateral and left medial surfaces of a standardized brain (PALS-B12) atlas using Caret 5, and on a coronal section of the across-groups mean T1-weighted structural image; (B) Parameter estimates (arbitrary units) and standard errors for associative hits, associative misses, mean negative subsequent memory effect, and mean task effect by group and region. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Parameter estimates (arbitrary units) and standard errors for associative hits, associative misses, mean negative subsequent memory effect, and mean task effect, averaged across all voxels within a 5 mm radius of each peak in 9 regions identified by the across-group main effect of negative subsequent memory. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Partial plot showing the relationship between the across-region mean task-negative effect and associative memory performance across older participants after controlling for age. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 (A) Regions demonstrating task-negative effects across age groups. The effects are displayed on the left and right lateral surfaces and left medial surface of a standardized brain (PALS-B12) atlas using Caret 5, and on a coronal section of the across-group mean T1-weighted structural image; (B) Regions where young adults displayed greater task-negative effects than middle-aged adults; (C) Regions where young adults displayed greater task-negative effects than older adults. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Regions where task-negative effects covaried with pR in older adults. Effects are displayed on sagittal sections of the across-group mean T1-weighted structural image and on the right lateral surface of a standardized brain (PALS-B12) atlas using Caret 5. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic and neuropsychological data (mean, SD, and range) for young, middle-aged, and older adults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young adults 
 Middle-aged adults 
 Older adults 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 
 22.2 
 3.0 
 18–29 
 49.4 
 3.4 
 43–55 
 68.4 
 3.6 
 63–76 
 
 
 
 Years of Education 
 a 
 † 
 
 15.5 
 2.4 
 11–22 
 16.3 
 2.6 
 10–22 
 17.1 
 2.3 
 12–22 
 
 
 
 Mini Mental State Exam 
 
 29.6 
 0.6 
 28–30 
 29.3 
 0.8 
 28–30 
 29.3 
 0.8 
 27–30 
 
 
 
 CVLT 1 Composite Recall 
 a 
 † 
 
 13.3 
 1.9 
 9.3–16 
 12.4 
 2.0 
 9–16 
 12.0 
 2.5 
 5.5–16 
 
 
 CVLT 1 Recognition a ‡ ,  b * 
 15.6 
 0.6 
 14–16 
 15.2 
 0.9 
 13–16 
 14.8 
 1.3 
 12–16 
 
 
 CVLT 1 False Positives a † ,  b * 
 0.9 
 1.0 
 0–4 
 1.9 
 2.2 
 0–8 
 1.9 
 2.2 
 0–10 
 
 
 
 WMS 2  Composite Score 
 
 29.0 
 6.6 
 15.5–41 
 27.1 
 6.2 
 14–44.5 
 27.5 
 5.3 
 18.5–39.5 
 
 
 
 Forward/Backward Digit Span 
 
 18.0 
 3.9 
 11–26 
 18.2 
 3.5 
 13–26 
 18.3 
 4.4 
 12–27 
 
 
 Digit Symbol Substitution a ‡ ,  b † ,  c † 
 61.4 
 10.1 
 39–83 
 55.2 
 7.8 
 41–70 
 49.7 
 8.5 
 31–74 
 
 
 Trail A a ‡ ,  c 
 ‡ 
 20.9 
 7.3 
 11–47 
 24.1 
 6.7 
 14–39 
 32.5 
 11.4 
 15–88 
 
 
 Trail B a ‡ ,  c ‡ 
 46.7 
 17.3 
 23–108 
 51.7 
 16.9 
 27–95 
 74.8 
 46.7 
 31–360 
 
 
 
 Letter Fluency 
 
 43.6 
 11.8 
 23–65 
 47.5 
 12.0 
 28–69 
 45.3 
 12.6 
 21–81 
 
 
 
 Category Fluency 
 
 24.8 
 5.9 
 16–42 
 24.0 
 5.9 
 13–36 
 22.3 
 5.5 
 12–40 
 
 
 
 WTAR 3  Raw Score 
 
 112.3 
 5.0 
 102–119 
 111.1 
 5.1 
 101–118 
 112.5 
 5.5 
 101–119 
 
 
 Raven's Prog. Matrices 4 a ‡ ,  b ** 
 11.2 
 1.0 
 8–12 
 10.4 
 1.5 
 7–12 
 9.7 
 2.0 
 3–12 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 California Verbal Learning Test 
 
 
 2 
 Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-IV) 
 
 
 3 
 Wechsler Test of Adult Reading Full Scale Intellectual Quotient 
 
 
 4 
 Short version of Raven’s Progressive Matrices 
 
 
 Note: Statistically significant difference between a) young and older adults, b) young and middle-aged adults, c) middle-aged and older adults. 
 
 
 * 
 P  < .05, 
 
 
 ** 
 P  < .01, 
 
 
 † 
 P  < .005, 
 
 
 ‡ 
 P  < .001, 2-tailed  t -tests. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean associative recognition memory (±SD) for young, middle-aged, and older adults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young 
 Middle-aged 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intact responses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 
 0.63 (0.17) 
 
 
 0.63 (0.14) 
 
 
 0.56 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 0.15 (0.11) 
 0.24 (0.12) 
 0.25 (0.13) 
 
 
 New pairs 
 0.03 (0.06) 
 0.06 (0.07) 
 0.07 (0.07) 
 
 
 
 Rearranged responses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 0.26 (0.12) 
 0.27 (0.11) 
 0.29 (0.13) 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 
 0.64 (0.16) 
 
 
 0.55 (0.15) 
 
 
 0.49 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 New pairs 
 0.29 (0.15) 
 0.30 (0.16) 
 0.30 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 New responses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 0.11 (0.09) 
 0.10 (0.09) 
 0.14 (0.09) 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 0.20 (0.11) 
 0.21 (0.13) 
 0.26 (0.12) 
 
 
 New pairs 
 
 0.68 (0.17) 
 
 
 0.64 (0.19) 
 
 
 0.63 (0.18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: The table shows the proportion of intact, rearranged, and new pairs given intact, rearranged, and new responses. Correct responses are highlighted in bold. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Peak voxels of the across-group main effect of negative subsequent memory. 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates 
 Peak  Z 
 No. of above- threshold voxels 
 Region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 29 
 16 
 3.94 
 23 
 Left anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 −3 
 −28 
 28 
 6.85 
 1297 
 Left posterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 24 
 56 
 19 
 4.72 
 293 
 Right superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 9 
 47 
 4 
 4.11 
 143 
 Right anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 36 
 35 
 34 
 4.08 
 70 
 Right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 42 
 20 
 −2 
 3.98 
 66 
 Right insula 
 
 
 57 
 −22 
 −20 
 4.34 
 55 
 Right inferior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 60 
 −49 
 37 
 5.99 
 567 
 Right supramarginal gyrus 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Results of the across-group regression model investigating variables that predict pR. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 
 b 
 
 SE  b 
 β 
 P  value 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Constant) 
 
 .691 
 .062 
 
 < .001 
 
 
 
 Age 
 
 −.006 
 .001 
 −.680 
 < .001 
 
 
 
 Mean task effect 
 
 .019 
 .029 
 .058 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 Age group × mean task effect 
 
 −.102 
 .032 
 −.373 
 < .005 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note:  b , unstandardized coefficient; SE  b , standard error of the unstandardized coefficient; and β, standardized coefficient. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Peak voxels of task-negative effects that covaried with pR in older adults. 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates 
 Peak  Z 
 No. of above- threshold voxels 
 Region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 29 
 19 
 3.27 
 50 
 Left anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 12 
 38 
 −5 
 3.27 
 53 
 Right medial frontal cortex 
 
 
 15 
 −37 
 7 
 3.25 
 52 
 Right caudate (tail) 
 
 
 66 
 −46 
 37 
 4.44 
 72 
 Right supramarginal gyrus 
 
 
 
 
 
 Associative memory performance declined across young, middle-aged and older adults. 
 Negative subsequent memory effects showed a graded decline with age. 
 Task-negative effects declined markedly from the young to the middle-aged group. 
 Task-negative effects predicted associative recognition in older individuals. 
 
 
