
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101300405 
 34269 
 Brain Imaging Behav 
 Brain Imaging Behav 
 
 Brain imaging and behavior 
 
 1931-7557 
 1931-7565 
 
 
 25280970 
 4385510 
 10.1007/s11682-014-9317-9 
 NIHMS633211 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Task-Rest Modulation of Basal Ganglia Connectivity in Mild to Moderate Parkinson’s Disease 
 
 
 
 
 Müller-Oehring 
 Eva M. 
 
 a 
 d 
 * 
 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 Edith V. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 Adolf 
 
 a 
 d 
 
 
 
 Huang 
 Neng C. 
 
 c 
 
 
 
 Poston 
 Kathleen L. 
 
 b 
 
 
 
 Bronte-Stewart 
 Helen M. 
 
 b 
 
 
 
 Schulte 
 Tilman 
 
 d 
 
 
 a Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305 
 b Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305 
 c Valley Parkinson Clinic, Los Gatos, CA 95032 
 d Neuroscience Program, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 
 * Correspondence: Eva M. Müller-Oehring, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (MC 5723), Stanford University School of Medicine, 401 Quarry Road, Stanford, CA 94305-5723, Phone: 650-859-2767, FAX: 650-859-2743,  evamoe@stanford.edu 
 
 
 22 
 10 
 2014 
 
 
 9 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 9 
 2016 
 
 9 
 3 
 619 
 638 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Parkinson’s disease (PD) is associated with abnormal synchronization in basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops. We tested whether early PD patients without demonstrable cognitive impairment exhibit abnormal modulation of functional connectivity at rest, while engaged in a task, or both. PD and healthy controls underwent two functional MRI scans: a resting-state scan and a Stroop Match-to-Sample task scan. Rest-task modulation of basal ganglia (BG) connectivity was tested using seed-to-voxel connectivity analysis with task and rest time series as conditions. Despite substantial overlap of BG–cortical connectivity patterns in both groups, connectivity differences between groups had clinical and behavioral correlates. During rest, stronger putamen–medial parietal and pallidum–occipital connectivity in PD than controls was associated with worse task performance and more severe PD symptoms suggesting that abnormalities in resting-state connectivity denote neural network dedifferentiation. During the executive task, PD patients showed weaker BG-cortical connectivity than controls, i.e., between caudate–supramarginal gyrus and pallidum–inferior prefrontal regions, that was related to more severe PD symptoms and worse task performance. Yet, task processing also evoked stronger striatal–cortical connectivity, specifically between caudate–prefrontal, caudate–precuneus, and putamen–motor/premotor regions in PD relative to controls, which was related to less severe PD symptoms and better performance on the Stroop task. Thus, stronger task-evoked striatal connectivity in PD demonstrated compensatory neural network enhancement to meet task demands and improve performance levels. fMRI-based network analysis revealed that despite resting-state BG network compromise in PD, BG connectivity to prefrontal, premotor, and precuneus regions can be adequately invoked during executive control demands enabling near normal task performance. 
 
 
 Parkinson’s disease 
 cognitive control 
 response switching 
 fMRI 
 task-related and resting-state functional connectivity 
 neural compensation 
 
 
 
 
 1 Introduction 
 Parkinson’s disease (PD) is marked by dopaminergic dysfunction in midbrain structures projecting to basal ganglia (BG) and affecting motor functions and cognition via interconnected corticostriatal circuits ( Albin et al., 1989 ;  Betchen and Kaplitt, 2003 ;  Damier et al., 1999 ). Neuroimaging studies in PD have identified neural network changes of BG and motor areas affecting movement behavior, and BG–frontal cortex connectivity affecting cognition ( Leisman and Melillo, 2013 ). Motor impairment is the main clinical feature of PD, but cognitive deficits, particularly those involving mental flexibility, conflict resolution, and executive control (e.g., planning, initiation and monitoring of actions) ( Aarsland et al., 2003 ;  Caballol et al., 2007 ;  Dubois and Pillon, 1997 ;  Vandenbossche et al., 2011 ), are frequently observed in the advanced stages of PD, and can emerge even at the early mild disease stages ( Aarsland et al., 2010 ) and before treatment commences ( Cooper et al., 1992 ). Disturbances of executive functions in PD that involve conflict resolution and task switching ( Greenhouse et al., 2013 ; Obeso et al., 2011) can affect planning and carrying through tasks in daily life ( Dirnberger and Jahanshahi, 2013 ); little is known about their neurofunctional correlates ( Aarsland et al. 2003 ;  Caballol et al., 2007 ;  Dubois and Pillon, 1997 ). 
 Cognitive functions and action selection are mediated through the BG ( Stafford and Gurney, 2007 ). This set of subcortical nuclei (globus pallidus, caudate, putamen) interacts closely with the thalamus, cerebellum, frontal and premotor cortices ( DeLong and Wichmann, 2007 ;  McNab and Klingberg, 2008 ) and forms a series of anatomically and functionally segregated circuits, and separable cognitive and motor BG loops ( Graybiel et al., 1994 ;  Middleton and Strick, 2000 ;  Pasquereau et al., 2007 ). Dopamine signaling can modulate the dynamic synchronization of neural activity within and between brain structures ( Dzirasa et al., 2009 ). Disruption of these circuits through the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra in PD potentially results in widespread changes in brain activity and connectivity (e.g.,  Costa et al., 2006 ;  Fuentes et al., 2009 ;  Martinu and Monchi, 2013 ;  Poston and Eidelberg, 2012 ). 
 Functional connectivity neuroimaging has been used in cognitively unimpaired PD to examine the brain’s intrinsic functional architecture at a resting state. Although unimpaired on behavioral cognitive tests, PD patients demonstrated altered functional brain connectivity at rest that involved bilateral inferior parietal cortices and the right medial temporal lobe ( Tessitore et al., 2012 ). Other studies reported decreased resting-state connectivity in patients with mild PD, relative to controls, from substantia nigra/BG to several cortical regions including supplementary motor area (SMA) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) ( Wu et al., 2012 ), and in patients with advanced PD, from the striatum to thalamus, midbrain, pons and cerebellum ( Hacker et al., 2012 ). Notably,  Helmich et al. (2010)  reported a dissociated striatal connectivity pattern in mild PD, with abnormally weak posterior putamen and abnormally strong anterior putamen connectivity to somatosensory and motor cortical regions.  Helmich et al. (2010)  speculated that early in the course of PD the cortical sensorimotor system becomes partitioned into different cortico-striatal loops and that the cortico-striatal remapping may also impair cortico-cortical sensorimotor integration function. Greater than normal connectivity may indicate neurofunctional compensation with the anterior putamen compensating for the more-dopamine depleted posterior portions of the striatum ( Helmich et al., 2010 ). Similarly, greater than normal premotor cortical and cerebellar activity was observed in PD patients performing motor tasks and interpreted as compensatory ( Catalan et al., 1999 ;  Wu and Hallett, 2005 ;  Wu et al., 2014 ). In animal models of PD corticostriatal plasticity was observed as sprouting of dopamine terminals ( Song and Haber, 2000 ) and diffusion of dopamine to more distant targets ( Stanic et al., 2003 ;  Stafella et al., 2005 ) enhancing interactions in corticostriatal circuits that are normally segregated ( Bergmann et al., 1998 ). Yet, when a specific pattern of functional connectivity signifies neural coherence necessary for network efficiency, extended activity to other regions can be a failure to keep neural coherence confined to that specific network and result in poor cognitive or motor performance. Such forms of network dedifferentiation have been reported in normal aging ( Park et al., 2001 ) and in PD during the resting state and associated with motor symptoms ( Baudrexel et al., 2011 ;  Helmich et al., 2011 ;  Yu et al., 2007 ). Thus, changes in the dynamic modulation of neural synchrony in frontostriatal and BG-thalamic-motor cortex circuits during rest and task involvement in PD patients may uncover the role of functional subcortico-cortical networking for motor functions and cognition. 
 To further understanding of the role of BG functional network connectivity in cognitive and motor control function and its modulation in PD, we used a modified Stroop task, i.e., the Stroop Match-to-Sample task ( Schulte et al., 2011 ). Typically, brain areas associated with Stroop conflict resolution are frontoparietal networks, including the dlPFC, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) ( Milham and Banich, 2005 ) and posterior parietal regions ( Liu et al., 2004 ;  Schulte et al., 2009 ,  2011 ). These cortical regions are closely connected with the BG forming cortico-BG loops ( Arimura et al., 2013 ) that play an essential role in neuronal computational processes underlying controlled and automatic aspects of motor behavior ( Wu et al., 2014 ) and cognition in PD ( Lebedev et al., 2014 ). The modified Stroop Match-to-Sample task tested motor control in addition to cognitive functions by manipulating response selection demands requiring subjects either to switch responses or to repeat the same response several times in a row. There is evidence that PD patients do well when engaging in more automatic behavior, and that executive functions are especially impaired when automatic behavior needs to be overridden ( Cameron et al., 2010 ). Accordingly, we expected no impairment in PD for task conditions that engage more automatic behavior, i.e., when responses are repeated (vs. switched) in no-conflict trials. However, mild PD patients will be impaired in cognitive conflict trials, when automatic processing of the word’s meaning needs to be overridden for correct color matching. In addition, we expected normal controls to show conflict adaptation effects, expressed as less conflict with repetition, not mild PD patients. 
 Accordingly, we hypothesized that 1) at the  behavioral level,  PD patients’ ability to exert cognitive control in a Stroop paradigm would be modulated by response demands such as response switching and repetition. We further assumed that 2) at the  neurofunctional level , PD patients, relative to controls, would exhibit weaker BG functional connectivity for motor and cognitive circuits during  rest  and engage additional areas outside the main regions (of the corticostriatal network) during  task  processing. 
 3)  Functional compensation versus dedifferentiation hypothesis:  In principle, brain networks have the potential to enhance function with redistribution of resources ( Schulte et al., 2011 ), but in mild PD, this likely comes at the expense of usurping functional reserve. We expect compensatory neural network engagement during task processing in mild to moderate PD but not during rest. 3a)  Neural compensation : To demonstrate that alternative neural processes are in fact  compensatory,  any synchronous activity in mild PD not seen in the healthy aging comparison group should be associated with normal level performance (c.f.,  Davis et al., 2008 ). 3b)  Neural dedifferentiation : By contrast, if extended BG connectivity to additional regions outside the main network correlates with poorer performance and more severe clinical symptoms this would indicate network dedifferentiation and support a pathophysiological view of BG functional circuitry expansion in PD (see e.g.,  Martinu and Monchi, 2013 ). 
 
 
 2 Material and Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Groups comprised 11 patients with mild Parkinson Disease (PD) ( Gelb et al., 1999 ) and 11 age-matched control (CTL) men and women ( Table 1 ). PD participants were recruited from the Valley Parkinson Clinic and through a local Parkinson’s support group; controls were volunteers from the community. Of the 15 patients who contacted us after hearing about the study, 11 completed the study, 1 moved out of the area, and 3 decided not to participate. Subjects had completed at least 8 years of education. All participants underwent a SCID interview, semi-structured health history interview, and general neurological examination. All were free of lifetime schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, neurological illness other than PD, medical conditions potentially affecting the CNS (e.g., stroke, diabetes), or MRI contraindications. PD patient inclusion criteria were the diagnosis of PD from a board certified neurologist, Hoehn and Yahr stages 1–2 (mild to moderate PD), no cognitive dementia (DRS-2;  Jurica et al., 2004 ; cut-off score ≤132/144,  Pedraza et al., 2010 ; for a discussion on cut-off scores for PD see e.g.,  Fernández de Bobadilla et al., 2013 ;  Pirogovsky et al., 2014 ). PD patients also underwent assessments of ‘mentation’ (part I), daily living (part II) and motor function (part III) with the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS;  Fahn and Elton, 1987 ) by trained clinicians. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, and the Institutional Review Board of SRI International approved the study. 
 PD and control subjects were matched in age, gender, level of education, and handedness ( Table 1 ). Verbal IQ (WTAR) levels of all participants were within the normal range and, on average, slightly lower in the PD than the control group. Groups did not differ in Dementia Rating Scale (DRS-2) total scores ( t (20)=1.43,  p =.17). DRS-2 total scores of all participants were within the normal range except for one subject with a total score of 128, who scored low in the sub-category ‘Conceptualization’ (6 th –10 th  age-corrected percentile) ( Paolo et al., 1995 ).  Pirogovsky et al. (2014)  classified mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in PD for those with complaint in the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS Part I, item 1.1.), which assesses the effect of cognitive impairment on daily functioning. This PD patient scored a 0, i.e., no complaint. In addition, as per Movement Disorder Society (MDS) criteria, PD-MCI is diagnosed if there is impairment on at least two neuropsychological tests represented by either two impaired tests in one cognitive domain or one impaired test in two different cognitive domains. Yet, this PD subject had a normal verbal IQ and normal performance level in all other DRS sub-categories ‘Attention, Initiation/Perseveration, Construction, and Memory’ and in the Stroop Match-to-Sample task. Based on these considerations, we included this PD participant in the study. 
 On average, the PD group had a greater body mass index (BMI) and reported more depressive symptoms (BDI-2) ( Beck et al., 1996 ) than the control group ( Table 1a ). PD subjects showed mild to moderate symptoms, ranging between 1 (unilateral symptoms) and 2 (bilateral disease, without impairment of balance) on the modified Hoehn & Yahr Staging scale ( Fahn and Elton, 1987 ;  Hoehn and Yahr, 1967 ). Pharmacological treatment was not modified from previous regime during testing (c.f.,  Baglio et al., 2011 ). The time since PD diagnosis was on average 3.1 (± 3) years (range: 1 month to 8 years). Medication involved a combination of MAO-B inhibitors, dopamine agonists (DA), and levodopa (l-dopa) in 7 patients, 3 patients were taking MAO-B inhibitors alone, and 1 patient was not treated with any dopamine replacement at the time of the study; yet, at a follow-up phone interview more than a year after the study this patient reported taking DV/L-dopa medication and that the medication was effective in reducing PD symptoms. Levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD) was calculated for each patient ( Herzog et al., 2003 ;  http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/Documents/college.mds/trials/bctu/PDRehab/Investigators/meetings/2010-2/CSmithLEDReview.pdf ) and was on average 473 (± 484 SD) mg ( Table 1b ). LEDD was not related to UPDRS scores (all p> 0.2) or Hoehn and Yahr staging ( Rho =.05,  p =0.87) but was to longer duration since PD diagnosis ( Rho =.74*,  p =0.009). 
 
 
 2.2 Stroop Match-to-Sample Task 
 Subjects performed a Stroop Match-to-Sample task ( Schulte et al., 2008 ,  2009 ,  2011 ) in the scanner. Stimuli were created and presented with  PsyScope  software. Subjects matched the color of a cue stimulus to the color of a Stroop target stimulus. The color cue was presented prior to the Stroop stimulus and either matched or did not match the font color of the Stroop target, which was either congruent (e.g., the word BLUE written in blue font) or incongruent (e.g., the word BLUE written in red font). Subjects were instructed to match the color of the cue to the font color of the Stroop target stimulus. They pressed a YES-key for cue-target color matches and a NO-key for nonmatches using index and middle fingers of their dominant hand, yielding accuracy and reaction time measures. The task used a blocked fMRI design with four blocks requiring response switches (mixed-response blocks) that contained both match (YES-response) and nonmatch (NO-response) trials; and four block requiring response repetitions (same-response blocks) that contained either match trials or nonmatch trials only. Trials presented in same- and mixed-response blocks were the same, only the order of trials differed. Each block had 6 trials; each trial started with a color patch presented for 700 ms, followed by an interstimulus interval of 700 ms, and then the Stroop color-word stimulus was presented for 700 ms; the intertrial interval was 2660 ms. All participants performed a whole task run outside the scanner to ensure that the task instructions were understood and well practiced. Test instructions were further reviewed with the subject by the examiner in a short practice session (8 trials) before entering the scanner and also via the scanner’s intercom system before the onset of the task run. The start of the task was preceded by a countdown of 11 sec. Lengths of scan and number of volumes collected were the same for the task and resting-state fMRI runs. 
 
 2.2.1 Behavioral Stroop data and Z-transformation 
 Errors and reaction times (RTs) were recorded for each trial. Individual mean RTs and SD for correct responses were calculated for each Stroop condition. RT is direct measures of performance that provide information on the effect of an experimental manipulation in milliseconds. To control for task difficulty and individual differences in response latencies (RT) for each participant regardless of diagnosis, we calculated individual z-scores for all Stroop task conditions. Z-scores were obtained by taking the individual’s condition RT means, subtracting the overall mean (collapsed across conditions), and dividing by the standard deviation of the condition mean ( Faust et al., 1999 ). 
 We used z-transformed reaction time data (z-scores) to test the relationships among Stroop task performance, Parkinson Disease severity, and functional connectivity strength. Z-transformation allowed us to study whether PD severity and brain functional connectivity measures are related to specific component processes of Stroop conflict processing (incongruent–congruent), attentional cueing (cue-target match–nonmatch), and response repetition–switching, thereby controlling for individual difference in overall response latency and condition difficulty ( Faust et al., 1999 ). 
 
 
 
 2.3 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) 
 Structural and functional MR imaging data were acquired using a clinical whole-body GE 3T scanner. Subjects were placed comfortably in the scanner with cushions under neck, knees, and the sides of the head in the 8-channel GE head coil. In addition, a headband is fastened over the forehead as a reminder to keep as still as possible. During the 5-minute resting-state fMRI scan session, participants were instructed to lie relaxed with their eyes open and not to think about anything in particular. A mirror mounted on the head coil enabled subjects to look out of the scanner. During the 5-minute task-activated fMRI scan session, participants performed the Stroop Match-to-Sample task. 
 
 2.3.1 Data acquisition and analyses 
 Subject motion was minimized by following best practices for head fixation, and structural image series were inspected for residual motion. Whole-brain fMRI data were acquired with a T2*-weighted gradient echo planar pulse sequence (2D axial, TE=30ms; TR=2200ms; flip angle=90°; in plane resolution=3.75mm; thick=5mm; skip=0mm; locations=36; FOV=240mm; 1 NEX). Instructions were reviewed with the subject by the examiner via the scanner intercom system before the onset of the task and the resting-state scans. Five dummy scan volumes (not saved to disk) were scanned to establish an equilibrium magnetization prior to task and resting-state image acquisition. A dual-echo FSE (2D axial; TR=5000ms; TE=17/102ms; thick=5 mm; skip=0mm; xy matrix=256; flip angle=90°; locations=36; FOV=240mm; 1 NEX) was used for spatially registering the fMRI data. A field map for correction of spatial distortions in the echo-planar images was generated from a gradient-recalled echo sequence pair (TR=460ms, TE=3/5ms, thickness=5mm, skip=0mm, locations=36). 
 Image preprocessing was performed using the SPM8 software package (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology;  www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/ ). The fMRI analysis focused on the whole brain. Participants inclusion criteria for fMRI image analysis was head motion <2mm in any direction, and was met by all subjects for both the task-activated and resting-state fMRI scan series. The functional images were subjected to geometric distortion (field map) correction and motion correction. The FSE structural images were co-registered to the mean unwarped and motion-corrected functional image for each subject and functional and structural images were normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Functional volumes were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8mm 3  (FWHM). 
 For functional connectivity analysis and group comparison, the SPM-based conn toolbox ( www.nitrc.org/projects/conn/ ) was used. Correlational analyses between the BOLD signal from an a priori selected seed for each network ( Raichle et al., 2001 ;  Raichle, 2011 ) and from every other brain voxel during the entire acquisition condition (135 volumes) provided seed-to-voxel connectivity estimations for each subject. Movement parameters were entered as first-level covariates in the model. 
 Before averaging individual voxel data, the waveform of each brain voxel was filtered using a bandpass filter (0.0083/s < f < 0.15/s) to reduce the effect of low-frequency drift and high-frequency noise. Several sources of spurious variance along with their temporal derivatives were then removed from the data through linear regression: signal from movement, signal from ventricular regions, and signal from the white matter. Global signal was not included as a regressor, given evidence that this may introduce spurious anticorrelations into the data (Murphy et al., 2009). Because further steps included between-groups comparisons, temporal connectivity maps were generated for each subject across the conditions. These images were then included in a second-level between-groups, random-effects analysis. 
 
 
 2.3.2 Seed region selection 
 Subcortical seed regions were selected from the aal template ( www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ext/ ) and included the putamen, caudate nucleus, globus pallidus, and thalamus. 
 
 
 2.3.3 Second-level between-groups, random-effects analysis 
 Seed-to-voxel connectivity maps for each group were derived via individual time series correlations of activity over 135 time points, an index of synchronous activity, for task and resting-state scans. Within-group analyses describe seed-to-voxel correlations for each group that met criteria for statistical significance of  p FWE-corrected  < 0.05, with the maps thresholded at the peak level at  p  = 0.001 with  k minimum extent  = 50 voxels. For between-group analyses, statistical thresholds for combined peak intensity and spatial extent were set at  p FWE corrected  < 0.05 ( Poline et al., 1997 ). 
 
 
 
 2.4 Statistical analyses 
 To examine whether Parkinson patients differed from controls in Stroop conditions testing cognitive control and response selection demands, we used mixed effects ANOVA with group (PD, CTL) as the between-subject factor and condition (rest, task) as the repeated-measures factor. For correlation analyses, we used 2-tailed Spearman’s Rho correlations. Multiple linear regression analysis was employed to test for the combined effect of PD-related factors such as daily living symptom severity (UPDRS-II), motor symptom severity (UPDRS-III), years since PD diagnosis, and LEDD on Stroop component processes for response repetition and response switching. The alpha level was set to p<0.05 for all statistical tests; results significant at alpha levels FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons ( Benjamini et al., 2001 ) are marked with a star *. 
 
 
 
 3 Results 
 
 3.1 Stroop Match-to-Sample task performance 
 Both groups showed high accuracy rates and few errors. On average PD committed 7 (6%) and controls (CTL) 3 errors (2%), which was not significantly different ( t =1.79,  p =0.09). Stroop task-derived response times (RTs) showed a trend to be slower in PD (mean of 910±333 ms) than CTL (mean of 708±68 ms) ( t =1.97,  p =0.075). Testing in each group whether individuals with faster responses committed more errors (i.e., lax response criterion) ( Salo et al., 2001 ;  Schulte et al., 2005 ), we found the opposite effect, a positive correlation between response time and error count (CTL  r =.47,  ns ; PD  r =.64,  p =0.034). 
 To test for the effect of PD on Stroop interference for the switching and repetition response blocks, reaction time data were submitted into repeated-measures ANOVA with Stroop (incongruent, INC vs. congruent, CON) and motor response (switching, RS vs. repetition, RR) conditions as within-subject factors and group (PD, CTL) as the between-subject factor. Main effects were observed for Stroop and motor-response conditions: longer RTs for incongruent than congruent Stroop words ( F (1,20)=22.3,  p <0.0001), and longer RTs for response switching than repetitions ( F (1,20)=10.66,  p =0.004). A Stroop-by-response block interaction indicated greater Stroop effects (incongruent > congruent) for response switches than repetitions ( F (1,20)=2.27,  p <0.0001). PD showed a trend for greater Stroop effects than controls ( F (1,20)=3.23,  p =0.068). Following-up on the Stroop-by-response block interaction and based on our hypothesis that cognitive control (Stroop) is modulated by response control demands, we calculated Stroop effects (RT INC  minus RT CON ) for response switching (RS) and response repetition (RR) conditions, and found similar Stroop-RS effects in both groups ( F (1,20)=1.8,  ns ) but greater Stroop-RR effects in PD than controls (MANOVA;  F (1,20)=5.2,  p =0.034) that was due to a reduction of interference with response repetition nearly eliminating Stroop conflict in controls (see incongruent condition; INC) ( Figure 1A ). This analysis was confirmed using Z-transformed scores correcting for individual differences in response latencies ( Figure 1B ). 
 
 3.1.1 PD Severity, levodopa equivalent daily dose and Stroop task performance 
 Less severe impairment in daily living (UPDRS-II) was associated with greater Stroop effects during response switching (RS) due to reduced benefit from congruent-match trials (match condition), and less severe motor symptoms (UPDRS-III) correlated with greater Stroop effects during response repetitions (RR) ( Table 2 ). Here, higher LEDD was, as a trend, correlated with the greater Stroop-RR effects for color-match conditions and this was mainly due to greater benefits from response repetition in congruent no-conflict trials, i.e., response facilitation with higher LEDD ( Table 2 ,  Figure 2 ). LEDD was not correlated with overall response latency ( Rho= .02,  ns ), or the number of errors committed ( Rho= .52,  ns ). 
 Next, we used multiple regression analyses to test for the relative contribution of PD severity factors (UPDRS-II daily living, UPDRS-III motor scores LEDD, years since PD diagnosis, LEDD) to Stroop component processes. A regression model using years since PD diagnosis, UPDRS-II and UPDRS-III scores as factors explained 71% of the variance of Stroop-match effects for response switching (RS) ( F (3,7)=5.57,  p =0.029). Adding LEDD to the model did not add to the variance explanation of Stroop-RS effects ( R 2 =0.71;  F (4,6)=3.58,  p =0.08). Regression models testing for the relative contribution of these three factors to component Stroop-RS processes for ‘benefit from congruent match trials’ (ConRS) ( F (3,7)=1.73,  p =0.25), or ‘interference from incongruent trials’(IncRS) ( F (3,7)=2.69,  p =0.13) were not significant. 
 For Stroop-match effects with response repetition (RR), a regression model with UPDRS-III and LEDD as factors explained together 55% of the total variance of Stroop-RR effects ( F (2,8)=4.81,  p =0.042) with less severe motor symptoms (UPDRS-III,  t =−2.52,  p =0.036) and as a trend higher LEDD ( t =2.12,  p =0.067) contributing independently to greater Stroop-RR effects. A regression model with all 4 PD severity factors was not significant ( F (4,6)=2.68,  p =0.14). Again, regression models testing for the relative contribution of these two factors to component Stroop-RR processes showed a trend for ‘benefit from congruent match trials’ (ConRS) ( R 2 =0.50;  F (2,8)=4.01  p =0.062), with LEDD contributing independently ( t =−2.82,  p =0.023), but not for ‘interference from incongruent trials’ (IncRS) ( F (2,8)=2.74,  p =0.12). 
 Thus, within the patient group, those with more severe PD symptoms (UPDRS daily living and motor scores) exhibited smaller Stroop effects. We next tested for group similarities and differences in the functional basal-ganglia networks at rest and during task processing, and whether connectivity differences in PD relative to controls are associated with better or worse task performance. 
 
 
 
 3.2 Functional Brain Networks 
 For both, task and rest scans, seed-to-voxel connectivity analyses were performed for each  a priori  defined seed and group. Task-rest modulation of connectivity was modeled by using the opposite condition (rest/task) as regressor. We tested for group similarities, using conjunction analyses, and group differences, using contrast analyses, in basal ganglia-thalamocortical networks using striatal (caudate and putamen), globus pallidum, and thalamic seeds for whole brain connectivity analysis. 
 
 3.2.1 Striatum: Caudate connectivity 
 
 Group similarities  ( Figure 3 ,  Suppl. Table 1 ) 
 Both groups showed functional connectivity overlap during both the resting-state and the task between the caudate seed and inferior prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and temporal brain regions including the insula, anterior entorhinal cortex, and temporopolar areas. 
 
 
 Group differences  ( Figure 4 ,  Tables 3  and  4 ) 
 During the resting-state, PD showed more connectivity to thalamic and insula regions, and less connectivity to premotor, motor, and somatosensory regions than controls. During task processing, PD exhibited less connectivity to left temporoparietal regions than controls involving among other regions the supramarginal gyrus (SMG) ( Figure 4.1 ). For task>rest, and when using an uncorrected threshold of p<0.001, PD showed more extended caudate–prefrontal cortical connectivity ( Table 3 ) and stronger caudate–precuneus connectivity relative to controls ( Table 4 ). 
 
 
 
 Putamen connectivity 
 
 Group similarities  ( Figure 3 ,  Supplement Table 2 ) 
 Both groups showed putamen connectivity to inferior prefrontal, insula, superior temporal and parietal regions during rest, with additional connectivity to premotor and dorsal frontal regions during task processing. 
 
 
 Group differences  ( Figure 4 ,  Tables 3  and  4 ) 
 During rest, PD showed less putamen connectivity to anterior prefrontal regions than controls ( Table 3 ). For task>rest, and using an uncorrected p-threshold, interactions indicated that PD, relative to controls, had weaker putamen–dorsal posterior cingulate cortex (dPCC) connectivity and stronger putamen–motor/premotor cortical connectivity ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 4.2 ). 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Globus pallidus connectivity 
 
 Group similarities  ( Figure 3 ,  Supplementary Table 3 ) 
 Testing the functional connectivity of the globus pallidus in PD patients and controls, we found overlapping connectivity for both groups to inferior prefrontal, insula, and entorhinal cortical regions during both rest and task, with additional connectivity to superior and middle temporal regions during rest. 
 
 
 Group differences  ( Figure 4 ,  Tables 3  and  4 ) 
 During task processing, PD showed less pallidum-prefrontal cortical connectivity than controls, also including the subgenual cortex and temporopolar area ( Table 3 ). For task>rest, a significant interaction effect revealed that PD, relative to controls, exhibited weaker pallidum connectivity to inferior prefrontal, anterior cingulate, orbitofrontal, subgenual, and temporal cortices (infPFC), to visual association cortices (VAA) involving fusiform and occipital gyri, and to medial temporal regions including the parahippocampal gyrus, perirhinal and pitiform cortices ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 4.3 ). 
 
 
 
 3.2.3 Thalamus connectivity 
 
 Group similarities  ( Figure 3 ,  Supplementary Table 4 ) 
 Testing the functional connectivity of the thalamus in PD patients and controls, we found overlapping connectivity for both groups to insula, cingulate, and prefrontal cortices during rest and task. 
 
 
 Group differences  ( Figure 4 ,  Tables 3  and  4 ) 
 During task processing, PD, relative to controls, showed more extended thalamus connectivity to posterior parietal cortices and to parahippocampal and subgenual regions, also including the hypothalamus ( Table 3 ). During rest, PD, relative to controls, showed stronger thalamus connectivity to posterior occipital and parietal regions including the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and precuneus, and weaker thalamus–prefrontal and thalamus–cerebellar connectivity. For task>rest, and using an uncorrected p-threshold, an interaction indicated weaker thalamus-cerebellum connectivity in PD than controls ( Table 4 ) ( Figure 4.4 ). 
 
 
 
 
 3.3 Compensation or dedifferentiation? Relationships to performance 
 By correlating connectivity strength with performance, we tested the compensation vs. dedifferentiation hypothesis, i.e., whether BG and thalamo-cortical network engagement during task processing in mild PD, that is not observed CTL, is related to better vs. worse performance; and whether less resting-state neural network engagement in mild PD relative to CTL is related to performance decrements and more severe PD symptoms ( Figure 3 ). 
 
 3.3.1 Striatum: Caudate 
 In PD, relative to controls, task-related caudate connectivity correlated with performance: Stronger  caudate–precuneus  connectivity correlated with larger Stroop effects for response switching blocks ( Rho =.82*,  p =0.002) due to processing interference from incongruent Stroop words ( Rho =.72*,  p =0.013). Similar relationships were observed for stronger  caudate–prefrontal  cortex connectivity that correlated with larger Stroop-match effects during response switching ( Rho =.66,  p =0.024). 
 PD as a group showed weaker caudate–SMG connectivity than controls. Within the patient group, those with weaker connectivity had smaller Stroop-match effects ( Rho =.66,  p =0.024) due to less benefits from correct color cueing in congruent trials during response switching ( Rho =−.82*,  p =0.002). Also during response repetition, weaker caudate–SMG connectivity correlated with smaller Stroop-match effects ( Rho =.66,  p =0.024), and here the relationship was driven by less interference from the incongruent word content ( Rho =.83*,  p =0.002) ( Figure 4.1 ). Further, a moderate relationship was observed between weaker caudate–SMG connectivity and greater UPDRS motor symptom scores ( Rho =−.65,  p =0.029). 
 
 Putamen 
 Stronger task-related putamen–motor/premotor connectivity in PD correlated with greater Stroop-RR effects ( Rho =.70*,  p =0.016). During rest, stronger putamen–dPCC connectivity moderately correlated with smaller Stroop-RS effects ( Rho =−.61,  p =0.047) ( Figure 4.2 ). 
 
 
 
 3.2.2 Globus pallidus 
 For task processing, weaker pallidum–inferior PFC connectivity in PD correlated with smaller Stroop-nonmatch effects during response switching ( Rho =.60,  p =0.05) and repetition ( Rho =.66,  p =0.026); these relationships were driven by less benefit from congruent trials for response switches ( Rho =−.82*,  p =0.002) and by less interference from incongruent trials for response repetitions ( Rho =.72*,  p =0.015). Furthermore, weaker pallidum–PFC connectivity correlated with less UPDRS motor symptoms ( Rho =.70*,  p =0.016). 
 For the resting-state, stronger pallidum–VAA connectivity in PD correlated with smaller Stroop-nonmatch effects ( Rho =−.86*,  p =0.001), and stronger pallidum–fusiform connectivity correlated moderately with smaller Stroop-match effects ( Rho =−.68,  p =0.021) during response repetitions ( Figure 4.3 ). In addition, stronger pallidum–cerebellar (area IX) connectivity correlated with higher UPDRS daily living ( Rho =.71,  p =0.015) and motor symptom scores ( Rho =.77,  p =0.006), and with more depressive symptoms (BDI) ( Rho =.80,  p =0.003). 
 For task>rest, stronger pallidum–fusiform connectivity in PD correlated with higher UPDRS daily living ( Rho =.65,  p =0.030) and motor symptom scores ( Rho =.83,  p =0.002). 
 
 
 3.2.3 Thalamus 
 For the resting-state, weaker thalamus–prefrontal connectivity in PD correlated with greater Stroop effects during response repetitions ( Rho =−.69,  p =0.019) with more interference from incongruent trials ( Rho =−.72,  p =0.013), and the greater thalamus–PCC connectivity in PD correlated with greater Stroop-match effects during response switching ( Rho =.61,  p =0.047) due to more interference from incongruent trials ( Rho =.69,  p =0.019) ( Figure 4.4 ). In addition, stronger task-activated thalamus-precuneus connectivity in PD correlated with higher LEDD ( Rho =.72,  p =0.013). 
 
 
 
 3.4 Whole brain analysis of LEDD effects on BG connectivity in PD 
 Analyzing effect of LEDD on functional connectivity in PD using LEDD as second-level covariate in the within-group whole brain analysis (conn toolbox) revealed effects of LEDD on BG connectivity ( Supplement Table 5 ).  Striatum (caudate, putamen):  Stronger striatal–prefrontal cortical connectivity (rest and task) and weaker caudate–cerebellar connectivity during task processing was related to higher LEDD.  Thalamus:  At rest, stronger thalamus–somatosensory and weaker thalamo–prefrontal cortical connectivity was related to higher LEDD. During task processing, stronger thalamus–insula connectivity was associated with higher LEDD. 
 
 
 
 4 Discussion 
 PD patients at mild to moderate stages of the disease showed near normal Stroop Match-to-Sample task performance with similar cognitive interference during response switching but greater interference during response repetitions compared with controls. Thus, cognitive performance was influenced by motor response demands, differently in PD from controls. As expected, Stroop effects were greater for response switching than repetition indicating higher conflict for response switching conditions in both groups ( Steinhauser and Hübner, 2009 ); by contrast, response repetition attenuated interference from incongruent trials, almost eliminating Stroop conflict in controls ( Figure 1 ). Such ‘conflict adaptation’ with repetition, a phenomenon previously observed in healthy subjects (e.g.,  Kim et al., 2014 ;  Wang et al., 2014 ), was also observed in PD, yet to a significantly lesser extent suggesting alterations in the automatic sources of sequential adaptation for motor response selection with repetition (e.g.,  Jiménez and Méndez, 2013 ) in the presence of cognitive conflict. This can be partly explained by general motoric slowing in PD ( Figure 1A ) and by an impaired adaptation of motor response selection, i.e., less benefit for incongruent trials, when motor commands repeat ( Figure 1B ). 
 In the response-switching condition of the Stroop task, a significant negative correlation with the UPDRS-II symptom severity confirms the role of executive functions, as tested with our paradigm, for quality of daily living ( Koerts et al., 2011 ). It is noteworthy that the UPDRS-II represents a good comparison score for the severity of disease in daily life and correlates with the UPDRS-III motor scores OFF medication ( Stebbins and Goetz, 1998 ;  Vassar et al., 2012 ). Together, symptom severity in motor and daily living functions and longer time since diagnosis explained over 70% of the variation observed in PD patients in their ability to exert executive control in a Stroop task with changing response demands (Stroop-RS). Specifically, patients with higher UPDRS-II scores did not show the cognitive benefit pattern that is typically observed when the cue color matches the color of a congruent Stroop word. 
 With repetitive response demands, over 50% of the variance in Stroop-RR performance in the PD patients was explained by motor symptom severity and LEDD indicating that dopaminergic medication and motor ability together affect automatic response adaptations in cognitive tasks. Automaticity of response selection with repetition is a basic component of motor learning, permits saving of resources ( Sanchez-Lopez et al., 2014 ), and plays an essential role in neuronal computational processes underlying controlled and automatic aspects of motor behavior ( Wu et al., 2014 ) and cognition ( Lebedev et al., 2014 ). PD patients with more severe UPDRS-III motor symptoms showed less interference from incongruent Stroop word information in the easiest task condition, i.e., cue-color match trials with response repetition, which suggests that with more severe motor symptoms less resources were available to process cognitive information such as color-word incongruency in a color matching task ( Schulte et al., 2011 ), potentially due to alterations in basal ganglia–frontal cortical circuitry in PD ( Camicioli et al., 2009 ). 
 
 4.2 Basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical functional networks 
 Overall, our findings show functional task-activated BG network differences in mild PD patients that have behavioral correlates indicative of compensation and resource availability. By contrast, resting-state connectivity pattern in PD, i.e., for the BG (caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus), but not the thalamus, was consistent with a pathophysiological view of intrinsic BG circuitry expansion. 
 
 
 
 Basal ganglia circuitry 
 The  caudate  plays a key role in planning and goal-directed behavior ( Grahn et al., 2008 ;  Ryan et al., 2013 ). In the resting-state, mild PD had more extended caudate functional connectivity to the thalamic and insula regions, and less connectivity to premotor, motor and somatosensory regions, which corresponds to the clinical manifestations of PD ( Hacker et al., 2012 ). However, during the Stroop task, PD patients showed weaker caudate connectivity to left temporoparietal regions and a trend to more prefrontal connectivity compared with controls. The degree of caudate-cortical synchrony during task processing was associated with greater Stroop effects that resulted from greater benefits from congruent information and resource availability for processing interference. Consequently, greater Stroop effects were associated with less severe PD symptoms. Thus, the temporal-to-frontal shift in striato-cortical connectivity during task engagement in mild PD patients may signify a compensatory process that enabled adequate executive control over conflicting response systems ( Harrison et al., 2005 ). 
 The  putamen  is relevant for movement regulation ( Alexander et al., 1990 ) but plays also a role in verbal learning, executive functioning, and working memory ( Hartberg et al., 2011 ). The observed weaker putamen–anterior prefrontal cortical connectivity during rest in PD patients could reflect difficulties PD patients have in initiating movements and flexibly changing motor output ( Playford et al., 1992 ). During task processing, however, stronger putamen–motor/premotor cortex connectivity was associated with greater Stroop effects during response repetitions. Considering that greater Stroop effects were related to less PD severity, this result may suggest that at less severe stages of the disease PD patients can adapt frontostriatal cortical networking to accommodate interference processing when resources become available as motor commands repeat. 
 Within the basal ganglia-cortical network, the  globus pallidus  is a structure that receives striatal outputs and has been implicated in converging the divergent striatal-cortical signals from the neocortex and sending processed information to frontal cortex areas that have been implicated in motor planning and execution, and cognitive control ( Graybiel et al., 1994 ;  Bhatia and Marsden, 1994 ;  Kim et al., 2008 ;  Rodriguez-Oroz et al., 2009 ). An interaction effect indicated that specifically pallidum connectivity is differently modulated by task–rest conditions in PD than controls. Relative to controls, PD patients demonstrated weaker pallidum connectivity to prefrontal and occipital cortical regions during the task than when resting. Decreased basal ganglia–prefrontal resting-state connectivity was previously observed in PD and associated to more severe disease states ( Wu et al., 2012 ) and in our study, to poorer Stroop task performance. Our results further suggest a role of pallidal resting-state connectivity to cerebellar regions for both disease severity and depressive symptoms, a common symptom in PD ( Kirsch-Darrow et al., 2006 ). Thus, compromised rest-task modulation of pallidum connectivity in mild PD may reflect neural disturbances of wide-spread functional networking that underlie motor symptoms, and can also subserve mood states, and daily living functions. Notably, the intrinsic resting-state patterns of BG network connectivity were more deviant (from controls) in PD patients with greater disease symptom severity; and this stronger resting-state connectivity, i.e., between pallidum–occipital and also putamen–medial parietal cortices, in turn correlated with worse Stroop performance. Here, the association of  resting-state  connectivity with poorer performance and more severe clinical symptoms supports a pathophysiological view of BG intrinsic circuitry expansion in PD. By contrast, the association of stronger  task-evoked  BG connectivity to additional regions with milder PD symptoms and better performance suggests a compensatory neural mechanism and brain functional resource availability. 
 
 
 Thalamus circuitry 
 Within basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuits, the thalamus has been considered a ‘center of integration of networks’ (Haber and Calzavara, 2009) with segregated thalamic nuclei projecting to medial prefrontal, amygdala and hippocampus forming limbic-thalamic loops (Amaral and Cowan, 1980; Norita and Kawamura, 1980), to primary motor and sensory cortices forming motor-thalamic loops (Matelli et al., 1989), and to dlPFC, orbitofrontal, and anterior cingulate cortices forming ‘cognitive’ fronto-thalamic loops (Giguerre and Goldman-Rakic, 1988). The resting-state thalamic-cortical connectivity pattern showed stronger thalamus connectivity to posterior occipital and parietal regions, including the PCC/precuneus, a major node of the resting-state self-referential network ( Raichle, 2011 ), and weaker thalamo-prefrontal connectivity in PD than controls, and here the deviation from normal connectivity was associated with better Stroop performance. Thus, the differential thalamo-cortical connectivity during rest in PD relative to healthy controls may reflect a redistribution of intrinsic functional resources that may have played a role in sustaining executive control function (see also,  Buhmann et al., 2005 ;  van Nuenen et al., 2012 ). Specifically, stronger thalamus–PCC connectivity together with weaker thalamus–prefrontal connectivity during the resting-state may reflect a compensatory response within self-referential networks ( van Nuenen et al., 2012 ) with the potential to provide resources for task performance. With its several parallel and segregated motor, limbic, and cognitive loops, and its connectivity to the striatum (Haber and Calzavara, 2009), the thalamus is well positioned to reconcile functional subcortico-cortical networking to compensate for neural compromise in PD. 
 From an anatomical view, normal motor function is achieved by the interaction of two different basal ganglia–cortical functional loops, a fast ‘direct’ pathway and a slow ‘indirect’ midbrain-striatal-pallidal-thalamo-cortical pathway (Nambu et al., 2002). PD is associated with an up-regulation of the indirect and down-regulation of the direct motor pathway. For example, during rest we observed stronger caudate-thalamocortical connectivity and weaker caudate-motor cortical connectivity, potentially reflecting patterns of ‘up’ and ‘down’ regulation in the synchronization of striatal-thalamic and striatal-motor cortex activity. Yet, differences in functional connectivity may not necessarily indicate differences in anatomical connectivity, and the reduced basal ganglia–cortical connectivity during rest was not restricted to motor cortical regions but involved prefrontal, parietal and extrastriate cortices as well ( Boehler et al., 2011 ;  van Nuenen et al., 2012 ). 
 During Stroop task processing, thalamus-precuneus connectivity was related to levodopa-equivalent daily dose in PD patients suggesting some influence of dopaminergic medication on the synchronization of activity within thalamic loops. In healthy subjects, dopaminergic medication can both increase and decrease connectivity ( Honey et al., 2003 ), while in mild PD dopaminergic medication was found to decrease striatal–thalamic resting-state connectivity ( Kwak et al., 2010 ). Considering the thalamus as ‘center of integration of networks’ (Haber and Calzavara, 2009) and the precuneus as the functional core of the default mode network that is typically inversely connected to other network regions for rest versus task processing states ( Utevsky et al., 2014 ), it could be speculated that dopaminergic medication can modulate rest–task dynamic synchronization within thalamic loops. 
 A limitation of our study is that we did not test our PD patients’ off-medication, a state in which decreased functional connectivity in the SMA has been observed in comparison to normal subjects ( Wu et al., 2009 ). Dopaminergic medical treatment, i.e., with levodopa, reduces Parkinson symptoms and provides best possible motor performance levels to patients. Accordingly, increased functional connectivity of the sensorimotor network has been reported, especially in drug-naive PD patients ( Esposito et al., 2013 ). Although we do not claim that simple correlations can grasp the complex effect of dopaminergic medications on the cognitive and sensorimotor networks, we found indication that higher levodopa-equivalent daily dose is related to greater activation synchrony between thalamus–precuneus, which points to a subtle and positive impact of LEDD. The positive effect of LEDD on synchronizing thalamus-somatosensory cortical activity in PD patients was confirmed in an independent whole brain covariate analysis that also revealed an effect of LEDD for stronger striatal–prefrontal synchrony. Behaviorally, LEDD was associated with faster response latencies for the easiest condition during Stroop task performance. Thus, this study provides preliminary evidence for dopaminergic effects on striato-frontal and thalamo-somatosensory network synchrony and behaviorally, for dopaminergic effects on fast response execution for more automatic, i.e., repetitive and no-conflict, processes that do not rely on executive control. Although the brain data reported herein met high statistical standards corrected for multiple comparisons for testing network similarities and differences, a limitation of the current study is the relatively small sample size, a common problem in neuroimaging studies (see also Desmond and Glover, 2002), especially those of neurodegenerative disorders. Although seed-to-voxel connectivity approaches allow examining the dynamic reconfiguration of brain networks, e.g., of the basal ganglia, we cannot rule out that the observed pattern of resting-state and task-activated connectivity dynamics in PD and controls are mediated by other unidentified regions. 
 Our findings support the view that weak synchrony of resting-state basal ganglia-cortical networks may play an important role in the pathophysiology of motor and cognitive symptoms in PD (Baudrexel at al., 2014;  Li et al., 2007 ). By contrast, for task engagement enhanced BG-cortical connectivity at an early stage of the disease may serve a compensatory role in PD patients (see e.g.,  Fling et al. 2014 ) with potential relevance for estimating disease progression in motor and cognitive function. Use of functional MRI with network analysis appears to be a useful method to test the dynamic modulation of network synchronization during rest and in response to cognitive and motoric task demands in PD. Longitudinal studies are warranted to test the predictive value of the observed patterns for disease progression. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 11682_2014_9317_MOESM1_ESM 
 
 
 
 11682_2014_9317_MOESM2_ESM 
 
 
 
 11682_2014_9317_MOESM3_ESM 
 
 
 
 11682_2014_9317_MOESM4_ESM 
 
 
 
 11682_2014_9317_MOESM5_ESM 
 
 
 
 
 
 Support: AA018022, AA012388, AA017168, AA010723, AA017923, NIH/NINDS K23 NS075097, NIH/NINDS P50 NS071675, Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s disease 
 
 
 
 
 Conflict of Interest 
 
 Authors Eva M. Müller-Oehring, Edith V. Sullivan, Adolf Pfefferbaum, Neng C. Huang, Kathleen L. Poston, Helen M. Bronte-Stewart, and Tilman Schulte declare that they have no conflict of interest. 
 
 
 
 Informed Consent 
 
 All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000. Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aarsland 
 D 
 
 
 Hutchinson 
 M 
 
 
 Larsen 
 JP 
 
 
 2003 
 Cognitive, psychiatric and motor response to galantamine in Parkinson’s disease with dementia 
 International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 
 18 
 937 
 941 
 14533126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aarsland 
 D 
 
 
 Bronnick 
 K 
 
 
 Williams-Gray 
 C 
 
 
 Weintraub 
 D 
 
 
 Marder 
 K 
 
 
 Kulisevsky 
 J 
 
 
 Burn 
 D 
 
 
 Barone 
 P 
 
 
 Pagonabarraga 
 J 
 
 
 Allcock 
 L 
 
 
 Santangelo 
 G 
 
 
 Foltynie 
 T 
 
 
 Janvin 
 C 
 
 
 Larsen 
 JP 
 
 
 Barker 
 RA 
 
 
 Emre 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease: a multicenter pooled analysis 
 Neurology 
 75 
 1062 
 1069 
 20855849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albin 
 RL 
 
 
 Young 
 AB 
 
 
 Penney 
 JB 
 
 
 1989 
 The functional anatomy of basal ganglia disorders 
 Trends in Neuroscience 
 12 
 366 
 75 
 Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alexander 
 GE 
 
 
 Crutcher 
 MD 
 
 
 DeLong 
 MR 
 
 
 1990 
 Basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits: parallel substrates for motor, oculomotor, “prefrontal” and “limbic” functions 
 Progress in Brain Research 
 85 
 119 
 146 
 Review 
 2094891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arimura 
 N 
 
 
 Nakayama 
 Y 
 
 
 Yamagata 
 T 
 
 
 Tanji 
 J 
 
 
 Hoshi 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Involvement of the globus pallidus in behavioral goal determination and action specification 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 33 
 13639 
 13653 
 23966686 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baglio 
 F 
 
 
 Blasi 
 V 
 
 
 Falini 
 A 
 
 
 Farina 
 E 
 
 
 Mantovani 
 F 
 
 
 Olivotto 
 F 
 
 
 Scotti 
 G 
 
 
 Nemni 
 R 
 
 
 Bozzali 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Functional brain changes in early Parkinson’s disease during motor response and motor inhibition 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 32 
 115 
 24 
 19188005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baudrexel 
 S 
 
 
 Witte 
 T 
 
 
 Seifried 
 C 
 
 
 von Wegner 
 F 
 
 
 Beissner 
 F 
 
 
 Klein 
 JC 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Roeper 
 J 
 
 
 Hilker 
 R 
 
 
 2011 
 Resting state fMRI reveals increased subthalamic nucleus-motor cortex connectivity in Parkinson’s disease 
 Neuroimage 
 55 
 1728 
 38 
 21255661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 A 
 
 
 Steer 
 R 
 
 
 Brown 
 G 
 
 
 1996 
 Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II 
 San Antonio, TX 
 Psychological Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benjamini 
 Y 
 
 
 Drai 
 D 
 
 
 Elmer 
 G 
 
 
 Kafkafi 
 N 
 
 
 Golani 
 I 
 
 
 2001 
 Controlling the false discovery rate in behavior genetics research 
 Behavioural Brain Research 
 125 
 279 
 284 
 11682119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bergman 
 H 
 
 
 Feingold 
 A 
 
 
 Nini 
 A 
 
 
 Raz 
 A 
 
 
 Slovin 
 H 
 
 
 Abeles 
 M 
 
 
 Vaadia 
 E 
 
 
 1998 
 Physiological aspects of information processing in the basal ganglia of normal and parkinsonian primates 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 21 
 32 
 38 
 9464684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Betchen 
 SA 
 
 
 Kaplitt 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Future and current surgical therapies in Parkinson’s disease 
 Current Opinion in Neurology 
 16 
 487 
 493 
 12869808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bhatia 
 KP 
 
 
 Marsden 
 CD 
 
 
 1994 
 The behavioural and motor consequences of focal lesions of the basal ganglia in man 
 Brain 
 117 
 859 
 876 
 7922471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boehler 
 CN 
 
 
 Appelbaum 
 LG 
 
 
 Krebs 
 RM 
 
 
 Chen 
 LC 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 2011 
 The role of stimulus salience and attentional capture across the neural hierarchy in a stop-signal task 
 PLoS One 
 6 
 e26386 
 22022611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buhmann 
 C 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Klein 
 C 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 van Eimeren 
 T 
 
 
 Erdmann 
 C 
 
 
 Hedrich 
 K 
 
 
 Kasten 
 M 
 
 
 Hagenah 
 J 
 
 
 Deuschl 
 G 
 
 
 Pramstaller 
 PP 
 
 
 Siebner 
 HR 
 
 
 2005 
 Motor reorganization in asymptomatic carriers of a single mutant Parkin allele: a human model for presymptomatic parkinsonism 
 Brain 
 128 
 2281 
 2290 
 15947065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caballol 
 N 
 
 
 Martí 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tolosa 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Cognitive dysfunction and dementia in Parkinson disease 
 Movement disorders: Official Journal of the Movement Disorder Society 
 22 
 S358 
 366 
 18175397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cameron 
 IG 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 M 
 
 
 Pari 
 G 
 
 
 Munoz 
 DP 
 
 
 2010 
 Executive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: response automaticity and task switching 
 Neuropsychologia 
 48 
 1948 
 1957 
 20303998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Camicioli 
 R 
 
 
 Gee 
 M 
 
 
 Bouchard 
 TP 
 
 
 Fisher 
 NJ 
 
 
 Hanstock 
 CC 
 
 
 Emery 
 DJ 
 
 
 Martin 
 WR 
 
 
 2009 
 Voxel-based morphometry reveals extra-nigral atrophy patterns associated with dopamine refractory cognitive and motor impairment in parkinsonism 
 Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 
 15 
 187 
 195 
 18573676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cao 
 X 
 
 
 Cao 
 Q 
 
 
 Long 
 X 
 
 
 Sun 
 L 
 
 
 Sui 
 M 
 
 
 Zhu 
 C 
 
 
 Zuo 
 X 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 Y 
 
 
 2009 
 Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity patterns of the putamen in medication-naïve children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
 Brain Research 
 1303 
 195 
 206 
 19699190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Catalan 
 MJ 
 
 
 Ishii 
 K 
 
 
 Honda 
 M 
 
 
 Samii 
 A 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 A PET study of sequential finger movements of varying length in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
 Brain 
 122 
 483 
 495 
 10094257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooper 
 J 
 
 
 Sagar 
 H 
 
 
 Doherty 
 S 
 
 
 Jordan 
 N 
 
 
 Tidswell 
 P 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 E 
 
 
 1992 
 Different effects of dopaminergic and anticholinergic therapies on cognitive and motor function in Parkinson’s disease. A follow-up study of untreated patients 
 Brain 
 115 
 1701 
 1725 
 1486457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Costa 
 RM 
 
 
 Lin 
 SC 
 
 
 Sotnikova 
 TD 
 
 
 Cyr 
 M 
 
 
 Gainetdinov 
 RR 
 
 
 Caron 
 MG 
 
 
 Nicolelis 
 MA 
 
 
 2006 
 Rapid alterations in corticostriatal ensemble coordination during acute dopamine-dependent motor dysfunction 
 Neuron 
 52 
 2 
 359 
 369 
 17046697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crovitz 
 HF 
 
 
 Zener 
 K 
 
 
 1962 
 A group-test for assessing hand- and eye-dominance 
 The American Journal of Psychology 
 75 
 271 
 276 
 13882420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damier 
 P 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 EC 
 
 
 Agid 
 Y 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 The substantia nigra of the human brain. II. Patterns of loss of dopamine-containing neurons in Parkinson’s disease 
 Brain 
 122 
 1437 
 1448 
 10430830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 S 
 
 
 Dennis 
 N 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 S 
 
 
 Fleck 
 M 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2008 
 Que PASA? The posterior-anterior shift in aging 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 1201 
 1209 
 17925295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeLong 
 MR 
 
 
 Wichmann 
 T 
 
 
 2007 
 Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia 
 Archives of Neurology 
 64 
 20 
 24 
 Review 
 17210805 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dirnberger 
 G 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 2013 
 Executive dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease: a review 
 Journal of Neuropsychology 
 7 
 193 
 224 
 24007368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 Pillon 
 B 
 
 
 1997 
 Cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease 
 Journal of Neurology 
 244 
 2 
 8 
 Review 
 9007738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dzirasa 
 K 
 
 
 Ramsey 
 AJ 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 DY 
 
 
 Stapleton 
 J 
 
 
 Potes 
 JM 
 
 
 Williams 
 JK 
 
 
 Gainetdinov 
 RR 
 
 
 Sameshima 
 K 
 
 
 Caron 
 MG 
 
 
 Nicolelis 
 MA 
 
 
 2009 
 Hyperdopaminergia and NMDA receptor hypofunction disrupt neural phase signaling 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 8215 
 8224 
 19553461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 R 
 
 
 Harris 
 A 
 
 
 Stanley 
 D 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 1999 
 The parahippocampal place area: recognition, navigation, or encoding? 
 Neuron 
 23 
 115 
 125 
 10402198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Tessitore 
 A 
 
 
 Giordano 
 A 
 
 
 De Micco 
 R 
 
 
 Paccone 
 A 
 
 
 Conforti 
 R 
 
 
 Pignataro 
 G 
 
 
 Annunziato 
 L 
 
 
 Tedeschi 
 G 
 
 
 2013 
 Rhythm-specific modulation of the sensorimotor network in drug-naive patients with Parkinson’s disease by levodopa 
 Brain 
 136 
 710 
 725 
 23423673 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fahn 
 S 
 
 
 Elton 
 RL 
 
 
 
 
 Fahn 
 D 
 
 
 Marsden 
 CD 
 
 
 Calne 
 D 
 
 
 Goldstein 
 M 
 
 
 1987 
 Members of the UPDRS Development Committee.  
 Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale 
 Recent Development in Parkinson’s Disease 
 2 
 Florham Park, NJ 
 Maacmillan Healthcare Information 
 153 
 163 
 293 
 304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 ME 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Spieler 
 DH 
 
 
 Ferraro 
 FR 
 
 
 1999 
 Individual differences in information-processing rate and account: Implications for group differences in response latency 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 125 
 777 
 799 
 10589302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fernández de Bobadilla 
 R 
 
 
 Pagonabarraga 
 J 
 
 
 Martínez-Horta 
 S 
 
 
 Pascual-Sedano 
 B 
 
 
 Campolongo 
 A 
 
 
 Kulisevsky 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 Parkinson’s disease-cognitive rating scale: psychometrics for mild cognitive impairment 
 Movement Disorders 
 28 
 1376 
 1383 
 23873810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fling 
 BW 
 
 
 Cohen 
 RG 
 
 
 Mancini 
 M 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 SD 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Nutt 
 JG 
 
 
 Horak 
 FB 
 
 
 2014 
 Functional reorganization of the locomotor network in Parkinson patients with freezing of gait 
 PLoS One 
 9 
 e100291 
 24937008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fuentes 
 R 
 
 
 Petersson 
 P 
 
 
 Siesser 
 W 
 
 
 Caron 
 MG 
 
 
 Nicolelis 
 MA 
 
 
 2009 
 Spinal cord stimulation restores locomotion in animal models of Parkinson’s disease 
 Science 
 323 
 1578 
 1582 
 19299613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gelb 
 DJ 
 
 
 Oliver 
 E 
 
 
 Gilman 
 S 
 
 
 1999 
 Diagnostic criteria for Parkinson disease 
 Archives of Neurology 
 56 
 33 
 39 
 9923759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grahn 
 JA 
 
 
 Parkinson 
 JA 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 The cognitive functions of the caudate nucleus 
 Progress in Neurobiology 
 86 
 141 
 55 
 18824075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 Aosaki 
 T 
 
 
 Flaherty 
 AW 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 1994 
 The basal ganglia and adaptive motor control 
 Science 
 265 
 1826 
 1831 
 8091209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greenhouse 
 I 
 
 
 Gould 
 S 
 
 
 Houser 
 M 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 2013 
 Stimulation of contacts in ventral but not dorsal subthalamic nucleus normalizes response switching in Parkinson’s disease 
 Neuropsychologia 
 51 
 1302 
 1309 
 23562963 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hacker 
 CD 
 
 
 Perlmutter 
 JS 
 
 
 Criswell 
 SR 
 
 
 Ances 
 BM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 2012 
 Resting state functional connectivity of the striatum in Parkinson’s disease 
 Brain 
 135 
 3699 
 3711 
 23195207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Shaw 
 M 
 
 
 Yücel 
 M 
 
 
 Purcell 
 R 
 
 
 Brewer 
 WJ 
 
 
 Strother 
 SC 
 
 
 Egan 
 GF 
 
 
 Olver 
 JS 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Pantelis 
 C 
 
 
 2005 
 Functional connectivity during Stroop task performance 
 Neuroimage 
 24 
 181 
 191 
 15588609 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hartberg 
 CB 
 
 
 Sundet 
 K 
 
 
 Rimol 
 LM 
 
 
 Haukvik 
 UK 
 
 
 Lange 
 EH 
 
 
 Nesvåg 
 R 
 
 
 Melle 
 I 
 
 
 Andreassen 
 OA 
 
 
 Agartz 
 I 
 
 
 2011 
 Subcortical brain volumes relate to neurocognition in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and healthy controls 
 Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biological Psychiatry 
 35 
 1122 
 1130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Helmich 
 RC 
 
 
 Derikx 
 LC 
 
 
 Bakker 
 M 
 
 
 Scheeringa 
 R 
 
 
 Bloem 
 BR 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 2010 
 Spatial remapping of cortico-striatal connectivity in Parkinson’s disease 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 20 
 1175 
 1186 
 19710357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Helmich 
 RC 
 
 
 Janssen 
 MJ 
 
 
 Oyen 
 WJ 
 
 
 Bloem 
 BR 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 2011 
 Pallidal dysfunction drives a cerebellothalamic circuit into Parkinson tremor 
 Annals of Neurology 
 69 
 269 
 281 
 21387372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herzog 
 J 
 
 
 Volkmann 
 J 
 
 
 Krack 
 P 
 
 
 Kopper 
 F 
 
 
 Pötter 
 M 
 
 
 Lorenz 
 D 
 
 
 Steinbach 
 M 
 
 
 Klebe 
 S 
 
 
 Hamel 
 W 
 
 
 Schrader 
 B 
 
 
 Weinert 
 D 
 
 
 Müller 
 D 
 
 
 Mehdorn 
 HM 
 
 
 Deuschl 
 G 
 
 
 2003 
 Two-year follow-up of subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease 
 Movement Disorders: Official Journal of the Movement Disorder Society 
 18 
 1332 
 1337 
 14639676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoehn 
 M 
 
 
 Yahr 
 M 
 
 
 1967 
 Parkinsonism: onset, progression and mortality 
 Neurology 
 17 
 427 
 442 
 6067254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Honey 
 GD 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Zelaya 
 F 
 
 
 Long 
 C 
 
 
 Routledge 
 C 
 
 
 Jackson 
 S 
 
 
 Ng 
 V 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 PC 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Brown 
 J 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2003 
 Dopaminergic drug effects on physiological connectivity in a human cortico-striato-thalamic system 
 Brain 
 126 
 1767 
 1781 
 12805106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiménez 
 L 
 
 
 Méndez 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 It is not what you expect: dissociating conflict adaptation from expectancies in a Stroop task 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance 
 39 
 271 
 284 
 22428671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jurica 
 PJ 
 
 
 Leitten 
 CL 
 
 
 Mattis 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 DRS-2 Dementia Rating Scale-2 
 Professional manual: Psychological Assessment Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 SH 
 
 
 Park 
 KH 
 
 
 Sung 
 YH 
 
 
 Lee 
 YB 
 
 
 Park 
 HM 
 
 
 Shin 
 DJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Dementia mimicking a sudden cognitive and behavioral change induced by left globus pallidus infarction: review of two cases 
 Journal of the Neurological Sciences 
 272 
 178 
 182 
 18561954 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 C 
 
 
 Johnson 
 NF 
 
 
 Gold 
 BT 
 
 
 2014 
 Conflict adaptation in prefrontal cortex: now you see it, now you don’t 
 Cortex 
 50 
 76 
 85 
 24074459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirsch-Darrow 
 L 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 HH 
 
 
 Marsiske 
 M 
 
 
 Okun 
 MS 
 
 
 Bowers 
 D 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociating apathy and depression in Parkinson disease 
 Neurology 
 67 
 33 
 38 
 16832074 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koerts 
 J 
 
 
 Van Beilen 
 M 
 
 
 Tucha 
 O 
 
 
 Leenders 
 KL 
 
 
 Brouwer 
 WH 
 
 
 2011 
 Executive functioning in daily life in Parkinson’s disease: initiative, planning and multi-task performance 
 PLoS One 
 6 
 12 
 e29254 
 22206004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kwak 
 Y 
 
 
 Peltier 
 S 
 
 
 Bohnen 
 NI 
 
 
 Müller 
 ML 
 
 
 Dayalu 
 P 
 
 
 Seidler 
 RD 
 
 
 2010 
 Altered resting state cortico-striatal connectivity in mild to moderate stage Parkinson’s disease 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 4 
 143 
 21206528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lebedev 
 AV 
 
 
 Westman 
 E 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Lebedeva 
 A 
 
 
 Siepel 
 FJ 
 
 
 Pereira 
 JB 
 
 
 Aarsland 
 D 
 
 
 2014 
 Large-scale resting state network correlates of cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease and related dopaminergic deficits 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 8 
 45 
 24765065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leisman 
 G 
 
 
 Melillo 
 R 
 
 
 2013 
 The basal ganglia: motor and cognitive relationships in a clinical neurobehavioral context 
 Reviews in the Neurosciences 
 24 
 9 
 25 
 23241666 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Apathy and the functional anatomy of the prefrontal cortex-basal ganglia circuits 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 16 
 916 
 928 
 16207933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 S 
 
 
 Arbuthnott 
 GW 
 
 
 Jutras 
 MJ 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 JA 
 
 
 Jaeger 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 Resonant antidromic cortical circuit activation as a consequence of high-frequency subthalamic deepbrain stimulation 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 98 
 3525 
 3537 
 17928554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Jacobson 
 BL 
 
 
 Tanabe 
 JL 
 
 
 2004 
 Common and distinct neural substrates of attentional control in an integrated Simon and spatial Stroop task as assessed by event-related fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 22 
 1097 
 1106 
 15219581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martinu 
 K 
 
 
 Monchi 
 O 
 
 
 2013 
 Cortico-basal ganglia and cortico-cerebellar circuits in Parkinson’s disease: pathophysiology or compensation? 
 Behavoral Neuroscience 
 127 
 222 
 236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McNab 
 F 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 2008 
 Prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia control access to working memory 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 11 
 103 
 107 
 18066057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middleton 
 FA 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2000 
 Basal ganglia output and cognition: evidence from anatomical, behavioral, and clinical studies 
 Brain and Cognition 
 42 
 183 
 200 
 10744919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2005 
 Anterior cingulate cortex: an fMRI analysis of conflict specificity and functional differentiation 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 25 
 328 
 335 
 15834861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Obeso 
 I 
 
 
 Wilkinson 
 L 
 
 
 Rodríguez-Oroz 
 MC 
 
 
 Obeso 
 JA 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 2013 
 Bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus has differential effects on reactive and proactive inhibition and conflict-induced slowing in Parkinson’s disease 
 Experimental Brain Research 
 226 
 451 
 462 
 23525560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pasquereau 
 B 
 
 
 Nadjar 
 A 
 
 
 Arkadir 
 D 
 
 
 Bezard 
 E 
 
 
 Goillandeau 
 M 
 
 
 Bioulac 
 B 
 
 
 Gross 
 CE 
 
 
 Boraud 
 T 
 
 
 2007 
 Shaping of motor responses by incentive values through the basal ganglia 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 27 
 5 
 1176 
 1183 
 17267573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paolo 
 AM 
 
 
 Tröster 
 AI 
 
 
 Glatt 
 SL 
 
 
 Hubble 
 JP 
 
 
 Koller 
 WC 
 
 
 1995 
 Differentiation of the dementias of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease with the dementia rating scale 
 Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 
 8 
 184 
 188 
 7576044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Polk 
 TA 
 
 
 Mikels 
 JA 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Marshuetz 
 C 
 
 
 2001 
 Cerebral aging: integration of brain and behavioral models of cognitive function 
 Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 
 3 
 151 
 165 
 22034448 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pedraza 
 O 
 
 
 Lucas 
 JA 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Graff-Radford 
 NR 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Robust and expanded norms for the Dementia Rating Scale 
 Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 
 25 
 347 
 358 
 20427376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pirogovsky 
 E 
 
 
 Schiehser 
 DM 
 
 
 Litvan 
 I 
 
 
 Obtera 
 KM 
 
 
 Burke 
 MM 
 
 
 Lessig 
 SL 
 
 
 Song 
 DD 
 
 
 Liu 
 L 
 
 
 Filoteo 
 JV 
 
 
 2014 
 The utility of the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale in Parkinson’s disease mild cognitive impairment 
 Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 
 20 
 627 
 631 
 24709086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Playford 
 ED 
 
 
 Jenkins 
 IH 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 Nutt 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Brooks 
 DJ 
 
 
 1992 
 Impaired mesial frontal and putamen activation in Parkinson’s disease: a positron emission tomography study 
 Annals of Neurology 
 32 
 151 
 161 
 1510355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Combining spatial extent and peak intensity to test for activations in functional imaging 
 Neuroimage 
 5 
 83 
 96 
 9345540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poston 
 KL 
 
 
 Eidelberg 
 D 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional brain networks and abnormal connectivity in the movement disorders 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 2261 
 2270 
 22206967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2001 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2011 
 The restless brain 
 Brain Connectivity 
 1 
 3 
 12 
 22432951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodriguez-Oroz 
 MC 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 Krack 
 P 
 
 
 Litvan 
 I 
 
 
 Macias 
 R 
 
 
 Bezard 
 E 
 
 
 Obeso 
 JA 
 
 
 2009 
 Initial clinical manifestations of Parkinson’s disease: features and pathophysiological mechanisms 
 Lancet Neurology 
 8 
 1128 
 1139 
 19909911 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ryan 
 NS 
 
 
 Keihaninejad 
 S 
 
 
 Shakespeare 
 TJ 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 M 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Malone 
 IB 
 
 
 Thornton 
 JS 
 
 
 Mancini 
 L 
 
 
 Hyare 
 H 
 
 
 Yousry 
 T 
 
 
 Ridgway 
 GR 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 Modat 
 M 
 
 
 Alexander 
 DC 
 
 
 Rossor 
 MN 
 
 
 Ourselin 
 S 
 
 
 Fox 
 NC 
 
 
 2013 
 Magnetic resonance imaging evidence for presymptomatic change in thalamus and caudate in familial Alzheimer’s disease 
 Brain 
 136 
 1399 
 1414 
 23539189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salo 
 R 
 
 
 Henik 
 A 
 
 
 Robertson 
 LC 
 
 
 2001 
 Interpreting Stroop interference: An analysis of differences between task versions 
 Neuropsychology 
 15 
 462 
 471 
 11761035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanchez-Lopez 
 J 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 T 
 
 
 Silva-Pereyra 
 J 
 
 
 Martinez Mesa 
 JA 
 
 
 Di Russo 
 F 
 
 
 2014 
 Differences in visuo-motor control in skilled vs. novice martial arts athletes during sustained and transient attention tasks: a motor-related cortical potential study 
 PLoS One 
 9 
 e91112 
 24621480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulte 
 T 
 
 
 Mueller-Oehring 
 EM 
 
 
 Rosenbloom 
 MJ 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 2005 
 Differential effect of HIV infection and alcoholism on conflict processing, attentional allocation, and perceptual load: Evidence from a Stroop Match-to-Sample task 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 57 
 67 
 75 
 15607302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulte 
 T 
 
 
 Müller-Oehring 
 EM 
 
 
 Javitz 
 H 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 2008 
 Callosal Compromise Differentially Affects Conflict Processing and Attentional Allocation in Alcoholism, HIV, and Their Comorbidity 
 Brain Imaging and Behavior 
 2 
 27 
 38 
 19360136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulte 
 T 
 
 
 Müller-Oehring 
 EM 
 
 
 Vinco 
 S 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 2009 
 Double dissociation between action-driven and perception-driven conflict resolution invoking anterior versus posterior brain systems 
 Neuroimage 
 48 
 2 
 381 
 390 
 19573610 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schulte 
 T 
 
 
 Müller-Oehring 
 EM 
 
 
 Chanraud 
 S 
 
 
 Rosenbloom 
 MJ 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 2011 
 Age-related reorganization of functional networks for successful conflict resolution: a combined functional and structural MRI study 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 32 
 2075 
 2090 
 20022675 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Song 
 DD 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 2000 
 Striatal responses to partial dopaminergic lesion: evidence for compensatory sprouting 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 20 
 5102 
 5114 
 10864967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stafford 
 T 
 
 
 Gurney 
 KN 
 
 
 2007 
 Biologically constrained action selection improves cognitive control in a model of the Stroop task 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 
 362 
 1671 
 1684 
 17428773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strafella 
 AP 
 
 
 Ko 
 JH 
 
 
 Grant 
 J 
 
 
 Fraraccio 
 M 
 
 
 Monchi 
 O 
 
 
 2005 
 Corticostriatal functional interactions in Parkinson’s disease: a rTMS/[11C]raclopride PET study 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 22 
 2946 
 2952 
 16324129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stanic 
 D 
 
 
 Parish 
 CL 
 
 
 Zhu 
 WM 
 
 
 Krstew 
 EV 
 
 
 Lawrence 
 AJ 
 
 
 Drago 
 J 
 
 
 Finkelstein 
 DI 
 
 
 Horne 
 MK 
 
 
 2003 
 Changes in function and ultrastructure of striatal dopaminergic terminals that regenerate following partial lesions of the SNpc 
 Journal of Neurochemistry 
 86 
 329 
 343 
 12871574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stebbins 
 GT 
 
 
 Goetz 
 CG 
 
 
 1998 
 Factor structure of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale: Motor Examination section 
 Movement Disorders 
 13 
 633 
 636 
 9686766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinhauser 
 M 
 
 
 Hübner 
 R 
 
 
 2009 
 Distinguishing response conflict and task conflict in the Stroop task: evidence from ex-Gaussian distribution analysis 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance 
 35 
 1398 
 1412 
 19803645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strange 
 BA 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Dissociable human perirhinal, hippocampal, and parahippocampal roles during verbal encoding 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 22 
 523 
 528 
 11784798 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tessitore 
 A 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Vitale 
 C 
 
 
 Santangelo 
 G 
 
 
 Amboni 
 M 
 
 
 Russo 
 A 
 
 
 Corbo 
 D 
 
 
 Cirillo 
 G 
 
 
 Barone 
 P 
 
 
 Tedeschi 
 G 
 
 
 2012 
 Default-mode network connectivity in cognitively unimpaired patients with Parkinson disease 
 Neurology 
 79 
 2226 
 2232 
 23100395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Utevsky 
 AV 
 
 
 Smith 
 DV 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 2014 
 Precuneus is a functional core of the default-mode network 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 34 
 932 
 940 
 24431451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenbossche 
 J 
 
 
 Deroost 
 N 
 
 
 Soetens 
 E 
 
 
 Spildooren 
 J 
 
 
 Vercruysse 
 S 
 
 
 Nieuwboer 
 A 
 
 
 Kerckhofs 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 Freezing of gait in Parkinson disease is associated with impaired conflict resolution 
 Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 
 25 
 765 
 773 
 21478498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Nuenen 
 BF 
 
 
 Helmich 
 RC 
 
 
 Buenen 
 N 
 
 
 van de Warrenburg 
 BP 
 
 
 Bloem 
 BR 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 2012 
 Compensatory activity in the extrastriate body area of Parkinson’s disease patients 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 32 
 9546 
 9553 
 22787040 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vassar 
 SD 
 
 
 Bordelon 
 YM 
 
 
 Hays 
 RD 
 
 
 Diaz 
 N 
 
 
 Rausch 
 R 
 
 
 Mao 
 C 
 
 
 Vickrey 
 BG 
 
 
 2012 
 Confirmatory factor analysis of the motor unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale 
 Parkinson’s Disease 
 2012 
 719167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 T 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Zhao 
 G 
 
 
 Hitchman 
 G 
 
 
 Liu 
 C 
 
 
 Zhao 
 X 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Chen 
 A 
 
 
 2014 
 Linking inter-individual differences in the conflict adaptation effect to spontaneous brain activity 
 Neuroimage 
 90 
 146 
 152 
 24398332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 T 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 A functional MRI study of automatic movements in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
 Brain 
 128 
 2250 
 2259 
 15958505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 T 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Chen 
 Y 
 
 
 Zhao 
 C 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Chan 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 Changes of functional connectivity of the motor network in the resting state in Parkinson’s disease 
 Neuroscience Letter 
 460 
 6 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 T 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Wang 
 C 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wu 
 X 
 
 
 Chan 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Basal ganglia circuits changes in Parkinson’s disease patients 
 Neuroscience Letter 
 524 
 55 
 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 T 
 
 
 Liu 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 Hallett 
 M 
 
 
 Zheng 
 Z 
 
 
 Chan 
 P 
 
 
 2014 
 Attention to Automatic Movements in Parkinson’s Disease: Modified Automatic Mode in the Striatum 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 Epub ahead of print 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yu 
 H 
 
 
 Sternad 
 D 
 
 
 Corcos 
 DM 
 
 
 Vaillancourt 
 DE 
 
 
 2007 
 Role of hyperactive cerebellum and motor cortex in Parkinson’s disease 
 Neuroimage 
 35 
 222 
 233 
 17223579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Stroop Match-to-Sample task performance of patients with mild Parkinson’s disease (PD) and healthy controls (CTL). (A) Mean reaction times (RT) and (B) Z-scores and S.E. to incongruent (INC) and congruent (CON) Stroop conditions for response switching (RS) and response repetition (RR). Stroop effects are defined as the difference in RT between incongruent and congruent conditions. Z-scores depict the condition-specific deviation in response latency corrected for each person’s own motoric response speed. Negative values illustrate response facilitation and positive values response slowing. For (B), an ANOVA using Z-scores confirmed the Stroop-by-response block interaction with greater Stroop effects for RS than RR ( F (1,20)=15.95,  p <0.001). A MANOVA testing group differences for Stroop-RS and Stroop-RR (Z INC  minus Z CON ) confirmed that both groups had similar Stroop-RS effects ( F (1,20)=0.17,  ns ). The significantly (*) greater Stroop-RR effect in PD than CTL using RT measures (A) emerged as a trend (♮) using Z-scores ( F (1,20)=3.18, p=0.09) (B), i.e., when controlling for group differences in motoric slowing and testing interference processing per se. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Correlation graphs between Parkinson symptom severity sub-scores (A., B.) derived from the Unified Parkinson’d Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD) (C.), and task performance (Z-scores) for Stroop effects (INC - CON), interference processing for incongruent (INC) Stroop stimuli, and benefits from congruent (CON) Stroop stimuli. Match: trials in which the color cue correctly predicted the Stroop word’s font color; nonmatch: trials in which the color cue wrongly predicted the Stroop word’s font color. RR: response repetition blocks of trials; RS: response switching blocks of trials. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Similarities in functional seed-to-voxel BG and thalamo-cortical connectivity maps for resting-state (REST) and the task-activated (TASK) fMRI runs for PD patients marked in red, and controls (CTL) marked in green, and the groups overlap in yellow. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Differences in functional seed-to-voxel BG and thalamo-cortical connectivity during the resting-state (REST), the task-activated (TASK) fMRI runs, and task-rest modulation, between PD patients and controls (CTL). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1a 
 
 Demographic and clinical data for the Parkinson’s disease (PD) and control (CTL) groups 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sex w/m 
 Age 
 Educ (yrs) 
 BMI 
 BDI 
 verbal IQ 
 DRS total 
 Handedness 
 PD stage 
 UDPRS
 
 
 
 I 
 II 
 III 
 
 
 
 
 PD 
 6/5 
 63±6 (52–72) 
 16±2 (12–18) 
 28±4 (22–35) 
 8.6±5 (0–15) 
 105±9 (90–118) 
 138±4 (128–143) 
 21±15 (14–67) 
 1.5 (1–2.5) 
 2.1 (0–3) 
 7.8 (2–14) 
 9.5 (3–17) 
 
 
 CTL 
 4/7 
 62±5 (54–73) 
 17±2 (13–21) 
 25±3 (21–29) 
 1.6±2 (0–7) 
 113±7 (101–119) 
 140±2 (136–144) 
 20±7 (14–37) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 p  < 
 
 ns 
 1 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 .024 
 
 
 .001 
 
 
 .024 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PD=Parkinson’s disease; CTL=healthy controls; w=women, m=men; mean ± standard devastation (range) for education in years (Educ); Body Mass Index (BMI); depressive symptoms (BDI-2; Beck Depression Inventory); PD stage (modified Hoehn and Yahr Staging;  Fahn and Elton, 1987 ); Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS): mean (range) for 3 subscales: mentation (part I), daily living (part II), motor (part III) ability; verbal IQ (WTAR); Dementia Rating Scale (DRS-2) ( Jurica et al., 2004 ); Handedness inventory ( Crovitz and Zener, 1962 ): scores 14–32 right-handed, 50–70 left-handed; 1 left-handed PD; 1 ambidextrous CTL. 
 
 
 1 
 Chi-square statistic 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1b 
 
 Clinical characteristics of the cohort of patients with PD enrolled in the study. 
 
 
 
 
 Subject no. 
 Age years 
 Sex 
 Diagnosis 
 Years since diagnosis 
 Lateralization 
 H & Y score 
 UPDRS total score 
 Medication/Treatment 
 LEDD in mg 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 66 
 M 
 Possible PD 
 0.5 
 Right 
 1.5 
 23 
 MAOB 
 100 
 
 
 2 
 72 
 F 
 Possible PD 
 1.0 
 Right 
 1 
 11 
 MAOB 
 100 
 
 
 3 
 67 
 M 
 Possible PD 
 0.1 
 Bilateral 
 2 
 34 
 - 
 0 
 
 
 4 
 66 
 F 
 Probable PD 
 7.0 
 Right 
 1.5 
 17 
 cl-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 1175 
 
 
 5 
 52 
 F 
 Possible PD 
 2.0 
 Left 
 1.5 
 31 
 cl-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 1500 
 
 
 6 
 63 
 M 
 Probable PD 
 7.5 
 Left 
 1 
 16 
 l-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 740 
 
 
 7 
 58 
 M 
 Probable PD 
 4.0 
 Right 
 1.5 
 27 
 cl-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 460 
 
 
 8 
 63 
 M 
 Possible PD 
 2.5 
 Bilateral 
 2 
 20 
 cl-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 487.5 
 
 
 9 
 65 
 F 
 Possible PD 
 1.5 
 Left 
 1 
 6 
 DA, MAOB 
 220 
 
 
 10 
 69 
 F 
 Possible PD 
 0.2 
 Right 
 1 
 10 
 MAOB 
 100 
 
 
 11 
 52 
 F 
 Probable PD 
 8.2 
 Right 
 1 
 18 
 cl-dopa, DA, MAOB 
 325 
 
 
 
 
 
 M= male; F = female; H&Y= Hoehn andYahr Scale; MAOB = Monoamine Oxidase B inhibitor, cl-dopa = Carbidopa-Levodopa, DA = Dopamine Agonists; LEDD = Levodopa equivalent daily dose. Diagnosis has been defined according to Gelb’s criteria ( Gelb et al., 1999 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Nonparametric correlation analysis (Spearman’s Rho) testing the relations between PD symptom severity, LEDD and Stroop task performance (match condition) in PD patients. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stroop-RS 
 INC-RS 
 CON-RS 
 
 
 
 
 UPDRS-II 
 
 Rho 
 
 −.89 * 
 
 .62 
 
 −.59 
 
 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 0.0001 
 
 
 0.041 
 
 
 0.056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stroop-RR 
 INC-RR 
 CON-RR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 UPDRS-III 
 
 Rho 
 
 −.49 
 
 −.69 
 
 −.07 
 
 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 0.12 
 
 
 0.018 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 
 LEDD 
 
 Rho 
 
 .59 
 .23 
 −.75 * 0.008 
 
 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 0.058 
 
 
 ns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations:  Parkinson Disease patients (PD), Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), part II (daily living), part III (motor symptoms), levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD), Reaction time (RT), cue-target color match (M), incongruent (INC), congruent (CON), Stroop=INC-CON, response switching (RS), response repetition (RR). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Statistical significance ( T -score) of clusters showing  group differences  in their functional connectivity between the seed and the cluster location in MNI space ( X, Y, Z  coordinates in mm) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 k 
 
 BA/nucleus 
 
 X 
 
 
 Y 
 
 
 Z 
 
 T -score 
 
 
 
 
 
 CAUDATE 
 
 
 
 
 REST 
 
 PD>CTL 
 Thalamus, claustrum, insula, cingulate cortex 
 905 
 13, 29, 30, lateral dorsal and posterior thalamic nuclei 
 
 
 −12 
 
 
 
 
 −22 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 
 5.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 
 
 −24 
 
 
 22 
 
 5.36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 −20 
 
 
 20 
 
 4.11 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 Premotor, motor, and somatosensory cortices (pre- and postentral gyri) 
 830 
 2, 3, 4, 6 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 −14 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 
 4.95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 
 
 
 −12 
 
 
 38 
 
 4.80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 −28 
 
 
 40 
 
 3.42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TASK 
 
 PD>CTL 1 
 
 Anterior prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices 
 
 52 
 10, 11 
 
 −12 
 
 
 66 
 
 
 −16 
 
 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 Supramarginal gyrus, temporoparietal junction, angular and superior temporal gyrus, insula 
 1166 
 13, 22, 40, 39, 42 
 
 
 −54 
 
 
 
 
 −42 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 
 5.94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −50 
 
 
 −38 
 
 
 52 
 
 4.81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −60 
 
 
 −42 
 
 
 42 
 
 4.63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PUTAMEN 
 
 
 
 
 REST 
 
 PD>CTL 
 
 no suprathrehold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 Anterior prefrontal cortex 
 187 
 10 
 
 
 −32 
 
 
 
 
 64 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 6.67 
 a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TASK 
 
 PD≠CTL 
 
 no suprathreshold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GLOBUS PALLIDUS 
 
 
 
 
 REST 
 
 PD>CTL 
 
 no suprathreshold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 1 
 
 Visual association cortex 
 
 47 
 18, 19 
 
 −38 
 
 
 −84 
 
 
 −2 
 
 5.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 
 22 
 IX 
 
 −30 
 
 
 −52 
 
 
 −48 
 
 4.61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TASK 
 
 PD>CTL 
 
 no suprathrehold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 Inferior prefrontal gyrus, subgenual cortex, temporopolar area 
 682 
 25, 38, 47 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 −16 
 
 
 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 −4 
 
 4.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 −14 
 
 4.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THALAMUS 
 
 
 
 
 REST 
 
 PD>CTL 
 Posterior cingulate cortex, visual association areas 
 881 
 18, 30 
 
 
 −26 
 
 
 
 
 −68 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 4.97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 −32 
 
 
 −88 
 
 
 −2 
 
 4.95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −34 
 
 
 −94 
 
 
 −18 
 
 3.97 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus, inferior parietal lobe 
 622 b 
 7, 40 
 
 
 −18 
 
 
 
 
 −76 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 
 
 
 4.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 
 
 −86 
 
 
 44 
 
 4.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −32 
 
 
 −54 
 
 
 42 
 
 4.12 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 Inferior frontal triangular and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices 
 754 
 9, 44, 46, 48 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 
 5.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 40 
 
 3.90 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 712 
 VIIb, VIII, IX 
 
 
 −6 
 
 
 
 
 −76 
 
 
 
 
 −48 
 
 
 
 5.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −24 
 
 
 −50 
 
 
 −50 
 
 4.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 
 
 −60 
 
 
 −42 
 
 3.49 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 721 
 Crus2, Crus1 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 −84 
 
 
 
 
 −34 
 
 
 
 4.47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 −80 
 
 
 −42 
 
 4.16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 −82 
 
 
 −32 
 
 4.07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TASK 
 
 PD>CTL 
 Parahippocampal gyrus, hypothalamus, subgenual cortex 
 547 c 
 25, 28, 34 
 
 
 −10 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 −14 
 
 
 
 6.28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 −2 
 
 
 −16 
 
 4.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 −14 
 
 3.64 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus, angular and supramarginal gyri, superior and inferior parietal lobe, dorsal posterior cingulate cortex, extrastriate areas 
 2281 
 7, 18, 19, 30, 31, 39, 40 
 
 
 −22 
 
 
 
 
 −60 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 
 4.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −20 
 
 
 −72 
 
 
 46 
 
 4.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 
 
 −60 
 
 
 38 
 
 3.95 
 
 
 
 CTL>PD 
 
 no suprathreshold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For analysis group differences (PD≠CTL), cluster extent threshold at  p FWE corrected  = 0.05, peak at  T (1,20) min =2.53;  k  = number of synchronously activated brain voxels. 
 
 
 a 
 trend for peak  p FWE corrected  >0.05 <0.1; 
 
 
 b 
 cluster extent  p FDR corrected  < 0.05; 
 
 
 c 
 trend for cluster extent  p FDR corrected  >0.05 <0.1; 
 
 
 1 
 peak p=0.001;  T (1,20)  min  = 3.55, k=20. 
 
 
 Abbreviations:  Parkinson Disease patients (PD), control participants (CTL), Brodmann area (BA) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Statistical significance ( T -score) of clusters showing  group-by-condition interactions  in their connectivity between the seed and the cluster location in MNI space ( X, Y, Z  coordinates in mm) 
 
 
 
 
 A) Analysis threshold: peak at  T (1,20)  min  = 2.53; extent at  p FWE corrected  = 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 k 
 
 BA/nucleus 
 
 X 
 
 
 Y 
 
 
 Z 
 
 T -score 
 
 
 
 
 
 GLOBUS PALLIDUS – right 
 
 
 
 T > R CTL>PD 
 Inferior prefrontal and orbitofrontal gyri, temporopolar area, middle temporal gyrus, subgenual, dorsal anterior cingulate and anterior entorhinal cortices 
 2447 
 10, 11, 21, 25, 32, 34, 38, 47 
 
 
 −2 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 −20 
 
 
 
 6.75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 −18 
 
 5.72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 20 
 
 
 −18 
 
 4.96 
 
 
 
 Fusiform, extrastriate, parahippocampal and inferior temporal gyri, perirhinal and piriform cortices 
 477 a 
 19, 20, 27, 35, 36, 37 
 
 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 
 
 
 
 −10 
 
 
 
 5.17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 −54 
 
 
 −4 
 
 4.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 −32 
 
 
 −16 
 
 3.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B) Analysis threshold: peak  p =0.001,  T (1,20)  min  = 3.55, k  min  = 60 
 
 
 
 CAUDATE – left 
 
 
 
 T > R PD>CTL 
 Precuneus, superior parietal lobe 
 66 
 7 
 
 0 
 
 
 −68 
 
 
 36 
 
 4.41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PUTAMEN – left 
 
 
 
 T > R CTL>PD 
 Dorsal posterior cingulate cortex 
 60 
 31 
 
 −22 
 
 
 −44 
 
 
 36 
 
 5.58 
 
 
   – right 
 
 
 T > R PD>CTL 
 Motor and premotor cortices 
 80 
 4, 6 
 
 26 
 
 
 −22 
 
 
 56 
 
 5.02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THALAMUS – left 
 
 
 
 T > R CTL>PD 
 Cerebellum 
 61 
 Crus2, declive 
 
 −8 
 
 
 −72 
 
 
 −24 
 
 5.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 extent at  p FDR corrected  < 0.05 
 
 
 Abbreviations:  Parkinson Disease patients (PD), control participants (CTL), Task (T), Rest (R), Brodmann area (BA). 
 
 
 
 
