
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 25315785 
 4402216 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.10.008 
 NIHMS635070 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Language Networks Associated with Computerized Semantic Indices 
 
 
 
 
 Pakhomov 
 Serguei V. S. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 David T. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Knopman 
 David S. 
 
 2 
 
 
 1 University of Minnesota Center for Clinical and Cognitive Neuropharmacology 
 2 Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
 
 Corresponding author: Serguei V.S. Pakhomov, PhD, Associate Professor, University of Minnesota, 308 Harvard St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, Tel. +1 612-624-1198, Fax. +1 612-625-9931,  pakh0002@umn.edu 
 
 
 27 
 11 
 2014 
 
 
 12 
 10 
 2014 
 
 
 1 
 1 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 1 
 2016 
 
 104 
 125 
 137 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Tests of generative semantic verbal fluency are widely used to study organization and representation of concepts in the human brain. Previous studies demonstrated that clustering and switching behavior during verbal fluency tasks is supported by multiple brain mechanisms associated with semantic memory and executive control. Previous work relied on manual assessments of semantic relatedness between words and grouping of words into semantic clusters. We investigated a computational linguistic approach to measuring the strength of semantic relatedness between words based on latent semantic analysis of word co-occurrences in a subset of a large online encyclopedia. We computed semantic clustering indices and compared them to brain network connectivity measures obtained with task-free fMRI in a sample consisting of healthy participants and those differentially affected by cognitive impairment. We found that semantic clustering indices were associated with brain network connectivity in distinct areas including fronto-temporal, fronto-parietal and fusiform gyrus regions. This study shows that computerized semantic indices complement traditional assessments of verbal fluency to provide a more complete account of the relationship between brain and verbal behavior involved organization and retrieval of lexical information from memory. 
 
 
 generative verbal fluency 
 semantic memory 
 latent semantic analysis 
 semantic clustering 
 task-free fMRI 
 semantics 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 The question of how conceptual knowledge is represented, organized and accessed from memory continues to be the subject of much research in multiple disciplines including neuroscience ( Caramazza & Mahon, 2006 ;  Chan, Butters, Salmon, & McGuire, 1993 ;  Mahon & Caramazza, 2009 ;  Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007 ;  Pylkkanen, Llinas, & Murphy, 2006 ), neuropsychology ( Salmon, Butters, & Chan, 1999 ;  Troster et al., 1998 ;  Weber, Thompson-Schill, Osherson, Haxby, & Parsons, 2009 ), psycholinguistics ( Levelt, 1989 ;  Tverski & Hemenway, 1984 ), and computer science ( G. Miller & Fellbaum, 1991 ;  Rada, Mili, Bicknell, & Blettner, 1989 ;  P. Resnik, 1999 ). Following  Tulving (1972)  this field of inquiry has drawn a distinction between a cognitive system that represents temporally dated events (episodic memory) and a system that constitutes a mental thesaurus of symbols that indexes information about cognitive referents and relations holding between them (semantic memory). The two types of memory have since been demonstrated to have different, albeit interdependent and interconnected, underlying neural mechanisms ( Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000 ;  Prince, Tsukiura, & Cabeza, 2007 ;  Tulving, Kapur, Craik, Moscovitch, & Houle, 1994 ). 
 The test of generative semantic verbal fluency (SVF) is an instrument widely used to elicit responses from subjects when studying semantic memory, executive function, and language. On this test, one is asked to say as many words as possible in one minute that denote objects belonging to a certain semantic category (e.g., animals, fruits, vegetables, tools). The performance on the SVF test is typically measured by counting the number of correct responses (SVF score). Lower SVF scores have been widely reported in patients with various stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) ( Chan, Salmon, & De La Pena, 2001 ;  Ober, Dronkers, Koss, Delis, & Friedland, 1986 ;  Rosen, 1980 ;  Troyer, Moscovitch, Winocur, Leach, & Freedman, 1998 ). Furthermore, performance on SVF tests often shows early and more pronounced decline relative to other language, attention, and executive abilities (see  Lezak, (2004)  and  Henry  et al. , (2004)  for review). The traditional SVF scores reflecting the number of words generated on this task assess performance consisting of several abilities including but not limited to semantic memory. Structural and functional neural imaging studies found that lower SVF scores are associated with lesions and atrophy in the anterior and inferior left temporal lobe regions as well as impairment in fronto-temporal connectivity ( Libon et al., 2009 ). Evidence collected in fMRI studies supports the involvement of multiple frontal, temporal and posterior areas during word generation tasks such as SVF that include (but are not limited to) the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left inferior temporal gyrus, the hippocampus, the left superior occipital gyrus, and the left inferior medial parietal lobe ( Birn et al., 2010 ;  Wheatley, Weisberg, Beauchamp, & Martin, 2005 ). Furthermore, the basal ganglia exerts inhibitory control over motor, cognitive/executive, and affective systems which would make it an important part in a variety of tasks including aspects of the SVF performance. The involvement of multiple brain areas in generating words on SVF tests suggests that verbal behavior resulting from this task is supported by multiple neural mechanisms. However, the correspondence between various aspects of the generative verbal fluency behavior and distinct neural mechanisms is currently much less clear because of the difficulty involved in isolating quantifiable characteristics of the responses produced during SVF testing. 
 The overarching objective of the current study was to investigate the utility of a computational linguistic approach to capturing distinct components of verbal behavior manifest on SVF tests and to relate them to the underlying brain networks identified with task-free fMRI. Using task-free fMRI in connection with behavioral performance on a specific task is well-motivated by the fact that the patterns of temporally correlated low-frequency fluctuations observed in a resting state constitute the brain’s intrinsic architecture that predicts the brain’s functional responses to stimulation ( Keller et al., 2011 ). 
 
 1.1 Clustering of Responses on SVF Tests 
 Optimal performance on SVF tests depends to a large extent on how well semantic information is organized into conceptually related clusters and whether the person is able to use an efficient strategy that accesses these clusters during the test ( Estes, 1974 ;  Hodges & Patterson, 1995 ;  Laine, 1988 ). The size of semantic clusters and the efficiency of switching between clusters have been found to have different neuroanatomical correlates. Semantic cluster size was found to be associated with the left temporal lobe function, whereas the processing associated with switching was associated with the function of the frontal lobe ( Rich, Troyer, Bylsma, & Brandt, 1999 ;  Troyer, Moscovitch, & Winocur, 1997 ;  Troyer, 2000 ). 
 While manual assessment of clustering and switching behavior has proven to be useful, it has traditionally relied on subjective evaluations of semantic similarity between at least two ( Rich et al., 1999 ;  Troyer et al., 1997 ,  1998 ) or three ( Laine, 1988 ) adjacent words to define semantic clusters. For example, the qualitative assessment proposed by  Troyer  et al.  (1997)  relies on manual categorization of words produced on the SVF test (e.g., Zoological Categories, Human Use, and Living Environment) with further more fine-grained subcategorizations (e.g. living environment category composed of African, Australian, Arctic/Far North, Farm, North American and Water Animals). In addition to their subjectivity, these manual qualitative approaches are time consuming and are difficult to implement and standardize, which may be responsible for some of the conflicting results obtained with these methods in studies of Alzheimer’s disease noted in previous work ( Raoux et al., 2008 ). 
 Independently of these efforts, a number of fully automated approaches to representing the degree to which any two words in a given language are semantically related have been developed in the field of computational linguistics based on lexical databases such as WordNet, as well as corpora of text ( Pedersen, Pakhomov, Patwardhan, & Chute, 2007 ;  Rada et al., 1989 ;  P. Resnik, 1999 ). Many of these approaches utilize variations on a technique called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA: ( Landauer & Dumais, 1997 )), a variant of factor analysis designed for representing lexical semantics. In addition to the LSA approach to semantic representation, several other alternatives have been proposed to model how semantic information is represented in the brain including neural networks ( McClelland & Rogers, 2003 ), Random Indexing ( Kanerva, 2009 ), Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) modeling ( Blei, Griffiths, Jordan, & Lafferty, 2003 ), and distributional memory models ( Baroni & Lenci, 2010 ;  Baroni, Murphy, Barbu, & Poesio, 2010 ). 
 The application of LSA to semantic representation is described in detail in the Methods section. In brief, LSA relies on the co-occurrence of words in a large corpus of text consisting of various types of discourse including newspaper articles, books, speeches and other sources of typical word usage to represent the semantic content of a word or a term as a set of co-occurrence counts with other words used in the same context. These semantic representations can then be directly and automatically compared to each other to assign a numeric value indicative of the strength of semantic relatedness between them. Apart from improved scalability and objectivity as a result of automation, these computational approaches allow quantification of semantic relations on a continuous rather than a categorical scale which allows us to: a) directly control and systematically vary how measures such as the cluster size, for example, are calculated, and b) develop new semantic indices not possible with categorical judgments. We have previously reported on applications of these computerized semantic indices, either calculated from WordNet, a large lexical database ( Pakhomov, Hemmy, & Lim, 2012 ), or from a a corpus of text ( Pakhomov & Hemmy, 2013 ). In other prior work, computational models of word meanings derived from a very large corpus of text have been demonstrated to predict neural activation patterns observed with fMRI ( Mitchell et al., 2008 ). These findings were based on representations for concrete nouns and thus provide a strong motivation for using distributional semantic approaches to represent the meaning of words produced in response to a verbal fluency task. 
 The mechanisms underlying  semantic  memory are negatively affected by aging ( Meinzer et al., 2009 ) and are the target of several types of neurodegenerative diseases including the semantic variant of fronto-temporal dementia ( Grossman, 2002 ;  Hodges et al., 2004 ;  Knopman et al., 2008 ) and the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) dementia ( Hodges & Patterson, 1995 ). In our previous work, we found that computerized semantic indices were sensitive to clinical differences between mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD dementia ( Pakhomov et al., 2012 ), and could be used to estimate future risk of developing dementia in healthy individuals ( Pakhomov & Hemmy, 2013 ). The current study relies on a sample consisting of cognitively normal individuals as well as MCI and AD dementia patients in order to investigate the relationship between SVF performance and functional connectivity in the language network ‘at rest’ assessed with task-free fMRI. Thus, the disease status is used in this study as a naturally occurring research instrument that modulates both the behavioral performance on SVF tests and the connectivity of brain networks that underlie verbal behavior. Therefore, we expect that the degree of differential impairment in the connectivity of functional brain networks that is characteristic of AD dementia ( Stam et al., 2009 ;  Stam, Jones, Nolte, Breakspear, & Scheltens, 2007 ;  Supekar, Menon, Rubin, Musen, & Greicius, 2008 ) will introduce detectable systematic variability into both behavioral and neural measurements. The specific aims of this study were: a) to confirm previously found neural correlates of the performance on the SVF test, and b) to determine if the new automated semantic clustering indices derived with the LSA-based computational linguistic approach are associated with connectivity in areas distinct from those related to the traditional SVF scores. Initially, our prediction was that the computerized semantic indices were associated with roughly the same brain networks as those associated with traditional SVF scores; however, while we did find some overlap between measures, we also found that they were associated with clearly distinct networks. 
 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 A random target sample of 60 participants (mean age = 72.46; SD = 10.8) was obtained from the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MCADRC). Of these participants, at the time of neuropsychological testing, 21 had a clinical diagnosis of probable AD dementia (DSM-IV/NINCDS-ADRDA criteria; ( American Psychiatric Association, 1994 ;  McKhann et al., 1984 )), 20 had a clinical diagnosis of MCI ( Petersen, 2004 ) with or without an amnestic component, and 19 were cognitively normal elders (CN). The final study sample consisted of 49 participants (11 CN, 17 MCI and 21 AD dementia) that were selected from the target sample of 60 participants based on availability of good quality task-free functional MRI scans (TF-fMRI). The demographic characteristics of this sample are reported in  Table 1 . 
 All participants, or appropriate surrogates, provided written informed consent for participation. The Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board approved the study and the consenting processes 
 
 
 2.2 Cognitive Assessments 
 All participants underwent a neuropsychological test battery that included the SVF test (“animals” category) on which they were asked to name as many animals as they could think of in 60 seconds. The responses were recorded on paper by a trained psychometrist and subsequently converted to electronic form for computerized analysis. The traditional SVF test score was calculated as the number of correct words excluding repetitions, intrusions and perseverations. The participants were also administered the Short Test of Mental Status (STMS: ( Kokmen, Smith, Petersen, Tangalos, & Ivnik, 1991 )). The STMS battery items test several cognitive domains: orientation, attention, immediate recall, arithmetic, abstraction, construction, information and recall after a 3-minute delay. This test is designed specifically for rapid (5 min) assessment of cognitive status at bedside and has been demonstrated to be more sensitive than the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) in detecting deficits in individuals with normal cognition at baseline that later developed MCI or AD dementia ( Tang-Wai et al., 2003 ). In addition to the STMS, Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scores were also obtained for all participants. The diagnoses of MCI and AD dementia were made during consensus conferences including neurologists, neuropsychologists and nurses and took into account the full neuropsychological test battery, the neurological assessment and the views of the family informants, as obtained by the examining neurologists and nurses. 
 
 
 2.4 Automated Semantic Relatedness Computation 
 To compute semantic relatedness between pairs of words, we relied on the LSA approach to semantic representation ( Landauer & Dumais, 1997 ;  Landauer, 2006 ). In order to compare the meanings of any given pair of words, we first represent the semantic content of each word as a set of other words found in the same context as the target word in a collection of texts. Since in this study, we are focused on the animal category SVF test, we experimented with the Wikipedia entries for animals, readily available electronically, as a source of textual co-occurrence information. For example, the meaning of the word “tiger” was represented as a set of all other words that were found in the Wikipedia entry for “tiger” after exclusion of function words (e.g., “the”, “he”, “she”, “it”, “on”, “is”, etc.) including: “panthera”, “tigris”, “largest”, “cat”, “species”, “most”, “recognizable”, “feature”, “pattern”, “dark”, “vertical”, “stripes”, “reddish”, “orange”, “fur”, “Russia”, “Bangladesh”, “India”, “siberian”, “asia”, among others. Similarly, the meaning for the word “lion” contains words “panthera”, “leo”, “four”, “big”, “cats”, “genus”, “panthera”, “second”, “largest”, “living”, “cat”, “tiger”, “currently”, “exist”, “subsaharan”, “Africa”, “asia.” Clearly, the Wikipedia entries also contain many words irrelevant to comparing the meanings of animal names and constitute “noise” that needs to be removed automatically prior to comparing semantic representations distributed across Wikipedia entries. Furthermore, in some cases, it is useful to take advantage of the fact that a given pair of words may not appear in the same context but may still be linked through their co-occurrence with a third word. For example, the words, “tigris” and “leo” may never occur in the same Wikipedia entry but the word “tigris” co-occurs with “panthera” and so does the word “leo”, thus forming a latent semantic association. We used LSA to take advantage of these latent associations between words never occurring in the same context. 
 LSA is a computational technique that operates by constructing a co-occurrence matrix for all words found in a given corpus of text (e.g., Wikipedia) and applying a variant of principal components analysis to filter out irrelevant words (dimensions) through singular value decomposition and to identify latent semantic associations between the words( Landauer & Dumais, 1997 ;  Landauer, 2006 ). For the current study, we used a subset of the Wikipedia corresponding to 254 articles about the animals found in the SVF test responses as the source of co-occurrence information to construct semantic representations of animal names. The motivation for using a subset of Wikipedia stems from the fact that corpus-based statistical approaches to representing lexical semantics are subject to potential noise in the data and may result in some cases in “discovering” spurious relations. We took a number of steps previously reported elsewhere ( Pakhomov & Hemmy, 2013 ;  Pakhomov et al., 2012 ) to automatically reduce the amount of noise and to optimize the parameters used in LSA computation and subsequent clustering of responses. In order to eliminate potentially spurious associations, we limited Wikipedia to a subset consisting only of animal names that occurred in the responses. Thus, the original co-occurrence matrix was composed of 254 animal names (Wikipedia documents) and 17,763 context words. While this is a departure from the standard LSA approach in which all available text from a corpus would be used, prior work by Pereira and colleagues ( Pereira, Botvinick, & Detre, 2013 ) on the same dataset that was developed by Mitchel et al. (2008) demonstrated that reasonable topic-model representations of semantic space of concrete concepts can be obtained from a relatively small (~ few thousand entries) subset of Wikipedia definitions. 
 Apart from the choice of text to be used for LSA, another source of variability has to do with selecting the most optimal dimensionality of LSA vectors. To select the number of dimensions we relied on calculating the proportion (share) of the sum of singular values for the first N dimensions in the LSA matrix to the total sum of singular values for all dimensions. The number of dimensions for LSA computation is difficult to estimate a priori. As described in detail in ( Quesada, 2011 , p. 82), unlike other related techniques such as multi-dimensional scaling, LSA does not currently have an internal criterion or a theoretical way of determining the most optimal number of dimensions. Therefore, we determined the optimal dimensionality by using an external criterion – a small independent dataset consisting of pairs of animals manually assessed for semantic similarity as follows. As described in more detail in our previously reported work ( Pakhomov & Hemmy, 2013 ), to control for the effects of source text selection and to find the optimal number of dimensions, we used a dataset developed by Weber and colleagues ( Weber et al., 2009 ) that consists of nine animal names and all possible pairs (n=36) of these nine animals that were presented to participants in a series of behavioral and imaging experiments. The participants were asked to judge photographic images of these pairs of animals for similarity. While holding the source data constant (the Wikipedia corpus), we varied the proportion of the sum of singular values for the first N dimensions to the total sum of singular values for all dimensions. We experimented with several values for this criterion in the range between 0.05 and 0.50 and found that the optimal threshold was around 0.20. This threshold resulted in reducing the original word by document matrix to 14 dimensions, yielding a peak correlation of 0.65 between the relatedness scores obtained with this LSA method and the manually derived Weber’s reference standard. The previously mentioned work by Pereira et al. also suggests that a relatively small number of dimensions (~ 25 – 100) is needed to model representations of concrete objects using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) which, similarly to LSA, models the distributions of words over documents in order to “learn” semantic features that best represent them ( Pereira, Botvinick, & Detre, 2013 ). 
 Applying LSA to Wikipedia entries for all animal names that were produced by the participants in our study resulted in representing each animal name as a set of a number of latent semantic dimensions. We subsequently used the resulting matrix to compare pairs of animal names represented as vectors in this multi-dimensional space by computing the cosine of the angle between the semantic vectors that represented the meaning of each animal name. The cosine values range from −1 (180 degree angle between vectors, i.e., they are pointing in opposite directions), to zero (90 degree angle - the two vectors are orthogonal), to 1 (zero degree angle - the vectors are pointing in the same direction). Thus, these cosine values can be interpreted in terms of semantic relatedness between the words that the vectors represent. We used the cosine values to compute measures of clustering and cumulative semantic relatedness as described in the next two sections − 2.5 and 2.6. 
 
 
 2.5 Automatic Determination of Clusters and their Size in SVF Responses 
 Based on the semantic relatedness tools described in the previous section, we developed an automated approach that follows the clustering and switching analysis introduced by  Troyer et al. (1997)  as closely as possible. The one significant departure from Troyer’s approach in the current implementation is that the qualitative human judgments of whether any given pair of words belongs to the same semantic category are replaced by quantitative semantic relatedness scores with the cutoff threshold for the cosine values set to 0.90 to identify very closely related pairs (i.e., their semantic vectors point almost in the same direction). Thus, if the relatedness value between two words exceeds this threshold, the words (or to be more precise, the animal senses of these words) are treated as belonging to the same cluster. The rest of clustering computation was the same as described by  Troyer et al. (1997) , repeated here briefly for convenience. In order to be counted as a cluster, all words in a given sequence of words found in a test response had to be closely related (i.e., have pairwise relatedness values above the predetermined threshold − 0.90). For example, a sequence of w 1 , w 2  and w 3  would be considered a cluster if w 1  is closely related to w 2 , w 2  is closely related to w 3 , and w 3  is closely related to w 1 . The size of clusters was discounted by one – a single word cluster would have the size of zero, a cluster of two words would have the size of one, and so on; however, the total number of clusters used in the denominator for calculating the mean cluster size (MCS) included single word clusters. It is important to note that we followed Troyer’s methodology to make our results interpretable in light of the prior work; however, automated computation of semantic relatedness enables further experimentation with modified approaches that we reserved for future work 1 . For clarity of presentation we will refer to LSA-based automated computation of mean cluster size as MCS and manually computed cluster size based on Troyer’s guidelines as mMCS. 
 The network graph in  Figure 1  illustrates the connectivity between names for the top 50 most frequent animals found in the study participants’ responses. This network was constructed by first computing a fully connected adjacency matrix representing pairwise semantic relatedness values between all 50 animal names. We then applied the same 0.90 threshold as was used in the determination of semantic clusters in participants’ responses to retain only the strongest associations. The resulting network was visually represented with an edge-weighted layout (Cytoscape software package, version 2.8.1,  http://www.cytoscape.org/ ) in which the length of the edges is proportionate to cosine values between retained word pairs. 
 
 
 2.6 Measuring Cumulative Semantic Relatedness 
 In the present study, in addition to clustering and switching, we assessed the  cumulative  approach to computing relatedness over the entire SVF sample. This approach consists of making automatic semantic relatedness measurements between all pairs of words produced during the test of verbal fluency regardless of the order in which they appear in the test sample. The pair-wise measurements are then averaged over the entire sample to obtain a cumulative relatedness (CuRel) score that represents a measure of semantic diversity of the response. We used the word “cumulative” to describe this approach to reflect the fact that the computation of the mean “accumulates” values across all pairs of words even though this approach is not purely additive. This approach is illustrated in  Figure 1  in which each test sample is represented as an  N  ×  N  matrix ( N  = number of words generated on the test) with the cells containing pairwise relatedness values with the exception of the on-diagonal cells. Since the same words are used both in rows and columns, these matrices are symmetrical and thus we do not need to compute values for half of the pairs (represented with blank cells). The example in  Figure 2  illustrates the computation of CuRel in two samples. Sample 1 is from a 77-year-old male diagnosed with multiple-domain MCI with an amnestic component (STMS: 36, CDR: 0.5). Sample 2 is from an 80-year-old male diagnosed with probable AD dementia (STMS: 30, CDR: 0.5). Theoretically, CuRel score may represent the degree of semantic diversity in the meaning of words produced on the SVF test. Higher CuRel scores may index a tendency to produce exemplars that are more closely related and are thus less semantically diverse. Lower CuRel score may indicate greater diversity in exemplars and a tendency to search across subcategories. 
 
 
 2.7 Task Free Functional MRI 
 Given that performance on the SVF test is multidimensional with various measures of semantic relatedness each likely capturing a distinct dimension of overall performance, it would be expected that the neural substrates supporting these measures would be distinct, at least to some extent, for each measure as well. However, it is also possible that the various aspects of overall performance on this test are controlled by the same or overlapping mechanisms. Therefore, we investigated the association between semantic relatedness measures and the brain systems-level organization of the language network using task-free fMRI. 
 Task-free fMRI data were acquired using a General Electric 3T Signa HDx scanner, 8 channel head coil, gradient EPI, TR = 3000 ms, TE = 30 ms, 90° flip angle, 21 cm field of view, 64 × 64 in-plane matrix, slice thickness 3.3 mm without gap, and 103 or 113 volumes were obtained. Subjects were instructed to keep their eyes open during scanning. All task-free fMRI data sets with greater than 3 mm of translational movement, 3° of rotational movement, or that failed visual inspection for obvious artifacts were excluded from analysis. Preprocessing and data analysis were performed utilizing a combination of the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5) software ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm5/ ) (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, University College London, UK), the Resting-State fMRI Data Analysis Toolkit (REST) v1.5 ( http://www.restfmri.net ) ( Song et al., 2011 ), Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF) v2.0 ( http://www.restfmri.net ) ( Chao-Gan & Yu-Feng, 2010 ), group ICA of fMRI toolbox (GIFT) software v2.0c ( http://icatb.sourceforge.net ) ( Calhoun, Adali, Pearlson, & Pekar, 2001 ), and in-house developed software implemented in MATLAB v7.11 (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA). 
 Preprocessing steps included discarding the first 3 volumes to obtain steady state magnetization (sequences with 113 volumes were also truncated so all sequences had 100 remaining volumes for analysis), realignment, slice time correction, normalization to SPM5 EPI template, smoothing with 4 mm full-width half maximum Gaussian kernel, linear detrending to correct for signal drift, and 0.01–0.08 HZ bandpass filtering to reduce non-neuronal contributions to BOLD fluctuations. In addition, regression correction for spurious variables included rigid body transformation motion effects, global mean signal, white matter signal and cerebral spinal fluid signal ( Fox, Zhang, Snyder, & Raichle, 2009 ;  Weissenbacher et al., 2009 ). 
 The language network was back reconstructed for each subject using the spatial-temporal dual regression (STR) method, as implemented in the GIFT software package ( Calhoun et al., 2001 ), with scaling of the parameter estimates of functional connectivity to z-scores. The resulting spatial maps contain voxel-wise information about the spatial location and magnitude of language network connectivity at the individual subject level. Independent component analysis (ICA) applied to task-free fMRI identifies functionally connected brain networks in a model-free manner by estimating spatially independent patterns from linearly mixed time courses of fMRI data. Multi-subject or group ICA (GICA) methods have been developed in order to draw inference about group data using ICA ( Erhardt et al., 2011 ). Using the GICA approach, an aggregate estimate of intrinsic connectivity networks can be obtained. However, subject-level maps need to be back-reconstructed using the group-level solution to initialize the STR method to estimate a subject-level solution ( Beckmann, Mackay, Filippini, & Smith, 2009 ). We have recently developed a well characterized high-dimensional GICA atlas (Mayo Clinic Study of Aging Functional Connectivity Atlas) using a large (n = 892) population-based sampling of cognitively normal elderly individuals ( Jones et al., 2012 ). This GICA atlas can be used to initialize the STR method in a manner unbiased by the connectivity profiles of the sample of subjects under investigation. 
 The STR method is a two-step process to derive subject-level parameter estimates of the intrinsic connectivity network (ICN). The first step uses spatial-maps from group average estimates of ICNs as spatial regressors against a single subject’s 4-dimensional dataset that produces a time-series for each subject. This time-series is then used in the second step as a temporal regressor against the same subject’s 4-dimensional dataset producing subject-level spatial maps of ICNs. The aggregate GICA language network template from the high-dimensional ICA Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA) Functional Connectivity Atlas was used for the back-reconstruction (available at  http://mayoresearch.mayo.edu/mayo/research/jack_lab/supplement.cfm ) ( Jones et al., 2012 ). Each of the subjects’ back-reconstructed language networks were entered into a multiple regression SPM5 analysis with age and gender as nuisance covariates and SVF, CuRel, or MCS as the covariate of interest. A one-sample t-test of the back-reconstructed language networks was performed to visualize the spatial extent of the entire language network at the group level ( Figure 3 ). For each of the covariates of interest, a linear regression analysis was performed and considered significant at a FWE corrected cluster level significance p < 0.05 (voxel-wise p < 0.05, k > 93). Each of the identified significant clusters was further characterized using the Anatomy toolbox (Eickhoff  et al. , 2005) and the MCSA high dimensional ICA ROI atlas ( Jones et al., 2012 ). The average functional connectivity in the most significant clusters for each contrast was extracted from every subject and correlated with the respective covariate of interest in order to better characterize the direction of the relationship between language network connectivity and behavioral performance on a language task. 
 
 
 2.8 Statistical Analysis 
 Correlations between continuous variables were estimated with Pearson correlation. Differences between group means were tested for statistical significance using one-way ANOVA with post-hoc tests carried out using the Tukey Honestly Significant Differences (HSD) method. Linear regression analysis was performed by including age, sex, and years of education as covariates along with the predictive covariate of interest. Comparisons between manual and automatic determination of clusters in SVF responses were performed based on manual clustering guidelines originally proposed by Troyer and colleagues ( Troyer et al., 1997 ). All statistical tests assumed the significance threshold of 0.05. All statistical computations were carried out using the R statistical package (version 2.14.1) and software designed specifically for brain imaging analysis described in the previous section. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Comparison of Automated and Manual Clustering 
 Comparing MCS calculated with the LSA approach to mMCS - cluster size determined manually by following Troyer’s guidelines – resulted in a moderate correlation of 0.57 (n = 49, p < 0.001). 
 
 
 3.2 Differences Between Diagnostic Groups 
 Demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants in this study are presented in  Table 1 . Significant differences in SVF score means between AD dementia and CN (adjusted p-value < 0.001), and between MCI and CN groups (adjusted p-value = 0.016) were observed with higher SVF scores in CN than in AD dementia and MCI groups. MCI participants were less impaired (higher SVF score) than AD; however, while this difference was in the expected direction, it only approached significance (adjusted p-value = 0.054). On STMS and CDR, post-hoc analyses revealed that both CN and MCI participants were significantly less impaired than AD (adjusted p-value < 0.001); however, the differences between CN and MCI on the STMS and CDR scales were not significant. The CuRel scores were highest in the MCI group followed by a tie between AD dementia and CN; however, these differences were not significant either. A similar pattern of results was observed for STMS, showing that CN and MCI participants performed significantly better than AD, with MCI scores being between CN and AD but the differences failing to reach statistical significance. 
 The traditional SVF score was not correlated with either MCS (r = 0.27, p = 0.06) or CuRel (r = −0.09, p = 0.52) measures. MCS and CuRel were also uncorrelated (r = 0.16, p = 0.28). We estimated three regression models with the STMS score as the dependent variable and SVF, MCS, or CuRel score as the independent variable, respectively. Each model also included sex, age and education level of the participants as covariates in addition to the SVF, MCS, or CuRel score. The model with the SVF score showed that it was a significant predictor of STMS (p < 0.001); however, the remaining models did not show significant associations between the LSA-based scores (MCS or CuRel) and STMS. 
 
 
 3.3 Associations Between Language Brain Network Connectivity and Semantic Clustering 
 The back-reconstructed language network recapitulated the typical regions of positive and negative functional connectivity found in the ICN shown in  Figure 3 . The spatial topography of ICNs represents the average composition of dynamic binary brain configurations ( Jones et al., 2012 ), consisting of regions of positive synchrony in brain areas related to a specific cognitive task and regions of negative synchrony (i.e., anticorrelations) in brain areas which may serve related, yet competing, functions ( Fox et al., 2009 ). Hence, the optimal brain organization that supports language-related tasks, captured by analysis of ICNs in both task-related and task-free experimental paradigms, relates to the system’s ability to maintain appropriate positive and negative functional connectivity of these regions, shown in  Figure 3 . 
 In this study, we examined the associations between one of each of the three covariates of interest (SVF, MCS, and CuRel) and both positive and negative regions of functional connectivity in the back-reconstructed language network ( Table 2  and  Figure 3 ). We looked for associations between performance on semantic clustering measures with functional connectivity of individual language network regions giving rise to four possibilities: loss of positive functional connectivity, loss of negative functional connectivity, gain of positive functional connectivity, or gain of negative functional connectivity. In general, poorer performance on semantic indices was associated with a loss of either positive or negative functional connectivity highlighting the importance of both strong positive and strong negative connectivity for high performance. The only exception being the gain of positive functional connectivity seen in the medial frontal lobe associated with lower SVF scores discussed below. 
 The following results are organized in terms of the comparisons between the back-reconstructed language network (see  Figure 3  showing the sign of functional connectivity of various regions with the rest of the language network) and the relationship of specific language network areas to the covariates of interest (see  Figure 3  showing the direction of the correlations between functional connectivity in language network areas and the covariates). It is important to note that yellow and blue colors in  Figure 3  represent a different phenomenon from the colors in  Figure 4 . The colors in  Figure 3  index areas of positive and negative functional brain network connectivity, whereas colors in  Figure 4  positive and negative correlations with semantic indices. 
 Better performance measured by the traditional SVF score was most strongly correlated with the left middle temporal gyrus and the basal ganglia ( Table 2 ). Both of these areas display positive functional connectivity with the rest of the language network (see  Figure 3 , yellow and orange areas). The negative functional connectivity of the medial prefrontal cortex (see  Figure 3 , blue), which is part of the anterior default mode network (aDMN), was correlated with poorer performance measured with the SVF score (shown in  Figure 4a , blue). 
 The MCS measure was found to be differentially associated with the middle temporal gyrus, superior parietal lobule, and fusiform gyrus. The middle temporal region had positive functional connectivity with the rest of the language network ( Figure 3 , orange and yellow). Greater positive connectivity in this region was associated with larger semantic clusters ( Figure 4b , yellow); however, larger semantic clusters were also associated with greater negative connectivity of the left superior parietal lobule and fusiform gyrus ( Figure 4b , blue and  Figure 3 , blue). 
 Lower CuRel scores were associated with loss of functional connectivity in the left angular gyrus and left frontal operculum areas ( Figure 4c , blue). Both of these areas are shown in  Figure 3  (yellow and orange) to be positively connected with the rest of the language network, thus the detrimental association with CuRel scores in this case is loss of positive functional connectivity. Higher CuRel scores were associated with greater negative functional connectivity of the ventral DMN areas (right precuneus and retrosplenial posterior cingulate cortex,  Figure 4c , yellow). At first glance it may seem counterintuitive that larger CuRel scores are associated with detrimental loss of positive and negative functional connectivity, particularly in light of the fact that CuRel means do not differ significantly across diagnostic groups. In order to further elucidate the relationship between CuRel scores and behavioral performance, we examined the association between CuRel and SVF scores by subgroups with higher and lower mental status using the STMS score threshold of 34 to separate participants into these groups. The motivation for using STMS score cutoff of 34 stemmed from findings of a previous large study that examined the utility of using STMS to predict MCI ( Tang-Wai et al., 2003 ) that reported a mean of 34.2 for patients with MCI diagnosis. The results of this examination are shown in  Figure 5  and are juxtaposed with the associations in  Figure 4c , repeated in  Figure 5  for convenience. These results show that there is a significant negative association between CuRel and SVF performance (r = −0.52, p = 0.022) in the higher functioning group ( Figure 5a , left). No association with SVF performance (r = 0.01, p = 0.98) was found for the lower-functioning group. The direction of the associations between CuRel and loss of negative and positive functional connectivity in the left angular gyrus and the right precuneus, respectively, was preserved. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 
 4.1 General Discussion 
 In this study, we demonstrated that distributed semantic representations of animal names constructed using LSA from a small subset of a large online encyclopedia can be used to characterize verbal behavior elicited with SVF tests and investigate distinct brain mechanism(s) that support generative semantic fluency. While two-thirds of our study sample came from a clinical population, our focus was not clinical. In this study, the disease process that resulted in MCI and AD dementia in the participants was used as a naturally occurring research instrument that modulated the connectivity of brain networks involved in verbal responses to the generative semantic verbal fluency task. The results of this study confirm the original proposal by  Troyer et al. (1997)  that cognitive performance on the SVF test is multidimensional and that the traditional SVF scores do not account for every aspect of performance on this test. We have developed a computational linguistic approach that can help assess multiple behavioral aspects of SVF testing in addition to the SVF score in a standardized and reproducible fashion, and improve the test’s explanatory power with respect to the underlying brain mechanisms involved in various aspects of this task. Our approach leverages the information contained in a new generation of social media resources (such as the Wikipedia), that are constantly being created and updated through Internet-mediated interactions among large numbers of people. Thus these resources can be used as a valuable source of information to represent distributional semantic properties of words. 
 Troyer et al.’s (1997)  procedure is widely used in research; however, it has certain limitations. It relies on an experimentally defined shallow hierarchy (at most 3 levels) with three top-level categories (Living Environment, Human Use and Zoological Categories) and several sub-categories with multiple inheritance (the same animal name may appear in more than one category). The subcategories in this classification scheme were defined based on patterns experimentally observed (unfortunately, the authors did not specify what empirical patterns were used to determine category membership) in the tests administered to 95 healthy Canadian adults. Thus manual clustering using this categorization scheme assumes that the subject conceptualizes the animal kingdom in the same way as this relatively small and specific study population. For example, Troyer’s categorization places the word “seal” under “Arctic/Far North Animals”, which makes sense from the standpoint of someone living in Canada; however, seals are also found in many places other than the Arctic. This is a trivial example used here only to illustrate the arbitrary nature of picking the dimension (among the three available dimensions exemplified by the top level categories) along which an animal can be categorized. 
 In contrast to Troyer’s original manual approach, the LSA-based automated clustering approach that we propose results in semantic relatedness assessments between words along multiple dimensions derived from a large corpus of text based on co-occurrence frequency. Thus this approach  implicitly  classifies animal names according to a number of empirically determined dimensions. In contrast,  Troyer’s et al. (1997)  approach relies on several  explicit  semantic dimensions. The choice of a small number of dimensions for manual analysis is quite reasonable because higher dimensionality would prove to be exponentially more difficult for manual human assessments. However, a classification along this practical but small number of dimensions may not be able to capture the variety of possible ways in which people categorize concrete objects such as animals. However, one potential disadvantage of the LSA-based approach, as compared to Troyer’s approach, is that the dimensions of the semantic space resulting from LSA computation are not labeled and may not be as readily interpretable as the explicit manually determined dimensions. 
 
 
 4.2 Behavioral Measurements Across Diagnostic Groups 
 The results with respect to the traditional SVF scores show that they are strongly associated with diagnostic group membership (lowest SVF score in the AD dementia group, highest in the CN group, with MCI in the middle). Standard SVF scores are also strongly associated with STMS, a global cognitive measures of mental status. These results are consistent with prior work showing sensitivity of the SVF score to AD dementia ( Henry  et al. , 2004 ) and confirm that the SVF performance in the sample used in this study is modulated by cognitive impairment affecting generative verbal fluency. Prior work on qualitative assessments of clustering performance on SVF tests is inconsistent with respect to the effects of MCI and AD dementia on cluster size. Some of the studies found significant differences between healthy controls (larger clusters) and patients with AD ( Fagundo et al., 2008 ;  Price et al., 2012 ;  Troster et al., 1998 ;  Troyer et al., 1998 ), while others failed to find such differences ( Epker, Lacritz, & Munro Cullum, 1999 ;  Raoux et al., 2008 ). The findings of the current study are consistent with the latter - we also did not find a significant difference between diagnostic groups on either the MCS or the CuRel measures. As has been noted by  Raoux et al. (2008) , differences in qualitative methods and sampling may be responsible for these discrepant results, highlighting the need for computerized quantitative clustering analyses. For example, AD dementia patients in previous studies that found a significant difference in MCS were more impaired on the SVF test (SVF score averaged across studies − 7.73 (SD – 4.3)) than AD dementia patients in studies that did not find significant differences (average SVF score − 9.44 (SD – 3.8)). A difference of 2 words at the lower end of the scale can have a much more significant impact on cluster size computation than the same difference at the higher end of the scale because the very notion of clusters becomes meaningless as the total number of words to be clustered approaches one. The mean SVF score for the AD dementia group in the current study is 11 (SD 4.6), which reflects the fact that our participants are in earlier stages of dementia. Thus our results are more consistent in this respect with studies that involved higher-functioning participants and did not find significant differences in clustering measures. 
 One of the objectives of this study was to determine if the overall SVF performance can be decomposed into components that may be associated with semantic processing. The fact that there was no significant association between MCS or CuRel scores and STMS, but that a significant association was found with the traditional SVF score supports the hypothesis that semantic measures (MCS and CuRel) tap into semantic-specific mechanisms rather than those involved in global functioning reflected by STMS scores. On the other hand, given that multiple mechanisms including executive function, attention, inhibition, motor, and semantic retrieval and organization systems are involved in producing speech on semantic verbal fluency tasks, it is not surprising that the traditional SVF score is strongly associated with global cognitive functioning. 
 
 
 4.3 Distinct Neural Mechanisms Underlying Semantic Indices 
 The task free fMRI imaging results show the intrinsic organization of large-scale neural networks in a task-free experimental paradigm from the perspective of the language network. Our results help elucidate the relationship of the networks to the traditional SVF score and other automatically derived semantic indices including MCS and CuRel. These results suggest that the SVF score, MCS and CuRel measures are dependent on different aspects of brain function, because each has an association with a distinct part of the ICN. 
 Brain regions found to be associated with SVF, MCS and CuRel metrics have been previously reported in the literature to be related to functions consistent with what one would expect these measures to reflect. The association between SVF scores and loss of positive functional connectivity in the left middle temporal gyrus and left basal ganglia may be indicative of impairment in fronto-temporal network interactions, which are coordinated by subcortical structures ( Thames et al., 2012 ). These structures have been shown to support performance on generative semantic fluency ( Libon et al., 2009 ) and to be involved specifically with lexical and semantic search and retrieval processes but not processes involved in overlearned automatic speech ( Birn et al., 2010 ). Our results are also in-line with a previous task free fMRI study that found left middle temporal connectivity with various frontal and parietal brain regions was predictive of semantic processing in healthy individuals ( Wei et al., 2012 ). The association between SVF scores and gain of positive functional connectivity of the medial prefrontal cortex, which constitutes a part of the aDMN, may index decreased ability to attenuate the activity of the default mode network during the SVF task resulting in interference and consequently poorer performance on the task. This finding is consistent with the previously observed association between increases in connectivity in the aDMN during normal aging, declining STMS scores, and progression to AD dementia ( Jones et al., 2011 ). 
 Similarly to SVF scores, the association between the MCS measure and gain of positive functional connectivity of the left middle temporal region with the rest of the language network is consistent with prior reports showing this area to be critical for supporting semantic language processing ( Hodges & Patterson, 1995 ;  Mummery et al., 1999 ;  Turken & Dronkers, 2011 ). The loss of negative functional connectivity in the occipital temporal (fusiform gyrus) and superior parietal regions implies dysfunction in those brain regions, in that they are unable to form the appropriate relationship to the rest of the brain during language network formation, which is associated with suboptimal behavioral performance on aspects of the SVF test dependent on the integrity of those brain regions (e.g., smaller semantic clusters). A likely explanation for this finding has to do with the involvement of these areas in working memory (superior parietal region) ( Koenigs, Barbey, Postle, & Grafman, 2009 ) and within-category identification and processing of dominant and distinctive semantic features (fusiform gyrus) ( Mechelli, Sartori, Orlandi, & Price, 2006 ). The finding of the association with fusiform gyrus is also consistent with other fMRI studies of semantic relatedness demonstrating involvement of this area in processing of semantically related, unrelated, and identical pairs of words referring to concrete objects ( Wheatley et al., 2005 ) and processing of object’s visual attributes and structural identity ( Bruffaerts et al., 2013 ). Our findings are also consistent with the crucial role that the fusiform gyrus plays in semantic processing involved in the SVF task by being a critical part of the brain’s semantic network, with hypometabolism in this area highly predictive of SVF scores in a population with semantic dementia ( Mion et al., 2010 ). A comparison of the brain areas associated with LSA-based MCS and manually computed mMCS (data not shown), confirmed that, consistent with the moderate correlation between the measures, they were associated with similar but not identical regions. Both were associated with loss of negative functional connectivity in the superior parietal regions and gain of positive connectivity in the temporal areas. The involvement of temporal areas was more bilateral for mMCS than for MCS and there was no association of mMCS with the fusiform gyrus. This may possibly be due to the fact that Troyer et al.’s guidelines for computing clusters are based on functional and taxonomic distinctions (e.g., Living Environment, Human Use, Zoological Categories) and thus does not include groupings of animals based on visual structural characteristics. 
 Higher CuRel scores were associated with loss of positive functional connectivity of the left fronto-parietal regions suggests possible impairment of mechanisms such as working memory and attention that underlie episodic memory retrieval in individuals with higher CuRel scores. This is consistent with prior work showing that the strength of connectivity in the left fronto-parietal network plays an important role in retrieval of previously studied information ( Iidaka, Matsumoto, Nogawa, Yamamoto, & Sadato, 2006 ). The association of CuRel measure with loss of negative functional connectivity of the ventral Default Mode Network (vDMN) (right precuneus, medial temporal lobe) is also consistent with prior findings of the association between these areas and use of visual imagery during episodic memory recall of concrete and highly imageable words ( Cavanna & Trimble, 2006 ). Similarly to the relationship between the MCS and the loss of negative functional connectivity in the occipital temporal and superior parietal regions, the relationship between CuRel and the loss of negative functional connectivity in vDMN regions implies the amelioration of functional distinction of that area from the rest of the brain during language network formation. As shown in  Figure 4 , larger CuRel scores are differentially associated with overall test performance in groups with higher versus lower mental status. This is an interesting finding in light of the fact that both groups show detrimental associations between larger CuRel scores and loss of positive and negative functional connectivity in areas supporting working memory and attention mechanisms, yet only the higher functioning group shows the same detrimental association between larger CuRel values and SVF scores. This finding indicates that the same brain mechanism is at work in both groups and that optimal performance for individuals with higher cognitive function (as measured by STMS) consists largely of producing more semantically diverse responses. These results may also indicate the presence of a floor effect in individuals with lower SVF scores that is also evident to some extent in the association between gain of positive functional connectivity in the medial prefrontal cortex ( Figure 4a ). 
 In summary, our findings suggest that the computerized semantic indices capture components of the verbal behavior produced on the SVF task that are different from the traditional SVF score. Based on the findings of the current and multiple previous studies ( Baldo, Schwartz, Wilkins, & Dronkers, 2006 ;  Mummery, Patterson, Hodges, & Wise, 1996 ;  Tupak et al., 2012 ), the traditional SVF score indexes the function of frontal and temporal brain areas thought to be involved in executive control and semantic memory necessary for adequate performance on generative verbal fluency tasks. The current study further suggests that the traditional SVF score may not be sufficient to reflect the complexity of brain mechanisms involved in this task. Computational linguistic analysis of responses to this task provide a more complete, albeit most likely not exhaustive account. The MCS measure appears to be associated with the function of parietal and occipital, in addition to temporal areas, shown to be involved in working memory and semantic feature processing. This makes sense in light of the fact that MCS reflects the size of semantic clusters whose production is dependent not only on the availability of conceptual information but also on the ability to use a strategy for their retrieval. A successful strategy is likely to depend on the ability to identify relevant semantic features to produce within-category exemplars, and the ability to keep information online to avoid repetition. The CuRel measure is different from MCS in that it captures the degree of overall semantic relatedness among all concepts produced on the SVF task. Thus it can be thought of as a measure of diversity of the semantic space (i.e., animals in this case) that may be sensitive to impairment in areas involved in memory of previously learned information. It makes sense that individuals with more intact memory would be able to produce more semantically diverse responses – e.g. produce smaller size clusters but a greater number of them due to availability of more previously learned exemplars of a given category. The fact that SVF, MCS and CuRel are uncorrelated with each other and are associated with network connectivity in distinct brain areas suggests that these indices may serve as independent and complementary variables in the investigation of the relationship between brain function and verbal behavior. 
 
 
 4.4 Other Approaches to Clustering Analysis of SVF Responses 
 Several approaches inspired by graph-theoretic network analysis have been proposed for the analysis of responses on SVF tests ( Chan et al., 1993 ,  2001 ;  Goni et al., 2011 ;  Lerner, Ogrocki, & Thomas, 2009 ). These approaches estimate the strength of semantic relatedness between words based on their proximity in individual SVF responses averaged across a large number of subjects to create lexical-semantic networks and describe their properties using similar graph-theoretic methods used in brain network analyses. These approaches use neurodegenerative disease status to group individual responses and to generate and compare the emerging lexical-semantic networks across groups. The underlying assumption in these approaches is that words produced in close proximity to each other on an SVF test are more semantically related than words that are further apart. This assumption may not always be true, particularly for people with neurodegenerative disease. Also, SVF responses typically contain more switches than clusters (mean cluster size is typically between 1 and 2 words). This may present a significant source of “noise” for the analyses that rely on word proximity alone and require a large number of samples for maximum separation between co-occurrences observed and those that are expected by chance. The advantage of the LSA-based approach presented in this paper is that it does not assume that proximity of words in SVF responses defined their semantic relatedness or similarity. Instead, this approach relies on a source of information external to and independent of the SVF testing responses provided by a particular group and thus can be applied to analyze individual responses. 
 In our own prior work ( Pakhomov, Hemmy, & Lim, 2012 ), we investigated the use of an alternative ontology-based method for calculating the strength of semantic association between pairs of words that was based on the distance between words in WordNet, a large manually constructed lexical database that contains mostly hierarchical relations. The corpus-based approach presented in the current study is complementary to the ontology-based approach. The hierarchical ontology-based approaches tend to measure the degree of similarity between concepts (e.g. cat vs. panther), while the corpus-based approaches tend to also measure the degree of semantic relatedness (e.g., cat vs. mouse). Furthermore, corpus-based approaches tend to be easier and less resource intensive to maintain and update over time; however, the ontology-based approaches tend to be more tractable and explicit (i.e., easier to determine the factors contributing to the various scores). In future work, we plan to experiment with hybrid approaches to computing SVF semantic indices that would leverage both the ontology-based as well as the corpus-based approaches to characterizing strategies used in response to the SVF task. 
 
 
 4.5 Limitations 
 For the current study, we started with the simplest and most straightforward approach to using LSA to represent word meanings in which each animal was represented as a document from a collection and each document was represented as an unordered list of words - “bag of words”. More sophisticated approaches may include targeting specific words in a predefined context such as a sentence or other syntactic units ( Baroni & Lenci, 2010 ;  Devereux, Pilkington, Poibeau, & Korhonen, 2009 ;  Padó & Lapata, 2007 ), and combining text corpus co-occurrence data with word association norms ( Andrews, Vigliocco, & Vinson, 2009 ;  Durda, Buchanan, & Caron, 2009 ). A number of non-corpus based and hybrid alternatives for computing semantic similarity and relatedness have also been developed, including methods that rely on calculating path length between concepts in a hierarchy such as WordNet ( Fellbaum, 1998 ;  G. A. Miller, 1995 ), as well as methods based on overlap in word definitions in addition to corpus statistics ( Jiang & Conrath, 1997 ;  Lesk, 1986 ;  Patwardhan & Pedersen, 2006 ;  Pedersen, Patwardhan, & Michelizzi, 2004 ;  Resnik, 1999 ;  Resnik, 1995 ). 
 
 
 
 6. Conclusion 
 A number of distinct aspects of verbal behavior exhibited on responses to semantic verbal fluency tests can be described and quantified using automated computational linguistic approaches. In the present study, we examined two different techniques that use the strength of semantic relatedness information to quantify clustering behavior (MCS) as well as the degree of semantic diversity present in the test response (CuRel). These two approaches appear to be supported by neural mechanisms not only distinct from each other, but also from those that support the overall performance on this task (SVF score). These findings have important implications for future studies focused on neural correlates of verbal behavior on generative verbal fluency tasks. Using these objective and relatively easily quantifiable measurements will enable a sensitive, systematic and fine-grained examination of the brain mechanisms involved in lexical access and retrieval. Future work may focus on introducing timing information into the examination of clustering and switching behavior on this task by using audio-recorded samples, as well task-related fMRI imaging to complement the findings obtained in the task-free fMRI paradigm. 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 The methods for computing MCS and CuRel described in this manuscript as well as additional approaches to measuring clustering and switching in semantic and phonemic fluency test responses have been made publicly available as a Python package ( https://pypi.python.org/pypi/VFClust/0.1.1 ). 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 GRANT SUPPORT: This work was supported by NIH grants R01 LM009623 (PI – Pakhomov), P50 AG016574 (PI – Ron Petersen), U01 AG006786 (PI – Ron Petersen), R01 AG041851 (PIs – David Knopman and Cliff Jack), R01 AG011378 (PI – Cliff Jack), and the Robert H. and Clarice Smith and Abigail Van Buren Alzheimer’s Disease Research Program of the Mayo Foundation. We are also deeply grateful to the participants in this study, their families, and caregivers. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 DSM-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
 1994 
 4th ed. 
 Washington, DC 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews 
 M 
 
 
 Vigliocco 
 G 
 
 
 Vinson 
 D 
 
 
 Integrating experiential and distributional data to learn semantic representations 
 Psychological Review 
 2009 
 116 
 3 
 463 
 498 
 19618982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baldo 
 JV 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 S 
 
 
 Wilkins 
 D 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Role of frontal versus temporal cortex in verbal fluency as revealed by voxel-based lesion symptom mapping 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 2006 
 12 
 896 
 900 
 17064451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baroni 
 M 
 
 
 Lenci 
 A 
 
 
 Distributional Memory: A General Framework for Corpus-Based Semantics 
 Computational Linguistics 
 2010 
 36 
 4 
 673 
 721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baroni 
 M 
 
 
 Murphy 
 B 
 
 
 Barbu 
 E 
 
 
 Poesio 
 M 
 
 
 Strudel: A Corpus-Based Semantic Model Based on Properties and Types 
 Cognitive Science 
 2010 
 34 
 2 
 222 
 254 
 21564211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 C 
 
 
 Mackay 
 C 
 
 
 Filippini 
 N 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 Group comparison of resting-state FMRI data using multi-subject ICA and dual regression 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 47 
 S148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Kenworthy 
 L 
 
 
 Case 
 L 
 
 
 Caravella 
 R 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Neural systems supporting lexical search guided by letter and semantic category cues: a self-paced overt response fMRI study of verbal fluency 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 49 
 1099 
 1107 
 19632335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blei 
 D 
 
 
 Griffiths 
 T 
 
 
 Jordan 
 M 
 
 
 Lafferty 
 J 
 
 
 Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
 Journal of Machine Learning Research 
 2003 
 3 
 993 
 1022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruffaerts 
 R 
 
 
 Dupont 
 P 
 
 
 De Grauwe 
 S 
 
 
 Peeters 
 R 
 
 
 De Deyne 
 S 
 
 
 Storms 
 G 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Right fusiform response patterns reflect visual object identity rather than semantic similarity 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 83 
 87 
 97 
 23811413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Imaging cognition II: An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2000 
 12 
 1 
 47 
 10769304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Adali 
 T 
 
 
 Pearlson 
 GD 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2001 
 14 
 140 
 151 
 11559959 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Mahon 
 BZ 
 
 
 The organisation of conceptual knowledge in the brain: The future’s past and some future directions 
 Cogn Neuropsychol 
 2006 
 23 
 13 
 38 
 doi:741532705 [pii] 10.1080/02643290542000021 
 21049320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cavanna 
 AE 
 
 
 Trimble 
 MR 
 
 
 The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates 
 Brain 
 2006 
 129 
 564 
 583 
 16399806 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chan 
 AS 
 
 
 Butters 
 N 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 McGuire 
 KA 
 
 
 Dimensionality and clustering in the semantic network of patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
 Psychol Aging 
 1993 
 8 
 411 
 419 
 8216961 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chan 
 AS 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 De La Pena 
 J 
 
 
 Abnormal semantic network for “animals” but not “tools” in patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
 Cortex 
 2001 
 37 
 197 
 217 
 11394721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chao-Gan 
 Y 
 
 
 Yu-Feng 
 Z 
 
 
 DPARSF: A MATLAB Toolbox for “Pipeline” Data Analysis of Resting-State fMRI 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 2010 
 4 
 13 
 20577591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devereux 
 B 
 
 
 Pilkington 
 N 
 
 
 Poibeau 
 T 
 
 
 Korhonen 
 A 
 
 
 Towards Unrestricted, Large-Scale Acquisition of Feature-Based Conceptual Representations from Corpus Data 
 Research on Language and Computation 
 2009 
 7 
 2–4 
 137 
 170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Durda 
 K 
 
 
 Buchanan 
 L 
 
 
 Caron 
 R 
 
 
 Grounding co-occurrence: Identifying features in a lexical co-occurrence model of semantic memory 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2009 
 41 
 4 
 1210 
 1223 
 19897830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epker 
 MO 
 
 
 Lacritz 
 LH 
 
 
 Munro Cullum 
 C 
 
 
 Comparative analysis of qualitative verbal fluency performance in normal elderly and demented populations 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 1999 
 21 
 425 
 434 
 10550803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erhardt 
 EB 
 
 
 Rachakonda 
 S 
 
 
 Bedrick 
 EJ 
 
 
 Allen 
 EA 
 
 
 Adali 
 T 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 Comparison of multi-subject ICA methods for analysis of fMRI data 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2011 
 32 
 12 
 2075 
 2095 
 21162045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Estes 
 WK 
 
 
 Learning theory and intelligence 
 Am Psychol 
 1974 
 29 
 740 
 749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fagundo 
 AB 
 
 
 Lopez 
 S 
 
 
 Romero 
 M 
 
 
 Guarch 
 J 
 
 
 Marcos 
 T 
 
 
 Salamero 
 M 
 
 
 Clustering and switching in semantic fluency: predictors of the development of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
 2008 
 23 
 1007 
 1013 
 18416452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fellbaum 
 C 
 
 
 Word Net: an electronic lexical database 
 1998 
 Cambridge, Mass 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The global signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain networks 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2009 
 101 
 3270 
 3283 
 19339462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goni 
 J 
 
 
 Arrondo 
 G 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Martincorena 
 I 
 
 
 Velez de Mendizabal 
 N 
 
 
 Corominas-Murtra 
 B 
 
 
 Villoslada 
 P 
 
 
 The semantic organization of the animal category: evidence from semantic verbal fluency and network theory 
 Cognitive Processing 
 2011 
 12 
 183 
 196 
 20938799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Frontotemporal dementia: a review 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 2002 
 8 
 566 
 583 
 12030310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henry 
 JD 
 
 
 Crawford 
 JR 
 
 
 Phillips 
 LH 
 
 
 Verbal fluency performance in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type: a meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2004 
 42 
 1212 
 1222 
 doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.02.001 S0028393204000296 [pii] 
 15178173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Davies 
 RR 
 
 
 Xuereb 
 JH 
 
 
 Casey 
 B 
 
 
 Broe 
 M 
 
 
 Bak 
 TH 
 
 
 Halliday 
 GM 
 
 
 Clinicopathological Correlates in Frontotemporal Dementia 
 Ann Neurol 
 2004 
 56 
 399 
 406 
 15349867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Patterson 
 H 
 
 
 Is semantic memory consistently impaired early in the course of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroanatomical and diagnostic implications 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1995 
 33 
 441 
 459 
 7617154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iidaka 
 T 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 A 
 
 
 Nogawa 
 J 
 
 
 Yamamoto 
 Y 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Frontoparietal network involved in successful retrieval from episodic memory. Spatial and temporal analyses using fMRI and ERP 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2006 
 16 
 1349 
 1360 
 16861334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 J 
 
 
 Conrath 
 D 
 
 
 Semantic Similarity Based on Corpus Statistics and Lexical Taxonomy 
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Research in Computational Linguistics 
 1997 
 19 
 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 DT 
 
 
 Machulda 
 MM 
 
 
 Vemuri 
 P 
 
 
 McDade 
 EM 
 
 
 Zeng 
 G 
 
 
 Senjem 
 ML 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 
 
 Age-related changes in the default mode network are more advanced in Alzheimer disease 
 Neurology 
 2011 
 77 
 1524 
 1531 
 21975202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 DT 
 
 
 Vemuri 
 P 
 
 
 Murphy 
 MC 
 
 
 Gunter 
 JL 
 
 
 Senjem 
 ML 
 
 
 Machulda 
 MM 
 
 
 Jack 
 CR 
 
 
 Non-Stationarity in the “Resting Brain’s” Modular Architecture 
 PLoS One 
 2012 
 7 
 e39731 
 22761880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanerva 
 P 
 
 
 Hyperdimensional Computing: An Introduction to Computing in Distributed Representation with High-Dimensional Random Vectors 
 Cognitive Computation 
 2009 
 1 
 2 
 139 
 159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 CJ 
 
 
 Bickel 
 S 
 
 
 Entz 
 L 
 
 
 Ulbert 
 I 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Mehta 
 AD 
 
 
 Intrinsic functional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2011 
 108 
 10308 
 10313 
 21636787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Kramer 
 JH 
 
 
 Boeve 
 BF 
 
 
 Caselli 
 RJ 
 
 
 Graff-Radford 
 NR 
 
 
 Mendez 
 MF 
 
 
 Mercaldo 
 N 
 
 
 Development of methodology for conducting clinical trials in frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
 Brain 
 2008 
 131 
 2957 
 2968 
 18829698 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koenigs 
 M 
 
 
 Barbey 
 AK 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Superior parietal cortex is critical for the manipulation of information in working memory 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 14980 
 14986 
 19940193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kokmen 
 E 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Tangalos 
 E 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RC 
 
 
 The short test of mental status. Correlations with standardized psychometric testing 
 Arch Neurol 
 1991 
 48 
 725 
 728 
 1859300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laine 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Koivuselka-Sallinen 
 P 
 
 
 Sarajarvi 
 L 
 
 
 Correlates of word fluency performance 
 Studies in Languages 
 1988 
 12 
 Joensuu, Finnland 
 University of Joensuu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landauer 
 TK 
 
 
 Handbook of latent semantic analysis 
 2006 
 Mahwah, N.J. 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landauer 
 TK 
 
 
 Dumais 
 ST 
 
 
 A solution to Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge 
 Psychol Rev 
 1997 
 104 
 211 
 240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lerner 
 AJ 
 
 
 Ogrocki 
 PK 
 
 
 Thomas 
 PJ 
 
 
 Network graph analysis of category fluency testing 
 Cogn Behav Neurol 
 2009 
 22 
 45 
 52 
 doi:10.1097/WNN.0b013e318192ccaf 00146965-200903000-00005 [pii] 
 19372770 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lesk 
 M 
 
 
 Automatic Sense Disambiguation Using Machine Readable Dictionaries: How to Tell a Pine Cone from an Ice Cream Cone 
 Proceedings of the 5th Annual International Conference on System Documentation 
 1986 
 24 
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levelt 
 WJ 
 
 
 Speaking: from intention to articulation 
 1989 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lezak 
 MD 
 
 
 Neuropsychological Assessment 
 2004 
 4th ed. 
 Oxford, England 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Libon 
 DJ 
 
 
 McMillan 
 C 
 
 
 Gunawardena 
 D 
 
 
 Powers 
 C 
 
 
 Massimo 
 L 
 
 
 Khan 
 A 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Neurocognitive contributions to verbal fluency deficits in frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
 Neurology 
 2009 
 73 
 535 
 542 
 19687454 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahon 
 BZ 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Concepts and categories: a cognitive neuropsychological perspective 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 2009 
 60 
 27 
 51 
 18767921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 The parallel distributed processing approach to semantic cognition 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2003 
 4 
 310 
 322 
 12671647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKhann 
 G 
 
 
 Drachman 
 D 
 
 
 Folstein 
 M 
 
 
 Katzman 
 R 
 
 
 Price 
 D 
 
 
 Stadlan 
 EM 
 
 
 Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: report of the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer’s Disease 
 Neurology 
 1984 
 34 
 939 
 944 
 6610841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Sartori 
 G 
 
 
 Orlandi 
 P 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Semantic relevance explains category effects in medial fusiform gyri 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 30 
 992 
 1002 
 16343950 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meinzer 
 M 
 
 
 Flaisch 
 T 
 
 
 Wilser 
 L 
 
 
 Eulitz 
 C 
 
 
 Rockstroh 
 B 
 
 
 Conway 
 T 
 
 
 Crosson 
 B 
 
 
 Neural signatures of semantic and phonemic fluency in young and old adults 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2009 
 21 
 2007 
 2018 
 19296728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 WordNet: a lexical database for English 
 Communications of the ACM 
 1995 
 38 
 11 
 39 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 Fellbaum 
 C 
 
 
 Semantic Networks of English 
 Cognition 
 1991 
 41 
 197 
 229 
 1790654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mion 
 M 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Acosta-Cabronero 
 J 
 
 
 Pengas 
 G 
 
 
 Izquierdo-Garcia 
 D 
 
 
 Hong 
 YT 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 What the left and right anterior fusiform gyri tell us about semantic memory 
 Brain 
 2010 
 133 
 3256 
 3268 
 20952377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 TM 
 
 
 Shinkareva 
 SV 
 
 
 Carlson 
 A 
 
 
 Chang 
 K-M 
 
 
 Malave 
 VL 
 
 
 Mason 
 RA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Predicting human brain activity associated with the meanings of nouns 
 Science (New York, N Y) 
 2008 
 320 
 5880 
 1191 
 1195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJ 
 
 
 Generating “tiger” as an animal name or a word beginning with T: differences in brain activation 
 Proc Biol Sci 
 1996 
 263 
 989 
 995 
 8805836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJ 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Disrupted temporal lobe connections in semantic dementia 
 Brain 
 1999 
 122 
 Pt 1 
 61 
 73 
 10050895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ober 
 BA 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Koss 
 E 
 
 
 Delis 
 DC 
 
 
 Friedland 
 RP 
 
 
 Retrieval from semantic memory in Alzheimer-type dementia 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 1986 
 8 
 75 
 92 
 3944246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Padó 
 S 
 
 
 Lapata 
 M 
 
 
 Dependency-Based Construction of Semantic Space Models 
 Computational Linguistics 
 2007 
 33 
 2 
 161 
 199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pakhomov 
 S 
 
 
 Hemmy 
 L 
 
 
 A computational linguistic measure of clustering behavior on semantic verbal fluency task predicts risk of future dementia in the Nun Study 
 Cortex 
 2013 
 (in press), (e-pub ahead of print). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pakhomov 
 S 
 
 
 Hemmy 
 LS 
 
 
 Lim 
 KO 
 
 
 Automated semantic indices related to cognitive function and rate of cognitive decline 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 2165 
 2175 
 22659109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 8 
 976 
 987 
 doi:nrn2277 [pii] 10.1038/nrn2277 
 18026167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patwardhan 
 S 
 
 
 Pedersen 
 T 
 
 
 Using WordNet-based Context Vectors to Estimate the Semantic Relatedness of Concepts 
 In Proceedings of the EACL 2006 Workshop on Making Sense of Sense: Bringing Computational Linguistics and Psycholinguistics Together 
 2006 
 1 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pedersen 
 T 
 
 
 Pakhomov 
 SV 
 
 
 Patwardhan 
 S 
 
 
 Chute 
 CG 
 
 
 Measures of semantic similarity and relatedness in the biomedical domain 
 J Biomed Inform 
 2007 
 40 
 288 
 299 
 doi:S1532-0464(06)00064-5 [pii] 10.1016/j.jbi.2006.06.004 
 16875881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pedersen 
 T 
 
 
 Patwardhan 
 S 
 
 
 Michelizzi 
 J 
 
 
 WordNet::Similarity - Measuring the Relatedness of Concepts 
 Proceedings of Fifth Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
 2004 
 38 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pereira 
 F 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 M 
 
 
 Detre 
 G 
 
 
 Using Wikipedia to learn semantic feature representations of concrete concepts in neuroimaging experiments 
 Artificial Intelligence 
 2013 
 194 
 240 
 252 
 23243317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity 
 J Intern Med 
 2004 
 256 
 183 
 194 
 15324362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 SE 
 
 
 Kinsella 
 GJ 
 
 
 Ong 
 B 
 
 
 Storey 
 E 
 
 
 Mullaly 
 E 
 
 
 Phillips 
 M 
 
 
 Perre 
 D 
 
 
 Semantic verbal fluency strategies in amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
 Neuropsychology 
 2012 
 26 
 490 
 497 
 22746308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Tsukiura 
 T 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Distinguishing the neural correlates of episodic memory encoding and semantic memory retrieval 
 Psychological Science 
 2007 
 18 
 144 
 151 
 17425535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pylkkanen 
 L 
 
 
 Llinas 
 R 
 
 
 Murphy 
 GL 
 
 
 The representation of polysemy: MEG evidence 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2006 
 18 
 97 
 109 
 16417686 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quesada 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Landauer 
 T 
 
 
 McNamara 
 D 
 
 
 Dennis 
 S 
 
 
 Kintsch 
 W 
 
 
 Creating Your Own LSA Spaces 
 Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis 
 2011 
 New York 
 Taylor and Francis Group 
 71 
 89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rada 
 R 
 
 
 Mili 
 F 
 
 
 Bicknell 
 E 
 
 
 Blettner 
 AM 
 
 
 Development and application of a metric on semantic nets 
 1989 
 19 
 Presented at the IEEE Transaction on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, IEEE 
 17 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raoux 
 N 
 
 
 Amieva 
 H 
 
 
 Le Goff 
 M 
 
 
 Auriacombe 
 S 
 
 
 Carcaillon 
 L 
 
 
 Letenneur 
 L 
 
 
 Dartigues 
 JF 
 
 
 Clustering and switching processes in semantic verbal fluency in the course of Alzheimer’s disease subjects: results from the PAQUID longitudinal study 
 Cortex 
 2008 
 44 
 1188 
 1196 
 doi:S0010-9452(07)00158-X [pii] 10.1016/j.cortex.2007.08.019 
 18761132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resnik 
 P 
 
 
 Using Information Content to Evaluate Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy 
 Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
 1995 
 448 
 453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Resnik 
 P 
 
 
 Semantic similarity in a taxonomy: an information-based measure and its application to problems of ambiguity in natural language 
 J of Artif Intell Res 
 1999 
 11 
 95 
 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rich 
 JB 
 
 
 Troyer 
 AK 
 
 
 Bylsma 
 FW 
 
 
 Brandt 
 J 
 
 
 Longitudinal analysis of phonemic clustering and switching during word-list generation in Huntington’s disease 
 Neuropsychology 
 1999 
 13 
 525 
 531 
 10527060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosen 
 WG 
 
 
 Verbal fluency in aging and dementia 
 J Clin Neuropsychol 
 1980 
 2 
 135 
 146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salmon 
 DP 
 
 
 Butters 
 N 
 
 
 Chan 
 AS 
 
 
 The deterioration of semantic memory in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Can J Exp Psychol 
 1999 
 53 
 108 
 117 
 10389493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Song 
 XW 
 
 
 Dong 
 ZY 
 
 
 Long 
 XY 
 
 
 Li 
 SF 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Zhu 
 CZ 
 
 
 Zang 
 YF 
 
 
 REST: a toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing 
 PLoS One 
 2011 
 6 
 e25031 
 21949842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 de Haan 
 W 
 
 
 Daffertshofer 
 A 
 
 
 Jones 
 BF 
 
 
 Manshanden 
 I 
 
 
 van Cappellen van Walsum 
 AM 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Graph theoretical analysis of magnetoencephalographic functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Brain 
 2009 
 132 
 213 
 224 
 doi:awn262 [pii] 10.1093/brain/awn262 
 18952674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Jones 
 BF 
 
 
 Nolte 
 G 
 
 
 Breakspear 
 M 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Small-world networks and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 92 
 99 
 16452642 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Rubin 
 D 
 
 
 Musen 
 M 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease 
 PLoS Computational Biology 
 2008 
 4 
 e1000100 
 18584043 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tang-Wai 
 DF 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Geda 
 YE 
 
 
 Edland 
 SD 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Comparison of the short test of mental status and the mini-mental state examination in mild cognitive impairment 
 Arch Neurol 
 2003 
 60 
 1777 
 1781 
 14676056 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thames 
 AD 
 
 
 Foley 
 JM 
 
 
 Wright 
 MJ 
 
 
 Panos 
 SE 
 
 
 Ettenhofer 
 M 
 
 
 Ramezani 
 A 
 
 
 Hinkin 
 CH 
 
 
 Basal ganglia structures differentially contribute to verbal fluency: evidence from Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-infected adults 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 390 
 395 
 22223078 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Troster 
 AI 
 
 
 Fields 
 JA 
 
 
 Testa 
 JA 
 
 
 Paul 
 RH 
 
 
 Blanco 
 CR 
 
 
 Hames 
 KA 
 
 
 Beatty 
 WW 
 
 
 Cortical and subcortical influences on clustering and switching in the performance of verbal fluency tasks 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1998 
 36 
 295 
 304 
 9665640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Troyer 
 AK 
 
 
 Normative data for clustering and switching on verbal fluency tasks 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 2000 
 22 
 370 
 378 
 10855044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Troyer 
 AK 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Clustering and switching as two components of verbal fluency: evidence from younger and older healthy adults 
 Neuropsychology 
 1997 
 11 
 138 
 146 
 9055277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Troyer 
 AK 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Leach 
 L 
 
 
 Freedman 
 M 
 
 
 Clustering and switching on verbal fluency tests in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease 
 J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
 1998 
 4 
 137 
 143 
 9529823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 W 
 
 
 Episodic and semantic memory 
 Organization of Memory 
 1972 
 381 
 New York 
 Academic Press 
 381 
 402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Kapur 
 S 
 
 
 Craik 
 FI 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry in episodic memory: positron emission tomography findings 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 1994 
 91 
 2016 
 2020 
 8134342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tupak 
 SV 
 
 
 Badewien 
 M 
 
 
 Dresler 
 T 
 
 
 Hahn 
 T 
 
 
 Ernst 
 LH 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 MJ 
 
 
 Ehlis 
 AC 
 
 
 Differential prefrontal and frontotemporal oxygenation patterns during phonemic and semantic verbal fluency 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 1565 
 1569 
 22426205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turken 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 2011 
 5 
 1 
 21347218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tverski 
 B 
 
 
 Hemenway 
 K 
 
 
 Objects, parts and categories 
 J Exp Psychol 
 1984 
 113 
 169 
 197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weber 
 M 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Osherson 
 D 
 
 
 Haxby 
 J 
 
 
 Parsons 
 L 
 
 
 Predicting judged similarity of natural categories from their neural representations 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 859 
 868 
 doi:S0028-3932(08)00504-6 [pii] 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.12.029 
 19162048 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wei 
 T 
 
 
 Liang 
 X 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Han 
 Z 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Bi 
 Y 
 
 
 Predicting Conceptual Processing Capacity from Spontaneous Neuronal Activity of the Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 2 
 481 
 489 
 22238084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissenbacher 
 A 
 
 
 Kasess 
 C 
 
 
 Gerstl 
 F 
 
 
 Lanzenberger 
 R 
 
 
 Moser 
 E 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 47 
 1408 
 1416 
 19442749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheatley 
 T 
 
 
 Weisberg 
 J 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Automatic priming of semantically related words reduces activity in the fusiform gyrus 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2005 
 17 
 1871 
 1885 
 16356325 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Network of top 50 most frequent animal names found in the study participants’ responses. This network was constructed based on applying a threshold (0.9) to pairwise semantic relatedness values computed from the dimensionality-reduced LSA matrix. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Illustration of cumulative semantic relatedness (CuRel) computation. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Group map of back-reconstructed language network. The one-sample t-test of all of the subjects’ back-reconstructed language networks is displayed on a surface rendering created using the Caret software package ( http://www.nitrc.org/projects/caret/ ). The left hemisphere is presented in the left half of the image. The color bar encodes the t-statistic. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Task free fMRI network connectivity associated with several aspects of performance on SVF tests. (a) – areas of positive (yellow) and negative (blue) correlation between the standard SVF score and language network connectivity; (b) – areas of positive and negative correlation between MCS and langue network connectivity; (c) – areas of positive and negative correlation between CuRel and language network connectivity. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Comparisons of associations between CuRel score and overall performance on the SVF test (a) with loss of positive functional connectivity of the left angular gyrus (b) and loss of negative functional connectivity in the right precuneus (c). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic, clinical, and SVF characteristics by diagnostic group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 CN (N=11) 
 MCI (N=17) 
 AD (N=21) 
 p-value 
 Tukey HSD 
 
 
 
 
 
 Female (%) 
 
 7 (63.6) 
 5 (29.4) 
 6 (28.5) 
 0.11 
 
 
 
 
 Mean Age 
 
 55 (13) 
 69 (12) 
 69 (11) 
 0.005 
 
 
 
 
 Mean STMS 
 1 
 
 36 (1.2) 
 33 (2.3) 
 27 (5.6) 
 <0.001 
 CN > AD MCI > AD 
 
 
 
 Mean CDR 
 2 
 
 0 (0) 
 1.2 (0.78) 
 3.6 (1.96) 
 <0.001 
 CN > AD MCI > AD 
 
 
 
 Mean SVF 
 3 
 
 23 (6.3) 
 16 (7.0) 
 11 (4.6) 
 < 0.001 
 CN > AD CN > MCI 
 
 
 
 Mean MCS 
 4 
 
 0.26 (0.11) 
 0.31 (0.24) 
 0.29 (0.18) 
 0.79 
 
 
 
 
 Mean CuRel 
 5 
 
 0.40 (0.05) 
 0.40 (0.08) 
 0.43 (0.12) 
 0.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 STMS - short test of mental status score 
 
 
 2 
 CDR - clinical dementia rating 
 
 
 3 
 SVF - semantic verbal fluency score 
 
 
 4 
 MCS – mean cluster size 
 
 
 5 
 CuRel – raw cumulative semantic relatedness score 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain network connectivity associated with different aspects of performance on SVF test. 
 
 
 
 
 Covariate 
 Cluster # 
 T-Score 
 # Voxels 
 MNI (x,y,z) 
 ICN 
 Region 
 Detrimental Association* 
 
 
 
 
 
 SVF-Pos 
 1 
 
 1 
 3.98 
 123 
 (−57,−27,0) 
 Language 
 L. Middle Temporal 
 Loss of positive connectivity 
 
 
 
 2 
 3.91 
 202 
 (−24,15,−12) 
 Deep Gray 
 L. Putamen 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 3.31 
 117 
 (21,−42,6) 
 vDMN 4 
 R. Precuneus 
 
 
 
 
 SVF-Neg 
 
 1 
 −3.64 
 212 
 (−27,51,33) 
 adDMN 5 
 L. Middle Frontal 
 Gain of positive connectivity 
 
 
 
 MCS-Pos 
 2 
 
 1 
 4.2 
 211 
 (−51,−57,18) 
 Language 
 L. Middle Temporal 
 Loss of positive connectivity 
 
 
 
 MCS-Neg 
 
 1 
 −4.08 
 125 
 (21,−57,54) 
 SPL 6 
 SPL 
 Loss of negative connectivity 
 
 
 
 2 
 −3.63 
 238 
 (−48,−63,−12) 
 Ventral Stream 
 L. Inf. Occipital 
 
 
 
 
 CuRel-Pos 
 3 
 
 1 
 3.59 
 303 
 (15,−54,75) 
 vDMN 
 R. Precuneus 
 Loss of negative connectivity 
 
 
 
 CuRel-Neg 
 
 1 
 −3.88 
 157 
 (−45,−63,45) 
 Working Memory 
 L. Angular Gyrus 
 Loss of positive connectivity 
 
 
 
 2 
 −3.31 
 206 
 (−42,39,0) 
 Language 
 L. IFG p.Triangularis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 SVF – semantic verbal fluency score (manual)
 
 
 
 2 
 MCS – mean cluster size 
 
 
 3 
 CuRel - cumulative relatedness (automated) 
 
 
 4 
 vDMN-ventral default mode network 
 
 
 5 
 adDMN- anterior dorsal default mode network 
 
 
 6 
 SPL-superior parietal lobule 
 
 
 
 
