
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8100437 
 6047 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 
 Neurobiology of aging 
 
 0197-4580 
 1558-1497 
 
 
 25442118 
 4315728 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.09.011 
 NIHMS647711 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 OCCIPITAL SOURCES OF RESTING STATE ALPHA RHYTHMS ARE RELATED TO LOCAL GRAY MATTER DENSITY IN SUBJECTS WITH AMNESIC MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE 
 
 
 
 
 Claudio 
 Babiloni 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Claudio 
 Del Percio 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Marina 
 Boccardi 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Roberta 
 Lizio 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Susanna 
 Lopez 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Filippo 
 Carducci 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Nicola 
 Marzano 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Andrea 
 Soricelli 
 
 5 
 6 
 
 
 
 Raffaele 
 Ferri 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Ivano 
 Triggiani Antonio 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 Annapaola 
 Prestia 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Serenella 
 Salinari 
 
 9 
 
 
 
 Rasser Paul 
 E 
 
 10 
 11 
 
 
 
 Erol 
 Basar 
 
 12 
 
 
 
 Francesco 
 Famà 
 
 13 
 
 
 
 Flavio 
 Nobili 
 
 13 
 
 
 
 Görsev 
 Yener 
 
 12 
 14 
 
 
 
 Durusu 
 Emek-Savaş Derya 
 
 12 
 14 
 
 
 
 Gesualdo 
 Loreto 
 
 15 
 
 
 
 Ciro 
 Mundi 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 Thompson Paul 
 M 
 
 17 
 
 
 
 Rossini Paolo 
 M. 
 
 2 
 18 
 
 
 
 Frisoni Giovanni 
 B 
 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy 
 2 IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Roma, Italy 
 3 IRCCS “S. Giovanni di Dio-F.B.F.”, Brescia, Italy 
 4 University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy 
 5 IRCCS SDN, Napoli, Italy 
 6 Dep of Studies of Institutions and Territorial Systems, University of Naples Parthenope, Naples, Italy 
 7 IRCCS Oasi, Troina (Enna), Italy 
 8 Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy 
 9 Department of Informatics and Systems “Antonio Ruberti”, University of Rome “Sapienza” 
 10 Centre for Translational Neuroscience & Mental Health Research, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia 
 11 Schizophrenia Research Institute, Sydney, Australia 
 12 Brain Dynamics, Cognition and Complex Systems Research Center, Istanbul Kültür University, Istanbul 34156, Turkey 
 13 Service of Clinical Neurophysiology (DiNOGMI; DipTeC), IRCCS AOU S Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy 
 14 Department of Neurosciences, Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Turkey 
 15 Dipartimento Emergenza e Trapianti d’Organi (D.E.T.O), University of Bari, Bari, Italy 
 16 Department of Neurology, Ospedali Riuniti, Foggia, Italy 
 17 Imaging Genetics Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology & Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA 
 18 Dept. of Geriatrics, Neuroscience & Orthopedics, Institute of Neurology Catholic University “Sacro Cuore” Rome, Italy 
 
 Corresponding author: Prof. Claudio Babiloni, Ph.D., Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy, P.le Aldo Moro, 5, 00185, Rome,  claudio.babiloni@uniroma1.it , Tel. (fax): +39 0649910989 (0917) 
 
 
 11 
 12 
 2014 
 
 
 21 
 9 
 2014 
 
 
 2 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 2 
 2016 
 
 36 
 2 
 556 
 570 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Occipital sources of resting state electroencephalographic (EEG) alpha rhythms are abnormal, at the group level, in patients with amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Here we evaluated the hypothesis that amplitude of these occipital sources is related to neurodegeneration in occipital lobe as measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Resting-state eyes-closed EEG rhythms were recorded in 45 healthy elderly (Nold), 100 MCI, and 90 AD subjects. Neurodegeneration of occipital lobe was indexed by weighted averages of gray matter density (GMD), estimated from structural MRIs. EEG rhythms of interest were alpha 1 (8–10.5 Hz) and alpha 2 (10.5–13 Hz). EEG cortical sources were estimated by low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA). Results showed a positive correlation between occipital GMD and amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources in Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (r=0.3, p=0.000004, N=235). Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources and cognitive status as revealed by Mini Mental State Evaluation (MMSE) score across all subjects (r=0.38, p=0.000001, N=235). Finally, amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources allowed a moderate classification of individual Nold and AD subjects (sensitivity: 87.8%; specificity: 66.7%; area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve: 0.81). These results suggest that the amplitude of occipital sources of resting state alpha rhythms is related to AD neurodegeneration in occipital lobe along pathological aging. 
 
 
 Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) 
 Electroencephalography (EEG) 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
 Gray Matter Density (GMD) 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a clinically intermediate state between elderly normal cognition and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). MCI subjects show memory complaints and cognitive impairment on neuropsychological tests, but do not yet fulfil the clinical criteria for dementia ( Flicker et al., 1991 ;  Petersen et al., 1995 ,  2001 ). MCI may be considered as a precursor to AD ( Galluzzi et al., 2001 ;  Scheltens et al., 2002 ;  Arnaiz and Almkvist, 2003 ), given the high rate of progression from MCI to AD ( Bachman et al., 1993 ;  Gao et al., 1998 ;  Petersen et al., 2001 ). In cognitively intact elderly subjects, the annual rate of transition to AD ranges from 0.17% to 3.86% ( Petersen et al., 2001 ;  Frisoni et al. 2004 ), but it is much higher in patients with MCI, ranging from 6 to 25% ( Petersen et al., 2001 ). However, the “transition” hypothesis is challenged by the fact that not all MCI subjects deteriorate over time ( Bennett et al., 2002 ;  Larrieu et al., 2002 ), as cumulative incidence rates for AD range from 40 to 60% after about 5 years ( Bennett et al., 2002 ;  Larrieu et al., 2002 ;  Fisk et al., 2003 ). 
 Neuropsychological markers are extremely important for the assessment of prodromal stages of AD, but there is consensus that a crucial challenge of aging research is a better understanding of the neurobiological basis of the MCI condition, to refine diagnostic procedures and to target new pharmacological interventions ( Braak and Braak, 1991 ;  Rogers et al., 1996 ;  Small et al., 1995 ;  Nestor et al., 2004 ;  Dubois et al., 2007 ;  Albert et al., 2011 ). In the light of the new international guidelines ( Dubois et al., 2007 ;  Albert et al., 2011 ), prodromal stages of AD in MCI subjects can be diagnosed by abnormal dosages of the “A beta amyloid to tau” ratio in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and deposition of A beta amyloid in the brain, as revealed by ligand-based positron emission tomography (PET). Other useful biomarkers are overt signs of neurodegeneration such as atrophy of the hippocampus, on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or hypometabolism of the posterior cingulate/precuneus, parietal and temporal regions, as revealed by fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) ( Dubois et al., 2007 ;  Albert et al., 2011 ). However, CSF and PET markers are invasive, and MRI markers of hippocampus volume are relatively expensive for serial screening of large elderly populations at risk of AD. For this reason, other fully non-invasive and more cost-effective procedures have been investigated in the past years. 
 A promising approach to assess MCI subjects is the recording of resting state eyes-closed electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms. This approach is based on low cost and relatively widely available equipment, as well as being is non invasive. It can also be used to collect serial measurements without incurring misleading effects that are solely due to the repetition of the procedure ( Rossini et al., 2007 ). Prior studies have successfully investigated the resting state eyes closed EEG rhythms in MCI and AD subjects. Compared to normal elderly subjects (Nold), AD patients showed an increase in delta (1–4 Hz) rhythms and a decrement of posterior alpha (8–12 Hz) rhythms ( Dierks et al., 1993 ,  2000 ;  Huang et al. 2000 ;  Ponomareva et al., 2003 ;  Jeong, 2004 ;  Prichep et al., 2005 ). These EEG abnormalities are associated with altered regional cerebral blood flow/metabolism and with impaired global cognitive function as evaluated by the mini mental state examination (MMSE;  Sloan et al., 1995 ;  Rodriguez et al., 1998 ,  1999a , b ;  Jeong, 2004 ). Similarly, MCI subjects show a decrease of alpha rhythms compared to normal elderly subjects ( Zappoli et al., 1995 ;  Elmstahl and Rosen, 1997 ;  Huang et al., 2000 ;  Jelic et al., 2000 ;  Koenig et al., 2005 ). However, a certain variability of the brain rhythms in pathological aging might prevent its use for personalized diagnosis and prognosis, especially in early MCI. For example, recent magnetoencephalographic (MEG) evidence has not detected a statistically significant difference in brain rhythms in Nold and MCI subjects ( Osipova et al., 2006 ). 
 When assessing MCI and AD subjects, the practical use of EEG markers would require preliminary validation studies showing that these markers are clearly related to AD neurodegenerative processes as revealed by brain atrophy. In this vein, it has been shown that EEG and structural MRI data complement each other in the modeling of psychomotor speed, global cognition, memory, and language ability in pathological aging ( Strijers et al., 1997 ). Brain atrophy has been proposed as the primary factor associated with psychomotor speed on the “trail making” test, but variations of alpha rhythms have been associated with a wider range of cognitive functions ( van der Hiele et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, MCI subjects with different degrees of hippocampal atrophy were characterized by different amplitude of the resting state EEG rhythms, especially at dominant alpha frequencies ( Moretti et al., 2007 ,  2011 ). 
 A step forward in studying the relationship between resting state EEG rhythms and structural MRI markers of AD neurodegeneration would be the use of EEG and MRI markers, with data co-registered in the same anatomical space. For this purpose, a promising approach is the estimation of the cortical sources of the resting state EEG rhythms by low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA), ( Pascual-Marqui and Michel, 1994 ,  Pascual-Marqui et al., 1999  and  Pascual-Marqui et al., 2002 ). For this kind of analysis, software is freely available and has been successfully used in cognitively impaired elderly subjects (Caso et al., 2012;  Nishida et al., 2011 ). With this goal in mind, our research group has repeatedly used LORETA methods to study the cortical sources of the resting state EEG rhythms in MCI and AD subjects. In these studies, occipital sources of the resting state alpha rhythms were the most promising EEG marker of prodromal AD in MCI subjects. Specifically, the magnitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms was positively correlated with the score on the MMSE and attention tasks in MCI and AD subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2006a ,  2007 ). Furthermore, it was negatively related to the atrophy of the hippocampal and global cortical gray matter as measured by structural MRIs in MCI and AD subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2009a ,  2013 ). 
 Keeping in mind the above data, the present study investigated the relationship between neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe, occipital sources of alpha rhythms and global cognitive status in Nold, MCI and AD subjects. We hypothesized that the higher the neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe, the lower the amplitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms and the lower the global cognitive status. To this aim, resting-state eyes-closed EEG rhythms were recorded in Nold, MCI, and AD subjects. Cortical sources of these EEG rhythms were estimated using the LORETA software. The MMSE score was used to index the global cognitive status ( Folstein et al., 1975 ). Neurodegeneration of the occipital lobe was indexed by gray matter density (GMD) estimated from the subject’s MRI, with GMD considered a good index of regional atrophy provoked by neuronal loss ( Mummery et al., 2000 ;  Kassubek et al., 2004 ). 
 
 
 Methods 
 We have extensively described in recent papers on EEG and pathological aging the methodological approach (e.g. procedures of subjects recruitment, EEG recordings, estimation of the cortical sources of resting state EEG rhythms, and statistical design) used in the present study ( Babiloni et al., 2006a 
 b 
 c ,  2007bc ,  2009a 
 b ,  2013 ). As a novelty, this is the first study to test the hypothesis that the abnormality of alpha rhythms in the occipital sources is specifically related to the neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe as revealed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The present results may also be compared to previous studies from our research group using the same basic methodology ( Babiloni et al., 2006a 
 b 
 c ,  2007bc ,  2009a 
 b ,  2013 ). 
 
 Subjects and diagnostic criteria 
 Forty-five cognitively normal elderly (Nold), 100 amnesic MCI, and 90 AD subjects were enrolled by the following clinical centers: Isola Tiberina Fatebenefratelli Hospital of Rome (Italy); IRCCS Fatebenefratelli of Brescia (Italy); IRCCS SDN of Naples (Italy); United Hospital of University of Foggia (Italy); IRCCS Oasi of Troina (Italy); Service of Neurophysiopathology of the University of Genova (Italy); and Brain Dynamics Multidisciplinary Research Center, Dokuz Eylül University of Izmir (Turkey). 
 Local institutional ethics committees approved the study. All experiments were performed with the informed and overt consent of each participant or caregiver, in line with the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki) and the standards established by the local Institutional Review Board. 
 The present inclusion and exclusion criteria for MCI were based on previous seminal reports ( Albert et al., 1991 ;  Devanand et al., 1997 ;  Flicker et al., 1991 ;  Petersen et al., 1995 ,  1997 ,  2001 ;  Rubin et al., 1989 ;  Zaudig, 1992 ;  Portet et al., 2006 ). Summarizing, the inclusion criteria were as follows: (i) objective memory impairment on neuropsychological evaluation - as defined by performances ≥ 1.5 standard deviations below the mean value for age- and education-matched controls for a neuropsychological test battery of neuropsychological tests, to assess cognitive performance in the domains of memory (i.e., Busckhe-Fuld and Memory Rey tests), language, executive function/attention, and visuo-construction; (ii) normal activities of daily living as documented by the history and evidence of independent living; and (iii) clinical dementia rating score of 0.5. The exclusion criteria included: (i) mild AD, as diagnosed by standard protocols including NINCDS-ADRDA ( McKhann et al., 1984 ); (ii) evidence (including diagnostic MRI procedures) of concomitant dementia such as frontotemporal, vascular dementia, reversible dementias (including pseudo-depressive dementia), marked fluctuations in cognitive performance compatible with Lewy body dementia and/or features of mixed dementias; (iii) evidence of concomitant extra-pyramidal symptoms; (iv) clinical and indirect evidence of depression as revealed by Geriatric Depression Scale scores higher than 13; (v) other psychiatric diseases, epilepsy, drug addiction, alcohol dependence (as revealed by a psychiatric interview) or use of psychoactive drugs including acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or other drugs enhancing cognitive functions; and (vi) current or previous uncontrolled or complicated systemic diseases (including diabetes mellitus) or traumatic brain injuries. Of note, benzodiazepines, antidepressant and/or antihypertensive drugs when present, were withdrawn for about 24h before the EEG recordings, in order to equalize the period from the last use of the drugs until the EEG recordings across the subjects within the MCI and AD groups. 
 A battery of neuropsychological tests were performed to assess general cognitive performance in the domains of memory, language, executive function/attention, and visuo-construction abilities, in line with general international standards of AD research. In some cases, different tests were used by different clinical centers to probe a given cognitive function, as the original data collection in those centers was not specifically done in the framework of the present multi-centric study. The tests assessing memory were the immediate and the delayed recall measure of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test ( Rey, 1958 ;  Carlesimo, 1996 ), the delayed recall of Rey figures ( Rey, 1968 ), the delayed recall of a 3-words list ( Chandler, 2004 ), and the delayed recall of a story ( Spinnler and Tognoni, 1987 ). The tests assessing language were the 1-minute verbal fluency for letters (Novelli, 1986), the 1-minute verbal fluency for fruits, animals or car trades (Novelli, 1986), and the Token test ( De Renzi, 1962 ;  Spinnler e Tognoni, 1987 ). The tests assessing executive function and attention were the Trail Making Test part A and B ( Reitan, 1958 ) and the Digit forward and Digit backward tasks ( Orsini 1987 ). Finally, the tests assessing visuo-construction were the copy of Rey figures ( Rey, 1968 ), the Raven’s Progressive matrices ( Raven, 1965 ), and the Clock Drawing test ( Shulman, 1993 ). 
 Probable AD was diagnosed according to the NINCDS-ADRDA ( McKhann et al., 1984 ) and the DSM-IV criteria. The recruited AD patients underwent general medical, neurological, and psychiatric assessments. Patients were also rated with a number of standardized diagnostic and severity instruments that included the MMSE ( Folstein et al., 1975 ), Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR;  Hughes et al., 1982 ), Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS,  Yesavage et al., 1983 ), Hachinski Ischemic Score (HIS,  Rosen et al., 1980 ), and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scale (IADL,  Lawton and Brodie, 1969 ). Neuroimaging diagnostic procedures from MRI and complete laboratory analyses were carried out to exclude other causes of progressive or reversible dementias, in order to have a clinically homogenous mild AD patient group. Exclusion criteria included, in particular, any evidence of (i) frontotemporal dementia, diagnosed according to criteria of Lund and Manchester Groups (1994), (ii) vascular dementia, diagnosed according to NINDS-AIREN criteria ( Roman et al., 1993 ), (iii) extra-pyramidal syndromes, (iv) reversible dementias (including depressive pseudodementia syndrome); and (v) Lewy body dementia, according to the criteria by  McKeith (1999) . 
 Nold subjects were often recruited among non-consanguineous patients’ relatives. All Nold subjects underwent physical and neurological examinations as well as cognitive screening. Subjects affected by chronic systemic illnesses, those receiving psychoactive drugs, or with a history of neurological or psychiatric disease were excluded. Also, Nold subjects did not suffer from clinical depression (i.e. GDS score lower than 14 or scores indicating no depression by other equivalent clinical scales). 
 
 
 MRI scans and Gray Matter Density 
 Proton density, T1- and T2-weigthed structural MRIs were acquired following standard research settings mostly by 1.5 T scanners at the following clinical centers: Isola Tiberina Fatebenefratelli Hospital of Rome (Italy); IRCCS Fatebenefratelli of Brescia (Italy); IRCCS SDN of Naples (Italy); United Hospital of University of Foggia (Italy); IRCCS Oasi of Troina (Italy); Service of Neurophysiopathology of the University of Genova (Italy); and Brain Dynamics Multidisciplinary Research Center, Dokuz Eylül University of Izmir (Turkey). Some of these units (IRCCS SDN of Naples; United Hospital of University of Foggia; IRCCS Oasi of Troina; Service of Neurophysiopathology of the University of Genova) collected the MRIs following the ADNI protocol ( http://www.adni-info.org/ ). 
 The MRI scans were visually inspected to verify the absence of structural abnormalities or technical artifacts. MRI data analysis was performed using Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL) to evaluate GMD. Here GMD was defined as the probability of a brain voxel belonging to gray matter (GM) on the basis of the amount of surrounding GM voxels. Specifically, the probability belonging to GM was estimated by the following procedure. Firstly, an atlas-based parcellation procedure was performed by the FSL-BET tool to automatically extract a subject’s brain region from their MRI. This was followed by a single-channel segmentation using the FAST tool of FSL, producing a-posterior probability maps in the individual subject’s space for GM, white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), with each voxel in the range 0–1 where 1 represent the maximum probability ( Zhang et al., 2001 ). Specifically, the FAST tool is based on a hidden Markov random field (HMRF) model and an associated expectation maximization (EM) algorithm ( Zhang et al., 2001 ). The advantage of the HMRF model derives from the way in which the MRI spatial information is encoded through the mutual influences of neighboring voxels, causing spatial regularisation and reducing the effect of noise on the segmentation. According to the present procedure, the HMRF model is fitted by an EM algorithm in order to achieve an accurate and robust segmentation ( Zhang et al., 2001 ). Thirdly, GM probability maps were non-linearly normalized (FSL-FNIRT tool) to fit a standard labelled template. This resulted in an associated spatial transformation matrix from subject space to standard template space. The template was based on averaged high-resolution MRIs acquired from 24 subjects, comprising anatomical channels (T1, T2, and proton density weighted), tissue channels (CSF probability, GM probability, WM probability, tissue labels), and two cortical parcellation maps, namely the TZO map, based on the template by Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. (2002), and the LPBA40 map, based on the LONI Probabilistic Brain Atlas of 40 subjects ( Shattuck et al., 2008 ). Fourthly, we focused on GM probability maps of cortical regions of interest (ROIs). Left and right brain occipital lobes were the experimental ROIs, whereas left and right temporal ROIs were the control ROIs. These ROIs were extracted from MRIs as binary masks, on the basis of LPBA40 map, since FNIRT tool has shown a high relative accuracy for this parcellation map. Then, ROIs masks were mapped in subject’s space using the inverse transformation matrix previously obtained. These mapped ROIs masks were used to obtain GMD values of all voxels belonging to left and right occipital and temporal lobes from the original GM probability maps. Finally, GMD within the occipital lobe was obtained by averaging the GMD values of all voxels within that lobe ( Pizzagalli et al, 2004 ). The same procedure was true for the temporal lobe. 
 
 
 EEG recordings 
 In the present study, the resting state condition is defined as a mode of brain activity unrelated to visual information processing, prolonged specific tasks or goal-oriented cognitive operations (e.g. oriented thinking, problem solving, expectancy, planning daily activities, etc.). In this resting state mode, there is a fluctuation of cortical arousal, alertness, and contents of mental operations along the EEG recording session. The subjects received the instruction to close their eyes, not to sleep, and not to engage in any persistent or specific goal-oriented cognitive activity (e.g. see above). 
 Resting state eyes-closed EEG data were recorded from the Nold, MCI, and AD subjects by specialized clinical units, during the diagnostic phase. EEG recordings were carried out (0.3–70 Hz bandpass; cephalic reference) from 19 electrodes positioned according to the International 10–20 System (i.e. Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T3, C3, Cz, C4, T4, T5, P3, Pz, P4, T6, O1, O2; cephalic reference and ground). To monitor eye movements, bipolar horizontal and vertical electro-oculogram (0.3–70 Hz bandpass) was also collected. All data were digitized in continuous recording mode (5 min of EEG; 128–256 Hz sampling rate). All EEG recordings were performed in the late morning. To keep level of vigilance constant, an experimenter monitored the subject and the EEG traces online in real time. In general, experimenter alerted the subject when behavior/posture indicated a possible trend towards sleep intrusion or slow frequency EEG waves (this was then annotated into the report of EEG recording). Reports on EEG recordings were available in two sub-groups of 19 Nold and 14 AD subjects. No Nold subject of the sub-group received an alert for a possible sleep intrusion. About 3% of the AD patients of the sub-group received such an alert. Median test (p<0.05, one way) showed no statistically significant difference of that variable between the Nold and AD sub-groups (p>0.05). The mentioned reports also allowed an evaluation of further general aspects of EEG recordings. No subject asked for an interruption of the EEG recording session, reported problems adhering to the instructions or experienced untoward disturbances or noise during the experiment. 
 To further address the issue of patients’ drowsiness, an off line analysis of slow frequency EEG waves was performed on all 235 subjects of the present study (45 Nold, 100 MCI, and 90 AD). The percentages of subjects showing the appearance of slow frequency EEG waves were found to be 2.2% for the Nold group, 4% for the MCI group, and 4.4% for the AD group. A median test (p<0.05, one way) showed no statistically significant difference among the Nold, MCI, and AD groups (p>0.05). 
 
 
 Preliminary EEG-EOG data analysis 
 The recorded EEG data were analyzed and fragmented off-line in consecutive epochs of 2 s. EEG epochs with ocular, muscular, and other types of artifact were first identified by a computerized automatic procedure based on an amplitude threshold set at 100 μV. Mean percentages of EEG epochs with blinking artifacts were of 9.7% (±2.6 SE) for the Nold group, of 11.3% (±2 SE) for the MCI group, and of 14.2% (±2.1 SE) for the AD group. An ANOVA with the factor Group (Nold, MCI, AD) was used to evaluate possible statistically significant differences of EEG epochs with blinking artifacts among the three groups (p<0.05). No statistically significant difference among the groups was found (F(2,232)=0.4; p>0.05). EEG epochs with sporadic blinking artifacts were corrected by an autoregressive method ( Moretti et al., 2003 ). 
 Two experimenters blind to subject diagnosis, performed the preliminary data analysis of all EEG epochs to reject artifactual EEG epochs not only related to uncorrected blinking and eye movements but also to head movements and EEG signs of drowsiness or pre-sleep stages. As a result, they selected the following mean percentages of artifact-free EEG epochs: 81.7% (±1.6 SE) for the Nold group, 82.3% (±1.5 SE) for the MCI group, and 79% (±1.6 SE) for the AD group. An ANOVA with the factor Group (Nold, MCI, AD) served to evaluate possible statistically significant differences among these mean values (p<0.05). No statistically significant difference among the groups was found (F(2,232)=1.8, p>0.05). Artifact-free EEG epochs were then re-referenced to common average for further analysis. 
 
 
 Spectral analysis of the EEG data 
 A digital fast Fourier Transform-based power spectrum analysis (Welch technique, Hanning windowing function, no phase shift) was used to compute the power density of the EEG rhythms with 0.5 Hz frequency resolution. The following standard band frequencies were studied: the standard frequency bands of interest were delta (2–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha 1 (8–10.5 Hz), alpha 2 (10.5–13 Hz), beta 1 (13–20 Hz), and beta 2 (20–30 Hz). 
 The choice of the fixed EEG bands did not account for the individual alpha frequency (IAF) peak, defined as the frequency associated with the strongest EEG power at the extended alpha range of 6–14 Hz ( Klimesch, 1999 ). The mean IAF peak was of 9.6 Hz (±0.1 SE) for the Nold group, of 9.2 Hz (±0.1 SE) for the MCI group, and of 8.4 Hz (±0.1 SE) for the AD group. An ANOVA (p<0.05) with the factor Group (Nold, MCI, AD; independent variable) was used to evaluate possible statistically significant differences of IAF peak among the three groups. A statistically significant difference was found (F(2,232)=2.3, p<0.000001). Duncan post-hoc testing (p<0.05, one way) indicated that IAF peak was higher in the Nold group compared to the MCI (p<0.05) and the AD group (p<0.00001). IAF peak was also higher in the MCI than in the AD group (p<0.00005). To control for the residual effect of IAF on the comparison of EEG variables, the IAF peak was used as a covariate in further EEG statistics. 
 
 
 Cortical source of EEG rhythms as computed by LORETA 
 LORETA, as provided at  http://www.unizh.ch/keyinst/NewLORETA/LORETA01.htm , was used to estimate cortical sources of EEG rhythms ( Pascual-Marqui and Michel, 1994 ,  Pascual-Marqui et al., 1999  and  Pascual-Marqui et al., 2002 ). LORETA is a functional imaging technique belonging to a family of linear inverse solution procedures ( Valdes et al., 1998 ) modeling 3D distributions of EEG sources ( Pascual-Marqui et al., 2002 ). With respect to the dipole modeling of cortical sources, no  a priori  decision of the dipole position is required by the LORETA procedure. 
 LORETA can be utilized from EEG data collected by low spatial sampling of 10–20 System (19 electrodes) when cortical sources are estimated from resting state eyes-closed EEG rhythms. Furthermore, it should be noted that LORETA solutions are intrinsically maximally smoothed at source space, due to its regularization procedure ( Pascual-Marqui and Michel, 1994 ), and prevents effects of spatial aliasing of the source solutions. 
 LORETA computes 3D linear solutions (LORETA solutions) for the EEG inverse problem within a 3-shell spherical head model including scalp, skull, and brain compartments. The brain compartment is restricted to the cortical gray matter/hippocampus of a head model co-registered to the Talairach probability brain atlas and digitized at the Brain Imaging Center of the Montreal Neurological Institute ( Talairach and Tournoux, 1988 ). This compartment includes 2394 voxels (7 mm resolution), with each voxel containing an equivalent current dipole. Notably, EEG electrode positions were not co-registered to individual brain source models; unfortunately, the official LORETA package did not include software to do so, and we could not obtain the digitalization of the electrode position from our clinical units. 
 LORETA solutions consisted of voxel z-current density values that are able to estimate EEG spectral power density at scalp electrodes, being a reference-free method of EEG analysis, one obtains the same LORETA source distribution for EEG data referenced to any reference electrode including common average. A normalization of the data was obtained by normalizing the LORETA current density at each voxel with the power density averaged across all frequencies (0.5–45 Hz) and across all 2394 voxels of the brain volume. After normalization, the solutions lost the original physical dimension and were represented on an arbitrary unit scale. This procedure reduced inter-subject variability and was used in previous EEG studies. The general procedure fitted the LORETA solutions in a Gaussian distribution and reduced inter-subject variability. Other normalization methods using principal components analysis are effective for estimating the subjective global factor scale of the EEG data ( Hernández et al., 1994 ). These methods are not available in the LORETA package, so they were not used in this study. 
 Solutions of the EEG inverse problem are under-determined and ill-conditioned when the number of spatial samples (electrodes) is lower than that of the unknown samples (current density at each voxel). To address this, the cortical LORETA solutions predicting scalp EEG spectral power density were regularized to estimate distributed rather than punctual EEG source patterns. In line with the low spatial resolution of the adopted technique, we used our MATLAB software to collapse the voxels of LORETA solutions to the occipital region of the brain model coded into Talairach space. The Brodmann areas listed in  Table 1  formed each of these regions of interest (ROIs). 
 Regional analysis of LORETA solutions has the advantage to disentangle alpha rhythms of occipital sources from those of the contiguous parietal and temporal sources. In contrast, the EEG potentials collected at each scalp electrode are strongly affected by head volume conductor effects. For example, occipital electrodes collect scalp potentials generated not only from the occipital cortex but also from parietal and temporal cortices, due to well known head volume conductor effects. For this reason, the regional analysis of LORETA source solutions may represent an important reference for multimodal comparisons not only with structural neuroimaging, as in the present study, but also with functional neuroimaging (functional MRI, positron emission tomography, magnetoencephalography, etc). 
 In comparison to the estimation of the GMD in occipital lobe, the spatial localization of the LORETA solutions in the occipital sources is lower. The former was performed on the basis of individual MRIs while the latter was based on the MNI common average brain model, and does not require the subject’s electrode positions to be digitalized and co-registered to their individual MRI. This relatively low spatial resolution is acceptable when applied to the cortical source estimation of eyes-closed resting state EEG rhythms as, in the resting state condition, there is a widespread synchronization at dominant alpha frequencies of pyramidal neurons in occipital, parietal, and temporal cortical regions. This is opposed to the circumscribed desynchronization of these rhythms, especially at high frequencies, during the observation of visual or visuo-spatial stimuli. Moreover, the spatial resolution of the LORETA source solutions is intrinsically low for its peculiar maximally-smoothing regularization procedure. 
 Currently, the official LORETA package does not support higher level co-registration between electrode position and MRIs, despite this, we continue to use this official release for our studies as it allows EEG research groups worldwide to extract the present EEG markers and replicate experimental findings. Nevertheless, we encourage the use of the individual MRIs for the LORETA source analysis in future validation studies using customized versions of the original LORETA program. The use of subjects’ MRIs may allow a better localization of the LORETA occipital sources and a higher correlation between these sources and the occipital GMD in MCI and AD subjects. Such an advanced procedure might improve the clinical value of these EEG markers in MCI and AD patients. 
 
 
 Statistical analysis 
 To test the working hypothesis, three main statistical sessions were performed by commercial tool STATISTICA (StatSoft Inc.,  www.statsoft.com ). 
 First statistical session tested the control hypothesis that occipital GMD differs in amplitude among the Nold, MCI and AD groups, in order to validate the procedures of subjects’ recruitment and MRI recording and analysis. To this aim, an ANOVA was computed using occipital GMD as a dependent variable (p<0.05). ANOVA factor was Group (Nold, MCI, AD; independent variable). Subjects’ age, education, and gender were used as covariates. Mauchly’s test evaluated the sphericity assumption. Correction of the degrees of freedom was made with Greenhouse-Geisser procedure when appropriate. The Duncan test was used for post-hoc comparisons (p<0.05, one way). The control hypothesis would be confirmed by the following two statistical results: (i) a statistical ANOVA effect including the factor Group (p<0.05) and (ii) a post-hoc test indicating statistically significant differences of occipital GMD with the pattern Nold > MCI > AD (Duncan test; p<0.05 one way). 
 The second statistical session tested the control hypothesis that cortical (LORETA) sources of alpha rhythms differ in amplitude among the Nold, MCI and AD groups. If confirmed, this would validate the procedures relative to subjects’ recruitment and EEG data. To this aim, an ANOVA was computed using regional normalized LORETA solutions (normalized current density at all voxels of a given ROI) as a dependent variable (p<0.05). The ANOVA factors were Group (Nold, MCI, AD; independent variable), Band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2), and ROI (central, frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, limbic). Subjects’ age, education, gender, and IAF peak were used as covariates. The control hypothesis would be confirmed by the following two statistical results: (i) a statistical ANOVA effect including the factor Group (p<0.05) and (ii) a post-hoc test indicating statistically significant differences of the occipital sources of alpha rhythms with the pattern Nold > MCI > AD (Duncan test; p<0.05 one way). 
 The third statistical session tested the working hypothesis that amplitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms is related to neurodegeneration in occipital lobe in the Nold, MCI, and AD subjects. To address this issue, we performed a correlation analysis by Pearson test between occipital normalized LORETA solutions (normalized current density at all voxels of occipital ROI) and occipital GMD in all Nold, MCI, and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.05). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Demographic, clinical and neuropsychological data 
 Table 2  summarizes relevant demographic (age, education, and gender) and clinical (MMSE) data of the enrolled Nold, MCI, and AD subjects. Three ANOVAs (p<0.05) using the factor Group (Nold, MCI, AD; independent variable) tested possible statistically significant differences of age, education, and MMSE score among the three groups, respectively. Furthermore, the Median test was used to evaluate possible statistically significant differences of gender among the three groups (p<0.05; two ways). Only the ANOVA for the MMSE score showed a statistically significant difference among the groups (F(2,232)=406.5, p<0.000001). Duncan post-hoc testing indicated that the MMSE score was higher in the Nold group compared to the MCI (p<0.00005) and the AD group (p<0.00005). Furthermore, the MMSE score was also higher in the MCI than in the AD group (p<0.00005). No statistically significant difference was found for age (F(2,232)=1.6, p>0.05), education (F(2,232)=1.7, p>0.05), and gender (Chi-square=0.8, p>0.05). 
 In some cases, different clinical centers used diverse neuropsychological tests to probe a given cognitive function. This prevented the computation and comparison of mean scores to neuropsychological tests in all MCI and AD patients of the present study. However, a general trend of patients’ cognitive status is given by  Table 3 . It reports the mean (±SE) scores of Trail Making Test part A (TMT A), part B (TMT B), part B-A (TMT B-A), copy of Rey figures (Rey figures), delayed recall of Rey figures (Rey figures recall), verbal fluency for letters (letter fluency), and verbal fluency for fruits, animals or car trades (categorical fluency) in two large subgroups of 100 MCI and 90 AD subjects. Six t tests for independent populations were computed to evaluate possible statistically significant differences of these mean scores in the two sub-groups (MCI vs. AD; p<0.05 one way). A statistically significant difference was found for all six neuropsychological tests (p<0.05) in that there was a lower performance in the AD compared to the MCI group. 
 
 
 Topography of the EEG cortical sources as estimated by LORETA 
 For illustrative purposes,  Figure 1  maps the grand average of the LORETA solutions (i.e., relative power current density at cortical voxels) modeling the distributed EEG cortical sources for delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, and beta 2 bands in the Nold, MCI, and AD groups. The Nold group presented alpha 1 sources with the highest amplitude values in the occipital regions. Delta, theta, and alpha 2 sources had moderate amplitude values when compared to the alpha 1 sources. Finally, the beta 1 and beta 2 sources had lowest amplitude values. Compared to the Nold group, the AD group showed a dramatic reduction of the parietal and occipital alpha 1 sources and an increase of the delta source. With respect to the Nold and AD groups, the MCI group showed an intermediate magnitude of the occipital alpha 1 sources. In general, the cortical sources of these EEG rhythms across Nold, MCI and AD groups showed the most marked modulation in the occipital region. 
 
 
 Statistical comparisons 
 Figure 2  shows the mean value (±SE) of occipital GMD for the Nold, MCI, and AD groups. The mean occipital GMD was of 0.0229 (±0.0003 SE) for the Nold group, of 0.0219 (±0.0002 SE) for the MCI group, and of 0.0191 (±0.0002 SE) for the AD group. As expected, ANOVA for the evaluation of the first control hypothesis (i.e. difference of occipital GMD among the Nold, MCI, and AD groups) showed a statistically significant main effect for the factor Group (F(2,229)=41.9, p<0.00001). Duncan post-hoc testing indicated that occipital GMD was higher in the Nold group compared to the MCI (p<0.05) and the AD group (p<0.00001). Occipital GMD was also higher in the MCI than in the AD group (p<0.00001). 
 ANOVA for the evaluation of the second control hypothesis (i.e., difference of the occipital sources of alpha rhythms among the Nold, MCI, and AD groups) showed a statistically significant interaction (F(60,6930)=13.27, p<0.0001) among the factors Group (AD, MCI, Nold), Band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2), and ROI (central, frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, limbic).  Figure 3  shows the mean regional normalized LORETA solutions relative to this statistical interaction in the ANOVA. In the figure, the LORETA solutions in the cortical sources had the shape of EEG relative power spectra. Notably, the profile and magnitude of these spectra in the AD, MCI, and Nold groups differed across various cortical macro-regions, supporting the idea that scalp EEG rhythms are generated by a distributed pattern of cortical sources. Duncan planned post-hoc testing showed that cortical alpha 1 source pattern Nold > MCI > AD was fitted by parietal, occipital, temporal, and limbic alpha 1 sources, being amplitude of these sources greater in the Nold group compared to the MCI and the AD group (Nold>AD, p<0.000001; Nold>MCI: p<0.00001), and in the MCI group compared to the AD group (MCI>AD, p<0.000001). 
 Finally, Pearson test was used to evaluate the main working hypothesis, namely the relationship between occipital sources of alpha rhythms and neurodegeneration in occipital lobe along the continuum of physiological and pathological aging. A statistically significant positive correlation was found between amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms and occipital GMD in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (r=0.3, p<0.000005; N=235). The higher the amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms, the higher the occipital GMD (see  Figure 4 ). 
 
 
 Control analyses 
 As previously mentioned, amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms positively correlated with occipital GMD in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.000005). To better understand this main finding, the following additional control analyses were performed. A first control analysis investigated whether a similar relationship was observed in the single groups (Nold, MCI, and AD) considered separately. To address this issue, Pearson test was used to evaluate the hypothesis of a correlation between the amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms and the occipital GMD in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a single groups (p<0.05). Results showed no statistically significant correlations (p=0.1). 
 A second control analysis investigated whether a similar relationship was observed between amplitude of temporal sources of alpha 1 rhythms and GMD in the temporal lobe, in line with previous evidence that temporal lobe atrophy is one of the most common MRI findings in MCI and AD subjects ( Baron et al., 2001 ;  Frisoni et al., 2002 ;  Ohnishi et al., 2001 ;  Rombouts et al., 2000 ;  Testa et al., 2004 ;  Wolf et al., 2003 ). To address this issue, we estimated the GMD in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. The mean GMD in the temporal lobe was of 0.0412 (±0.0006 SE) for the Nold group, of 0.038 (±0.0005 SE) for the MCI group, and of 0.0331 (±0.0005 SE) for the AD group. Furthermore, an ANOVA (p<0.05) evaluated whether temporal GMD differed among the Nold, MCI and AD groups. The ANOVA factor was Group (Nold, MCI, AD; independent variable). Subjects’ age, education, and gender were used as covariates. As expected based on the typical progress of neurodegenerative processes in the temporal lobe with aging, the ANOVA results showed a statistically significant main effect for the factor Group (F(2,229)=41.6, p<0.00001). Duncan post-hoc testing indicated that temporal GMD was higher in the Nold group compared to the MCI (p<0.0001) and the AD group (p<0.00001). It was also higher in the MCI compared to the AD group (p<0.00001). Finally, Pearson test tested the hypothesis of a correlation between amplitude of temporal sources of alpha 1 rhythms and temporal GMD in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.05). A statistically significant positive correlation was found (r=0.29, p<0.000005; N=235). Indicating the higher the amplitude of temporal sources of alpha 1 rhythms, the higher the GMD in the temporal lobe. 
 A third control analysis tested the hypothesis that amplitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms was related to cognitive status in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group. To address this issue, Pearson test was used evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms and MMSE score in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.05). A statistically significant positive correlation was found (r=0.38, p<0.000001; N=235). The higher the amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms, the better (higher) the MMSE score (see  Figure 6 ). 
 A fourth control analysis was performed to test the hypothesis that occipital GMD used for the correlation with occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms was related to neurodegenerative processes in the temporal lobe as one of the most reliable indexes of AD. To address this issue, Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between occipital and temporal GMD in the Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.05). A statistically significant positive correlation was found (r=0.77, p<0.000001; N=235). The higher the occipital GMD, the higher the temporal GMD (see  Figure 7 ). 
 A fifth control analysis tested the hypothesis that amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms allows a correct blind classification between individual Nold and AD subjects. To this aim, we used MedCalc software (Mariakerke, Belgium;  http://www.medcalc.org ), which computes Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves ( DeLong et al., 1988 ). Results showed that amplitude of occipital sources of alpha 1 rhythms allowed a moderate classification between Nold and AD subjects with sensitivity of 87.8%, specificity of 66.7%, and area under the ROC curve of 0.81. The same analysis was repeated for frontal, central, parietal, temporal, and limbic alpha 1 sources. Results showed that sensitivity ranged from 90% to 54.4%, specificity ranged from 73.3% to 62.6%, and area under the ROC curve ranged from 0.78 to 0.65 (see  Figure 8 ). Of note, no alpha source allowed a remarkable classification between the AD and MCI subjects, possibly due to the relatively small amount of subjects and/or a certain amount of prodromic AD patients in the present MCI subjects. 
 A sixth control analysis tested the hypothesis that occipital GMD allows a correct blind classification between individual Nold and AD subjects. Results showed a moderate to high classification of the Nold and AD subjects sensitivity of 70.0%, specificity of 91.1%, and area under the ROC curve of 0.87, thus confirming that occipital GMD is a valid MRI marker of AD neurodegeneration along pathological aging. 
 A seventh control analysis was used to cross-validate the results of correlation between amplitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms and occipital GMD in all Nold, MCI, and AD subjects as a whole group. To this aim, Pearson test was used to test the hypothesis that alpha 1 power density at occipital scalp electrodes (i.e. O1 and O2) correlated with occipital GMD across all Nold, MCI, and AD subjects as a whole group (p<0.05). Power density values of O1 and O2 electrodes were averaged. A statistically significant positive correlation was found (r=0.3, p<0.000005; N=235). The higher the occipital scalp alpha 1 power density, the higher the occipital GMD (see  Figure 10 ), in line with main results based on amplitude of occipital sources of alpha rhythms. It should be noted that an advantage of using cortical source estimation of EEG rhythms is that effects of head volume conductor are taken into account. While the EEG activity recorded at occipital scalp electrodes can depend not only on occipital but also on parietal and temporal sources. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Here we tested the hypothesis that across the continuum of physiological and pathological aging, amplitude of the occipital sources of resting state alpha rhythms is related to neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe as quantified by the GMD estimated from structural MRIs in Nold, MCI and AD subjects. In this regard, one might claim that GMD in the occipital lobe represents a partial index of the neurodegeneration in the AD process. Indeed, AD is thought to be a multi-focal process that evolves over time, and selectively impacts specific sub-cortical and cortical neuronal regions rather than preferentially affecting occipital neocortex ( Braak and Braak, 1996 ). However, the interest here in the occipital lobe is motivated by the fact that occipital alpha rhythms are the dominant oscillatory activity in humans during the condition of eyes closed resting state, and these signals are markedly abnormal in MCI and AD subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2006a ,  2007 ). These spontaneous cortical rhythms are a promising marker for a preliminary large screening of elderly subjects at risk of prodromal AD – these could include subjects with genetic risk factors for developing AD, or with subjective or objective memory deficits. However, such an EEG marker needs to be further validated by the correlation with overt signs of neurodegeneration across the continuum between physiological and pathological aging represented by Nold, MCI and AD subjects. 
 In the present study, we estimated occipital GMD instead of the gray matter volume, in line with the idea that the alterations in GMD may optimally account for cortical neuronal loss provoked by AD neurodegeneration ( Mummery et al., 2000 ;  Kassubek et al., 2004 ). However, we cannot rule out the possibility that some GMD changes could occur for reasons other than the neuronal loss (i.e., changes in signal properties, or widening of CSF spaces;  Kassubek et al., 2002 ). As expected, results showed that occipital GMD was higher in the Nold group compared to the MCI and the AD group. Occipital GMD was also higher in the MCI compared to the AD group. In general, the present results extend previous evidence showing that at different times over the course of AD, the reduction of the GMD as measured from MRIs reflects severity of the disease in the spectrum ranging from MCI to AD condition ( Frisoni et al., 2009 ). 
 We also found that the amplitude of the occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms (8–10.5 Hz) was greatest in the Nold, intermediate in the MCI, and lowest in the AD subjects. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between amplitude of these occipital alpha sources and global cognitive status as revealed by MMSE score in the Nold, MCI, and AD subjects considered as a whole group. Finally, occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms allowed a moderate classification between Nold and AD subjects with 87.8% of sensitivity, 66.7% of specificity, and area under the ROC curve of 0.81. These results are generally in line with prior evidence that resting state alpha rhythms do decrease in amplitude in AD and MCI compared to Nold subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2006a ,  2007 ;  Dierks et al., 1993 ;  Dierks et al., 2000 ;  Koenig et al., 2005 ;  Moretti et al., 2004 ;  Rodriguez et al., 1999a b ; for a review  Rossini et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, they confirm the bulk of previous evidence showing a positive correlation between the amplitude of the (LORETA) occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms and the MMSE score in MCI and AD subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2006a ,  2007 ). Finally, the present findings are in line with those showing that spectral EEG markers classified Nold from early stages of AD with 89–95% success ( Leuchter et al., 1987 ;  Nuwer, 1997 ;  Claus et al., 1999 ;  Huang et al., 2000 ;  Bennys et al., 2001 ;  Adler et al., 2003 ;  Missonnier et al. 2006 ;  Lehmann et al., 2007 ;  Buscema et al., 2007 ). On the whole, the present results validated the subjects selection and the EEG data analysis with the LORETA software. Furthermore, they confirmed that the occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms are related to individual cognitive status in amnesic MCI and AD patients. 
 As a novel finding of the present study, here we found a positive correlation between the GMD in the occipital lobe and the amplitude of the occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms in the MCI and AD subjects as a whole group. The lower the GMD in the occipital lobe, the lower the amplitude of these occipital sources. Notably, this linear correlation was statistically significant (p<0.000005) but relatively low in magnitude (r=0.3), possibly due to a complex relationship occurring between the neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe and synchronous activity of cortical pyramidal neurons generating occipital alpha rhythms in humans during eyes closed resting state. Of note, the single groups considered separately (e.g. Nold, MCI, AD) did not show statistically significant correlation values between the occipital GMD and the amplitude of the occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms (p>0.05), possibly due to the relatively small range of the occipital alpha 1 and/or of the occipital GMD values within these single groups. The relationship between GMD in the occipital lobe and occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms may be better captured by non-linear predictors such as artificial neural networks ( Buscema et al., 2007 ). Future studies should address this interesting direction. 
 The present results extend previous evidence that EEG rhythms in MCI and AD subjects are related to the loss of neurons as revealed by the atrophy of brain gray or white matter ( Fernandez et al., 2003 ;  Babiloni et 2006b ,  2009a ,  2013 ). The bilateral reduction of hippocampal and entorhinal volumes in AD subjects is known to be correlated with an increase in cortical delta rhythms ( Fernandez et al., 2003 ). Furthermore, the frontal white matter atrophy was related to the amplitude of frontal delta sources (2–4 Hz) in MCI and AD subjects ( Babiloni et al., 2006b ). In these subjects, the atrophy of hippocampus was related to the decline of alpha sources ( Babiloni et al., 2009a ), while global cortical gray matter volume was negatively correlated with the amplitude of widespread delta sources and positively correlated with the amplitude of widespread alpha 1 sources ( Babiloni et al., 2013 ). 
 Our results highlight interesting aspects of the generation of resting state alpha rhythms in humans as a basis for the use of “occipital alpha” markers for clinical applications and pharmacological trials on AD. An overview of these aspects is reported below. There is consensus that main generators of resting state alpha rhythms in humans are visual, somato-motor and auditory cortical areas and that occipital alpha rhythms (8–13 Hz) are the dominant oscillatory activity in the eyes closed resting state condition ( Rossini et al., 1991 ;  Klimesch, 1996 ;  Klimesch et al. 1997 ,  1998 ; Pfurtscheller and Lopes da Silva, 1999). The occipital alpha rhythms may reflect cycles of excitation and inhibition of the visual cortex. These cycles might gate the flow of visual information during the eyes closed condition (Pfurtscheller and Lopes da Silva, 1999), whereas they might frame perceptual events in discrete snapshots of around 70–100 ms during active visual information processing ( Fingelkurts and Fingelkurts, 2006 ;  Mathewson et al., 2009 ). In general, intrinsic features of alpha rhythms affect our ability to accurately select, consciously perceive, and memorize visual stimuli ( Varela et al., 1981 ;  Klimesch, 1999 ;  Babiloni et al., 2007 ;  Mathewson et al., 2009 ,  2011 ). In this theoretical framework, the low frequency (8–10.5 Hz) alpha rhythms would reflect the global cortical arousal and attention ( Klimesch, 1996 ,  Klimesch et al., 1997 ,  Klimesch et al., 1998 ,  Rossini et al., 1991  and  Steriade and Llinas, 1988 ). The higher the amplitude of occipital alpha rhythms, the lower the local cortical arousal as demonstrated by the co-registration of resting state EEG rhythms and functional MRI ( Laufs et al., 2003 ;  Gonçalves et al., 2006 ;  Mantini et al., 2007 ). Previous EEG-fMRI evidence also emphasized the important role of the thalamus in the generation of occipital alpha rhythms, namely the higher the occipital alpha power, the higher the thalamic activation ( Gonçalves et al., 2006 ). In the same vein, single unit recordings in animal models have shown that occipital alpha rhythms are mainly generated by the oscillatory activity of occipital pyramidal neurons in response to important inputs delivered by both high-threshold bursting and relay-mode thalamo-cortical neurons of the lateral geniculate nucleus ( Lorincz et al., 2009 ), when excited by glutamatergic and cholinergic inputs ( Huges and Crunelli, 2005 ). These neurons entrain thalamic GABAergic inter-neurons of the lateral geniculate nucleus that, when potentiated by cholinergic inputs, finely suppress relay-mode thalamo-cortical neurons at the pace of negative or positive peaks of thalamic alpha rhythms ( Lorincz et al., 2009 ). This leads to an effective fine temporal framing of the output of the relay-mode thalamo-cortical neurons ( Lorincz et al., 2009 ). Relay-mode thalamo-cortical neurons also receive feedback excitatory glutamatergic inputs from cortical pyramidal neurons (Suffczynski et al., 2001) and cholinergic inputs from neurons of nucleus basalis of Meynert ( Pinault and Deschenes, 1992 ;  Mesulam, 1995 ;  Lorincz et al., 2008 ). These neurons of the  nucleus basalis  of Meynert target the occipital cortical neurons and visual processes as well ( Nobili and Sannita, 1997 ). Along the AD progression, these cholinergic innervations would be targeted by neurodegenerative processes ( Helkala et al., 1996 ;  Holschneider et al., 1999 ;  Mesulam et al., 2004 ;  Ricceri et al., 2004 ;  Teipel et al., 2005 ), especially in patients not responding to long term cholinergic therapy ( Tanaka et al., 2003 ). As a functional counterpart, temporal, parietal, and occipital sources of the resting alpha rhythms were especially impaired in AD patients not responding to cholinergic therapy ( Babiloni et al., 2006c ). Finally, the occipital sources of alpha rhythms in amnesic MCI subjects deranged in association with the impairment of the cholinergic connections to cerebral cortex ( Babiloni et al., 2009b ). 
 Keeping in mind the above overview, it can be speculated that the resting state occipital alpha rhythms reflect both the impairment of cholinergic neuromodulation from basal forebrain to thalamus/occipital cortex and the relative neurodegeneration processes at occipital cortical gray matter ( Helkala et al., 1996 ,  Holschneider et al., 1999  and  Mesulam et al., 2004 ). This impairment would disinhibit cortical slow oscillators triggering resting delta rhythms ( Steriade, 2003 ), which are a typical finding in occipital lobe of AD patients ( Babiloni et al., 2006a ,  2007 ). Furthermore, global effect of the cholinergic modulation of the alpha rhythms might depend on the complex interaction with the glutamatergic and GABAergic neuromodulatory systems unveiled in the recent animal studies on alpha rhythms in the populations of thalamic neurons ( Hughes and Crunelli, 2005 ;  Lorincz et al., 2008 ,  2009 ). MCI and AD patients might present alterations in excitatory-inhibitory balance of thalamic and cortical neurons as a primary mechanism contributing to cognitive decline. As a matter of fact, AD is characterized by alterations of particular GABA(A) receptor subunits, a net decrease of inhibitory neurotransmission, and increased incidence of seizure activity ( Limon et al., 2011 ). Furthermore, there is a depression of cholinergic inhibitory activity and an enhancement of excitatory glutamatergic non-NMDA receptor activity as revealed by transcranial magnetic stimulation ( Ferreri et al., 2003 ;  Di Lazzaro et al., 2004 ). These pathological effects might result in a tonic desynchronization of occipital alpha rhythms. 
 The above speculation should be considered as tentative at this early stage of research. Even dopaminergic and serotoninergic systems could play a role in the fluctuation of resting state occipital alpha rhythms in AD patients. Monoaminergic disturbances are characteristic not only of depression but also of AD ( Korczyn and Halperin, 2009 ). Finally, concomitant use of selective serotonin-enhancing agents and AChEIs provides greater benefit in activities of daily living and global functioning in mild-to-moderate AD patients ( Mowla et al., 2007 ). 
 In conclusion, the present study evaluated the hypothesis that the activity of the occipital sources of resting state alpha rhythms are related to the neurodegeneration of the occipital lobe as indexed by GMD computed from MRIs across the continuum between physiological and pathological aging represented by Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Results showed a positive correlation between the GMD and amplitude of occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects as a whole group. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between amplitude of occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms and cognitive status as revealed by MMSE score in these subjects. Finally, amplitude of occipital sources of low-frequency alpha rhythms allowed a moderate classification of individual Nold and AD subjects with sensitivity of 87.8%, specificity of 66.7%, and area under the ROC curve of 0.81. These results suggest that occipital sources of resting state low-frequency alpha rhythms are related to AD neurodegeneration in the occipital lobe. Future studies should test the hypothesis that this EEG marker may be clinically useful as non-invasive, largely available, and cost-effective neurophysiologic biomarker for the following non mutually exclusive applications: 1) preliminary screening and monitoring of elderly subjects at high risk to develop AD dementia such as people with ApoE4 or Cystatin C genotyping or mutations of familial AD; 2) monitoring along time of elderly subjects at high risk to develop AD based on positivity to amyloid beta in cerebrospinal fluid, amyloidosis in the brain as revealed by ligand PET, posterior brain hypometabolism as revealed by FDG-PET and/or hippocampus atrophy as revealed by structural MRI; 3) enrichment of an early diagnosis of AD in those people; and 4) evaluation of the effect of therapy against AD in patients with a prodromic or manifest form of the disease. 
 
 
 
 The present study was developed and granted in the framework of the following projects: “Does rehabilitation with a 10-Hz sensory stimulation improve brain rhythms and cognitive-motor performance in neurological patients? Towards Internet-based clinical applications at subjects”, (Italian Ministry of Health, GR-2008-1143090), “Smart Health 2.0” (Italian Ministry of University and Technological Research, Pon04a2_C-MIUR D.D. 626/Ric e 703/Ric), “CONNAGE” (Italian Ministry of University and Technological Research, PRIN2010-2011, prot. 2010SH7H3F), and “Diagnostic Enhancement of Confidence by an International Distributed Environment” (DECIDE; FP7 ICT “infrastructure” 2010-2012;  www.eu-decide.eu ). We thank Dr. Giulia Santi for his precious contribution for the evaluation of cortical atrophy from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL). We thank Dr. Fabrizio Vecchio for his precious contribution in an early stage of this study carried out in 47 subjects using another methodology for the evaluation of cortical atrophy from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The results of that early study was really useful for the planning and execution of the present study in 235 subjects with a methodology better applicable to large databases of MRIs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adler 
 G 
 
 
 Brassen 
 S 
 
 
 Jajcevic 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 EEG coherence in Alzheimer’s dementia 
 J Neural Transm 
 110 
 9 
 1051 
 8 
 12928837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 LA 
 
 
 Scherr 
 PA 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JO 
 
 
 Evans 
 DA 
 
 
 Funkenstein 
 HH 
 
 
 1991 
 Use of brief cognitive tests to identify individuals in the community with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease 
 Int J Neurosci 
 57 
 3–4 
 167 
 178 
 1938160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albert 
 MS 
 
 
 DeKosky 
 ST 
 
 
 Dickson 
 D 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 Feldman 
 HH 
 
 
 Fox 
 NC 
 
 
 Gamst 
 A 
 
 
 Holtzman 
 DM 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Snyder 
 PJ 
 
 
 Carrillo 
 MC 
 
 
 Thies 
 B 
 
 
 Phelps 
 CH 
 
 
 2011 
 The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease 
 Alzheimers Dement 
 Epub 2011 Apr 21 
 7 
 3 
 270 
 9 
 21514249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 Semlitsch 
 HV 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 2003 
 Non-invasive localization of P300 sources in normal aging and age-associated memory impairment 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 24 
 3 
 463 
 79 
 12600722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderer 
 P 
 
 
 Saletu 
 B 
 
 
 Saletu-Zyhlarz 
 G 
 
 
 Gruber 
 D 
 
 
 Metka 
 M 
 
 
 Huber 
 J 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 2004 
 Brain regions activated during an auditory discrimination task in insomniac postmenopausal patients before and after hormone replacement therapy: low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography applied to event-related potentials 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 49 
 3 
 134 
 53 
 15034229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arnaiz 
 E 
 
 
 Almkvist 
 O 
 
 
 2003 
 Neuropsychological features of mild cognitive impairment and preclinical Alzheimer’s disease 
 Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 
 179 
 34 
 41 
 12603249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Cassetta 
 E 
 
 
 Dal Forno 
 G 
 
 
 Del Percio 
 C 
 
 
 Ferreri 
 F 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 G 
 
 
 Hirata 
 K 
 
 
 Lanuzza 
 B 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Romani 
 GL 
 
 
 Salinari 
 S 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2006a 
 Sources of cortical rhythms change as a function of cognitive impairment in pathological aging: A multi-centric study 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 117 
 2 
 252 
 268 
 16377238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 G 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 Bresciani 
 L 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Del Percio 
 C 
 
 
 Geroldi 
 C 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Zappasodi 
 F 
 
 
 Carfagna 
 T 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2006b 
 Frontal White Matter Volume and Delta EEG Sources Negatively Correlate In Awake Subjects With Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Cassetta 
 E 
 
 
 Dal Forno 
 G 
 
 
 Del Percio 
 C 
 
 
 Ferreri 
 F 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Lanuzza 
 B 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Luca Romani 
 G 
 
 
 Salinari 
 S 
 
 
 Zanetti 
 O 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2006c 
 Donepezil effects on sources of cortical rhythms in mild Alzheimer’s disease: Responders vs. Non-Responders 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 4 
 1650 
 65 
 Epub 2006 Apr 5 
 16600641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Cassetta 
 E 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Tombini 
 M 
 
 
 Del Percio 
 C 
 
 
 Ferreri 
 F 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 G 
 
 
 Lanuzza 
 B 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Parisi 
 L 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Frigerio 
 L 
 
 
 Gurzì 
 M 
 
 
 Prestia 
 A 
 
 
 Vernieri 
 F 
 
 
 Eusebi 
 F 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2007 
 Resting EEG sources correlate with attentional span in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 25 
 12 
 3742 
 57 
 17610594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Pievani 
 M 
 
 
 Vecchio 
 F 
 
 
 Lizio 
 R 
 
 
 Buttiglione 
 M 
 
 
 Geroldi 
 C 
 
 
 Fracassi 
 C 
 
 
 Eusebi 
 F 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2009a 
 Hippocampal volume and cortical sources of EEG alpha rhythms in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease 
 Neuroimage 
 1;44 
 1 
 123 
 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Pievani 
 M 
 
 
 Vecchio 
 F 
 
 
 Geroldi 
 C 
 
 
 Eusebi 
 F 
 
 
 Fracassi 
 C 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 E 
 
 
 De Carli 
 C 
 
 
 Boccardi 
 M 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 2009b 
 White-matter lesions along the cholinergic tracts are related to cortical sources of EEG rhythms in amnesic mild cognitive impairment 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 5 
 1431 
 43 
 19097164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Carducci 
 F 
 
 
 Lizio 
 R 
 
 
 Vecchio 
 F 
 
 
 Baglieri 
 A 
 
 
 Bernardini 
 S 
 
 
 Cavedo 
 E 
 
 
 Bozzao 
 A 
 
 
 Buttinelli 
 C 
 
 
 Esposito 
 F 
 
 
 Giubilei 
 F 
 
 
 Guizzaro 
 A 
 
 
 Marino 
 S 
 
 
 Montella 
 P 
 
 
 Quattrocchi 
 CC 
 
 
 Redolfi 
 A 
 
 
 Soricelli 
 A 
 
 
 Tedeschi 
 G 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Rossi-Fedele 
 G 
 
 
 Ursini 
 F 
 
 
 Scrascia 
 F 
 
 
 Vernieri 
 F 
 
 
 Pedersen 
 TJ 
 
 
 Hardemark 
 HG 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 2013 
 Resting state cortical electroencephalographic rhythms are related to gray matter volume in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bachman 
 DL 
 
 
 Wolf 
 PA 
 
 
 Linn 
 RT 
 
 
 Knoefel 
 JE 
 
 
 Cobb 
 JL 
 
 
 Belanger 
 AJ 
 
 
 White 
 LR 
 
 
 D’Agostino 
 RB 
 
 
 1993 
 3 
 Incidence of dementia and probable Alzheimer’s disease in a general population: the Framingham Study 
 Neurology 
 43 
 3 Pt 1 
 515 
 9 
 8450993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baron 
 JC 
 
 
 Chételat 
 G 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Perchey 
 G 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 de la Sayette 
 V 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 2001 
 In vivo mapping of gray matter loss with voxel-based morphometry in mild Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neuroimage 
 14 
 2 
 298 
 309 
 11467904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bennett 
 DA 
 
 
 Wilson 
 RS 
 
 
 Schneider 
 JA 
 
 
 Evans 
 DA 
 
 
 Beckett 
 LA 
 
 
 Aggarwal 
 NT 
 
 
 Barnes 
 LL 
 
 
 Fox 
 JH 
 
 
 Bach 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Natural history of mild cognitive impairment in older persons 
 Neurology 
 59 
 2 
 198 
 205 
 12136057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bennys 
 K 
 
 
 Rondouin 
 G 
 
 
 Vergnes 
 C 
 
 
 Touchon 
 J 
 
 
 2001 
 Diagnostic value of quantitative EEG in Alzheimer disease 
 Neurophysiol Clin 
 31 
 153 
 160 
 11488226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Besthorn 
 C 
 
 
 Zerfass 
 R 
 
 
 Geiger-Kabisch 
 C 
 
 
 Sattel 
 H 
 
 
 Daniel 
 S 
 
 
 Schreiter-Gasser 
 U 
 
 
 1997 
 Discrimination of Alzheimer’s disease and normal aging by EEG data 
 Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
 103 
 241 
 8 
 9277627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 1991 
 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes 
 Acta neuropathological 
 82 
 239 
 259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braak 
 H 
 
 
 Braak 
 E 
 
 
 1996 
 Evolution of the neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 
 165 
 3 
 12 
 Review 
 8740983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brassen 
 S 
 
 
 Braus 
 DF 
 
 
 Weber-Fahr 
 W 
 
 
 Tost 
 H 
 
 
 Moritz 
 S 
 
 
 Adler 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Late-onset depression with mild cognitive deficits: electrophysiological evidences for a preclinical dementia syndrome 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 18 
 271 
 277 
 15286459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buscema 
 M 
 
 
 Rossini 
 P 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Grossi 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 The IFAST model, a novel parallel nonlinear EEG analysis technique, distinguishes mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease patients with high degree of accuracy 
 Artif Intell Med 
 40 
 2 
 127 
 41 
 17466496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carlesimo 
 GA 
 
 
 Caltagirone 
 C 
 
 
 Gainotti 
 G 
 
 
 1996 
 The Group for the Standardization of the Mental Deterioration Battery 
 The Mental Deterioration Battery: normative data, diagnostic reliability and qualitative analyses of cognitive impairment 
 Eur Neurol 
 36 
 378 
 84 
 8954307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caso 
 F 
 
 
 Cursi 
 M 
 
 
 Magnani 
 G 
 
 
 Fanelli 
 G 
 
 
 Falautano 
 M 
 
 
 Comi 
 G 
 
 
 Leocani 
 L 
 
 
 Minicucci 
 F 
 
 
 1996 
 Quantitative EEG and LORETA: valuable tools in discerning FTD from AD 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chandler 
 MJ 
 
 
 Lacritz 
 LH 
 
 
 Cicerello 
 AR 
 
 
 Chapman 
 SB 
 
 
 Honig 
 LS 
 
 
 Weiner 
 MF 
 
 
 Cullum 
 CM 
 
 
 2004 
 Three-word recall in normal aging 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 26 
 8 
 1128 
 33 
 15590465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiaramonti 
 R 
 
 
 Muscas 
 GC 
 
 
 Paganini 
 M 
 
 
 Muller 
 TJ 
 
 
 Fallgatter 
 AJ 
 
 
 Versari 
 A 
 
 
 Strik 
 WK 
 
 
 1997 
 Correlations of topographical EEG features with clinical severity in mild and moderate dementia of Alzheimer type 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 36 
 3 
 153 
 8 
 9313246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Claus 
 JJ 
 
 
 Strijers 
 RL 
 
 
 Jonkman 
 EJ 
 
 
 Ongerboer de Visser 
 BW 
 
 
 Jonker 
 C 
 
 
 Walstra 
 GJ 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 van Gool 
 WA 
 
 
 1999 
 The diagnostic value of electroencephalography in mild senile Alzheimer’s disease 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 110 
 825 
 832 
 10400195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devanand 
 DP 
 
 
 Folz 
 M 
 
 
 Gorlyn 
 M 
 
 
 Moeller 
 JR 
 
 
 Stem 
 J 
 
 
 1997 
 Questionable dementia: clinical course and predictors of outcome 
 J Am Geriatr Soc 
 45 
 321 
 328 
 9063278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 Ihl 
 R 
 
 
 Frolich 
 L 
 
 
 Maurer 
 K 
 
 
 1993 
 Dementia of the Alzheimer type: effects on the spontaneous EEG described by dipole sources 
 Psychiatry Res 
 50 
 3 
 51 
 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 Julin 
 P 
 
 
 Linden 
 DEJ 
 
 
 Maurer 
 K 
 
 
 Winblad 
 B 
 
 
 Nordberg 
 A 
 
 
 2000 
 Spatial pattern of cerebral glucose metabolism (PET) correlates with localization of intracerebral EEG-generators in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Clinical Neurophysiology 
 111 
 1817 
 24 
 11018498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Lazzaro 
 V 
 
 
 Oliviero 
 A 
 
 
 Pilato 
 F 
 
 
 Saturno 
 E 
 
 
 Dileone 
 M 
 
 
 Marra 
 C 
 
 
 Daniele 
 A 
 
 
 Ghirlanda 
 S 
 
 
 Gainotti 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Tonali PA Motor cortex hyperexcitability to transcranial magnetic stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 75 
 4 
 555 
 9 
 15026495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DeLong 
 ER 
 
 
 DeLong 
 DM 
 
 
 Clarke-Pearson 
 DL 
 
 
 1988 
 Comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach 
 Biometrics 
 44 
 837 
 845 
 3203132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Renzi 
 E 
 
 
 Vignolo 
 LA 
 
 
 1962 
 The token test: A sensitive test to detect receptive disturbances in aphasics 
 Brain 
 85 
 665 
 78 
 14026018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dubois 
 B 
 
 
 Feldman 
 HH 
 
 
 Jacova 
 C 
 
 
 Dekosky 
 ST 
 
 
 Barberger-Gateau 
 P 
 
 
 Cummings 
 J 
 
 
 Delacourte 
 A 
 
 
 Galasko 
 D 
 
 
 Gauthier 
 S 
 
 
 Jicha 
 G 
 
 
 Meguro 
 K 
 
 
 O’brien 
 J 
 
 
 Pasquier 
 F 
 
 
 Robert 
 P 
 
 
 Rossor 
 M 
 
 
 Salloway 
 S 
 
 
 Stern 
 Y 
 
 
 Visser 
 PJ 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 2007 
 Research criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: revising the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria 
 Lancet Neurol 
 6 
 8 
 734 
 46 
 Review 
 17616482 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elmstahl 
 S 
 
 
 Rosen 
 I 
 
 
 1997 
 Postural hypotension and EEG variables predict cognitive decline: results from a 5-year follow-up of healthy elderly women 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 8 
 180 
 187 
 9137897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 A 
 
 
 Arrazola 
 J 
 
 
 Maestu 
 F 
 
 
 Amo 
 C 
 
 
 Gil-Gregorio 
 P 
 
 
 Wienbruch 
 C 
 
 
 Ortiz 
 T 
 
 
 2003 
 Correlations of hippocampal atrophy and focal low-frequency magnetic activity in Alzheimer disease: volumetric MR imaging-magnetoencephalographic study 
 AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
 24 
 3 
 481 
 7 
 12637301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferreri 
 F 
 
 
 Pauri 
 F 
 
 
 Pasqualetti 
 P 
 
 
 Fini 
 R 
 
 
 Dal Forno 
 G 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2003 
 Motor cortex excitability in Alzheimer’s disease: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study 
 Ann Neurol 
 53 
 1 
 102 
 8 
 12509853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingelkurts 
 AA 
 
 
 Fingelkurts 
 AA 
 
 
 Kivisaari 
 R 
 
 
 Autti 
 T 
 
 
 Borisov 
 S 
 
 
 Puuskari 
 V 
 
 
 Jokela 
 O 
 
 
 Kähkönen 
 S 
 
 
 2006 
 Increased local and decreased remote functional connectivity at EEG alpha and beta frequency bands in opioid-dependent patients 
 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
 188 
 1 
 42 
 52 
 Epub 2006 Jul 19 
 16850117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fisk 
 JD 
 
 
 Merry 
 HR 
 
 
 Rockwood 
 K 
 
 
 2003 
 Variations in case definition affect prevalence but not outcomes of mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurology 
 61 
 1179 
 84 
 14610117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Flicker 
 CS 
 
 
 Ferris 
 H 
 
 
 Reisberg 
 B 
 
 
 1991 
 Mild cognitive impairment in the elderly: predictors of dementia 
 Neurology 
 41 
 1006 
 1009 
 2067629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 MF 
 
 
 Folstein 
 SE 
 
 
 McHugh 
 PR 
 
 
 1975 
 Mini Mental State’: a practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for clinician 
 J Psychiat Res 
 12 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Testa 
 C 
 
 
 Zorzan 
 A 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Detection of gray matter loss in mild Alzheimer’s disease with voxel-based morphometry 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 73 
 657 
 664 
 12438466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Padovani 
 A 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 2004 
 The predementia diagnosis of Alzheimer disease 
 Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 
 18 
 2 
 51 
 3 
 15249846 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Pievani 
 M 
 
 
 Testa 
 C 
 
 
 Sabattoli 
 F 
 
 
 Bresciani 
 L 
 
 
 Bonetti 
 M 
 
 
 Beltramello 
 A 
 
 
 Hayashi 
 KM 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 2007 
 3 
 The topography of gray matter involvement in early and late onset Alzheimer’s disease 
 Brain 
 130 
 Pt 3 
 720 
 30 
 Epub 2007 Feb 9 
 17293358 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Prestia 
 A 
 
 
 Rasser 
 PE 
 
 
 Bonetti 
 M 
 
 
 Thompson 
 PM 
 
 
 2009 
 In vivo mapping of incremental cortical atrophy from incipient to overt Alzheimer’s disease 
 J Neurol 
 256 
 6 
 916 
 24 
 Epub 2009 Feb 28 
 19252794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galluzzi 
 S 
 
 
 Cimaschi 
 L 
 
 
 Ferrucci 
 L 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 2001 
 Mild cognitive impairment: clinical features and review of screening instruments 
 Aging 
 13 
 3 
 183 
 202 
 Milano 
 11442301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 S 
 
 
 Hendrie 
 HC 
 
 
 Hall 
 KS 
 
 
 Hui 
 S 
 
 
 1998 
 The relationships between age, sex, and the incidence of dementia and Alzheimer disease: a meta-analysis 
 Arch Gen Psychiatry 
 55 
 9 
 809 
 15 
 9736007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gonçalves 
 SI 
 
 
 de Munck 
 JC 
 
 
 Pouwels 
 PJ 
 
 
 Schoonhoven 
 R 
 
 
 Kuijer 
 JP 
 
 
 Maurits 
 NM 
 
 
 Hoogduin 
 JM 
 
 
 Van Someren 
 EJ 
 
 
 Heethaar 
 RM 
 
 
 Lopes da Silva 
 FH 
 
 
 2006 
 Correlating the alpha rhythm to BOLD using simultaneous EEG/fMRI: inter-subject variability 
 Neuroimage 
 30 
 1 
 203 
 13 
 Epub 2005 Nov 14 
 16290018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Helkala 
 EL 
 
 
 Hanninen 
 T 
 
 
 Hallikainen 
 M 
 
 
 Kononen 
 M 
 
 
 Laakso 
 MP 
 
 
 Hartikainen 
 P 
 
 
 Soininen 
 H 
 
 
 Partanen 
 J 
 
 
 Partanen 
 K 
 
 
 Vainio 
 P 
 
 
 Riekkinen 
 P 
 
 
 1996 
 Slow-wave activity in the spectral analysis of the electroencephalogram and volumes of hippocampus in subgroups of Alzheimer’s disease patients 
 Behav Neurosci 
 110 
 6 
 1235 
 43 
 8986328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hernández 
 JL 
 
 
 Valdés 
 P 
 
 
 Biscay 
 R 
 
 
 Virués 
 T 
 
 
 Szava 
 S 
 
 
 Bosch 
 J 
 
 
 Riquenes 
 A 
 
 
 Clark 
 I 
 
 
 1994 
 A global scale factor in brain topography 
 Int J Neurosci 
 76 
 267 
 278 
 7960483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holschneider 
 DP 
 
 
 Waite 
 JJ 
 
 
 Leuchter 
 AF 
 
 
 Walton 
 NY 
 
 
 Scremin 
 OU 
 
 
 1999 
 Changes in electrocortical power and coherence in response to the selective cholinergic immunotoxin 192 IgG-saporin 
 Exp Brain Res 
 126 
 2 
 270 
 80 
 10369149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huang 
 C 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 Julin 
 P 
 
 
 Winblad 
 B 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 2000 
 Discrimination of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment by equivalent EEG sources: a cross-sectional and logitudinal study 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 11 
 1961 
 1967 
 11068230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hughes 
 CP 
 
 
 Berg 
 L 
 
 
 Danziger 
 WL 
 
 
 Coben 
 LA 
 
 
 Martin 
 RL 
 
 
 1982 
 A new clinical scale for the staging of dementia 
 Br J Psychiatry 
 140 
 566 
 72 
 7104545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hughes 
 SW 
 
 
 Crunelli 
 V 
 
 
 2005 
 Thalamic mechanisms of EEG alpha rhythms and their pathological implications 
 Neuroscientist 
 11 
 4 
 357 
 72 
 Review 
 16061522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 Shigeta 
 M 
 
 
 Julin 
 P 
 
 
 Almkvist 
 O 
 
 
 Winblad 
 B 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 1996 
 Quantitative electroencephalography power and coherence in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment 
 Dementia 
 7 
 314 
 23 
 8915037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 Johansson 
 SE 
 
 
 Almkvist 
 O 
 
 
 Shigeta 
 M 
 
 
 Julin 
 P 
 
 
 Nordberg 
 A 
 
 
 Winblad 
 B 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 2000 
 Quantitative electroencephalography in mild cognitive impairment: longitudinal changes and possible prediction of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 21 
 533 
 540 
 10924766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jeong 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 EEG dynamics in patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 115 
 7 
 1490 
 505 
 15203050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kassubek 
 J 
 
 
 Juengling 
 FD 
 
 
 Hellwig 
 B 
 
 
 Spreer 
 J 
 
 
 Lücking 
 CH 
 
 
 2002 
 Thalamic gray matter changes in unilateral Parkinsonian resting tremor: a voxel-based morphometric analysis of 3-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neurosci Lett 
 323 
 1 
 29 
 32 
 11911983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kassubek 
 J 
 
 
 Juengling 
 FD 
 
 
 Kioschies 
 T 
 
 
 Henkel 
 K 
 
 
 Karitzky 
 J 
 
 
 Kramer 
 B 
 
 
 Ecker 
 D 
 
 
 Andrich 
 J 
 
 
 Saft 
 C 
 
 
 Kraus 
 P 
 
 
 Aschoff 
 AJ 
 
 
 Ludolph 
 AC 
 
 
 Landwehrmeyer 
 GB 
 
 
 2004 
 Topography of cerebral atrophy in early Huntington’s disease: a voxel based morphometric MRI study 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 75 
 2 
 213 
 20 
 14742591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 1996 
 Memory processes, brain oscillations and EEG synchronization 
 Int J Psychophysiol 
 24 
 1–2 
 61 
 100 
 8978436 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Doppelmayr 
 M 
 
 
 Russegger 
 H 
 
 
 Pachinger 
 T 
 
 
 Schwaiger 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 Induced alpha band power changes in the human EEG and attention 
 Neurosci Lett 
 244 
 2 
 73 
 6 
 9572588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 1999 
 EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory performance: a review and analysis 
 Brain Research Reviews 
 29 
 169 
 195 
 10209231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Doppelmayr 
 M 
 
 
 Pachinger 
 T 
 
 
 Russegger 
 H 
 
 
 1997 
 Event-related desynchronization in the alpha band and the processing of semantic information 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 6 
 2 
 83 
 94 
 9450602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klimesch 
 W 
 
 
 Doppelmayr 
 M 
 
 
 Russegger 
 H 
 
 
 Pachinger 
 T 
 
 
 Schwaiger 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 Induced alpha band power changes in the human EEG and attention 
 Neurosci Lett 
 244 
 2 
 73 
 6 
 9572588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koenig 
 T 
 
 
 Prichep 
 L 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 Hubl 
 D 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 John 
 ER 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 2005 
 Decreased EEG synchronization in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 26 
 2 
 165 
 71 
 15582746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kolev 
 V 
 
 
 Yordanova 
 J 
 
 
 Basar-Eroglu 
 C 
 
 
 Basar 
 E 
 
 
 2002 
 Age effects on visual EEG responses reveal distinct frontal alpha networks 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 113 
 901 
 10 
 12048049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Korczyn 
 AD 
 
 
 Halperin 
 I 
 
 
 2009 
 Depression and dementia 
 J Neurol Sci 
 283 
 1–2 
 139 
 42 
 Epub 2009 Apr 5 
 19345960 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yesavage 
 JA 
 
 
 Brink 
 TL 
 
 
 Rose 
 TL 
 
 
 Lum 
 O 
 
 
 Huang 
 V 
 
 
 Adey 
 M 
 
 
 Leirer 
 VO 
 
 
 1982–83 
 Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale: a preliminary report 
 J Psychiatr Res 
 17 
 1 
 37 
 49 
 7183759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larrieu 
 S 
 
 
 Letenneur 
 L 
 
 
 Orgogozo 
 JM 
 
 
 Fabrigoule 
 C 
 
 
 Amieva 
 H 
 
 
 Le Carret 
 N 
 
 
 Barberger-Gateau 
 P 
 
 
 Dartigues 
 JF 
 
 
 2002 
 Incidence and outcome of mild cognitive impairment in a population-based prospective cohort 
 Neurology 
 59 
 10 
 1594 
 9 
 12451203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laufer 
 I 
 
 
 Pratt 
 H 
 
 
 2003a 
 Evoked potentials to auditory movement sensation in duplex perception 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 114 
 7 
 1316 
 31 
 12842731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laufs 
 H 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 Beyerle 
 A 
 
 
 Eger 
 E 
 
 
 Salek-Haddadi 
 A 
 
 
 Preibisch 
 C 
 
 
 Krakow 
 K 
 
 
 2003 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 4 
 1463 
 76 
 EEG-correlated fMRI of human alpha activity 
 12948703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lawton 
 MP 
 
 
 Brodie 
 EM 
 
 
 1969 
 Assessment of older people: self maintaining and instrumental activity of daily living 
 J Gerontol 
 9 
 179 
 186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 C 
 
 
 Koenig 
 T 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 Prichep 
 L 
 
 
 John 
 RE 
 
 
 Wahlund 
 LO 
 
 
 Dodge 
 Y 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 2007 
 Application and comparison of classification algorithms for recognition of Alzheimer’s disease in electrical brain activity (EEG) 
 J Neurosci Methods 
 161 
 342 
 350 
 17156848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leuchter 
 AF 
 
 
 Spar 
 JE 
 
 
 Walter 
 DO 
 
 
 Weiner 
 H 
 
 
 1987 
 Electroencephalographic spectra and coherence in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s-type and multi-infarct dementia. A pilot study 
 Arch Gen Psychiatry 
 44 
 993 
 998 
 3314770 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leuchter 
 AF 
 
 
 Newton 
 TF 
 
 
 Cook 
 IA 
 
 
 Walter 
 DO 
 
 
 Rosenberg-Thompson 
 S 
 
 
 Lachenbruch 
 PA 
 
 
 1992 
 Changes in brain functional connectivity in Alzheimer-type and multi-infarct dementia 
 Brain 
 115 
 1543 
 1561 
 1422803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leuchter 
 AF 
 
 
 Cook 
 IA 
 
 
 Newton 
 TF 
 
 
 Dunkin 
 J 
 
 
 Walter 
 DO 
 
 
 Rosenberg Tompson 
 S 
 
 
 Lachenbruch 
 PA 
 
 
 Weiner 
 H 
 
 
 1993 
 Regional differences in brain electrical activity in dementia: use of spectral power and spectral ratio measures 
 Electroenceph clin Neurophysiol 
 87 
 385 
 393 
 7508371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Limon 
 A 
 
 
 Reyes-Ruiz 
 JM 
 
 
 Miledi 
 R 
 
 
 2011 
 GABAergic drugs and Alzheimer’s disease 
 Future Med Chem 
 3 
 2 
 149 
 53 
 21428809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lörincz 
 ML 
 
 
 Crunelli 
 V 
 
 
 Hughes 
 SW 
 
 
 2008 
 Cellular dynamics of cholinergically induced alpha (8–13 Hz) rhythms in sensory thalamic nuclei in vitro 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 3 
 660 
 71 
 18199766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lorincz 
 ML 
 
 
 Kékesi 
 KA 
 
 
 Juhász 
 G 
 
 
 Crunelli 
 V 
 
 
 Hughes 
 SW 
 
 
 2009 
 Temporal framing of thalamic relay-mode firing by phasic inhibition during the alpha rhythm 
 Neuron 
 63 
 5 
 683 
 96 
 19755110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mantini 
 D 
 
 
 Perrucci 
 MG 
 
 
 Cugini 
 S 
 
 
 Ferretti 
 A 
 
 
 Romani 
 GL 
 
 
 Del Gratta 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Complete artifact removal for EEG recorded during continuous fMRI using independent component analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 34 
 2 
 598 
 607 
 Epub 2006 Nov 16 
 17112747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathewson 
 KE 
 
 
 Gratton 
 G 
 
 
 Fabiani 
 M 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 Ro 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 To see or not to see: prestimulus alpha phase predicts visual awareness 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 9 
 2725 
 32 
 19261866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathewson 
 KE 
 
 
 Lleras 
 A 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 Fabiani 
 M 
 
 
 Ro 
 T 
 
 
 Gratton 
 G 
 
 
 Pulsed out of awareness: EEG alpha oscillations represent a pulsed-inhibition of ongoing cortical processing 
 Front Psychol 
 2011 
 2 
 99 
 Epub 2011 May 19 
 21779257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKeith 
 IG 
 
 
 Perry 
 EK 
 
 
 Perry 
 RH 
 
 
 1999 
 Report of the second dementia with Lewy body international workshop: diagnosis and treatment. Consortiumon Dementia with Lewy Bodies 
 Neurology 
 53 
 902 
 5 
 10496243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McKhann 
 G 
 
 
 Drachman 
 D 
 
 
 Folstein 
 M 
 
 
 Katzman 
 R 
 
 
 Price 
 D 
 
 
 Stadlan 
 EM 
 
 
 1984 
 Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: report of the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neurology 
 34 
 939 
 944 
 6610841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 1995 
 Cholinergic pathways and the ascending reticular activating system of the human brain 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 757 
 169 
 79 
 No abstract available 
 7611672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 Shaw 
 P 
 
 
 Mash 
 D 
 
 
 Weintraub 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Cholinergic nucleus basalis tauopathy emerges early in the aging-MCI-AD continuum 
 Ann Neurol 
 55 
 6 
 815 
 28 
 15174015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Missonnier 
 P 
 
 
 Gold 
 G 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 FR 
 
 
 Fazio-Costa 
 L 
 
 
 Michel 
 JP 
 
 
 Deiber 
 MP 
 
 
 Michon 
 A 
 
 
 Giannakopoulos 
 P 
 
 
 2006 
 Decreased theta event-related synchronization during working memory activation is associated with progressive mild cognitive impairment 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 22 
 250 
 259 
 16902280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 F 
 
 
 Carducci 
 F 
 
 
 Cincotti 
 F 
 
 
 Remondini 
 E 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Salinari 
 S 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 2003 
 Computerized processing of EEG-EOG-EMG artifacts for multicentirc studies in EEG oscillations and event-related potentials 
 Int J Pshycophysiol 
 47 
 3 
 199 
 216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Cassetta 
 E 
 
 
 Dal Forno 
 G 
 
 
 Ferreri 
 F 
 
 
 Ferri 
 R 
 
 
 Bartolo 
 Lanuzza 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Salinari 
 S 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Individual analysis of EEG frequency and band power in mild Alzheimer’s Disease 
 Clinical Neurophysiology 
 115 
 299 
 308 
 14744569 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Geroldi 
 C 
 
 
 Zanetti 
 O 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 2007 
 Hippocampal atrophy and EEG markers in subjects with mild cognitive impairment 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 Epub ahead of print 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moretti 
 DV 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Fracassi 
 C 
 
 
 Pievani 
 M 
 
 
 Geroldi 
 C 
 
 
 Binetti 
 G 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Zanetti 
 O 
 
 
 MCI patients’ EEGs show group differences between those who progress and those who do not progress to AD 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2011 
 4 
 32 
 4 
 563 
 71 
 20022139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mowla 
 A 
 
 
 Mosavinasab 
 M 
 
 
 Haghshenas 
 H 
 
 
 Borhani Haghighi 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 Does serotonin augmentation have any effect on cognition and activities of daily living in Alzheimer’s dementia? A double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial 
 J Clin Psychopharmacol 
 27 
 5 
 484 
 7 
 17873681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mulert 
 C 
 
 
 Gallinat 
 J 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 R 
 
 
 Dorn 
 H 
 
 
 Frick 
 K 
 
 
 Schlattmann 
 P 
 
 
 Mientus 
 S 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 WM 
 
 
 Winterer 
 G 
 
 
 2001 
 Reduced event-related current density in the anterior cingulate cortex in schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage 
 13 
 4 
 589 
 600 
 11305888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 2000 
 A voxel-based morphometry study of semantic dementia: relationship between temporal lobe atrophy and semantic memory 
 Ann Neurol 
 47 
 1 
 36 
 45 
 10632099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 2004 
 Advances in the early detection of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Nat Med 
 10 
 Suppl 
 S34 
 41 
 15298007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nishida 
 K 
 
 
 Yoshimura 
 M 
 
 
 Isotani 
 T 
 
 
 Yoshida 
 T 
 
 
 Kitaura 
 Y 
 
 
 Saito 
 A 
 
 
 Mii 
 H 
 
 
 Kato 
 M 
 
 
 Takekita 
 Y 
 
 
 Suwa 
 A 
 
 
 Morita 
 S 
 
 
 Kinoshita 
 T 
 
 
 2011 
 Differences in quantitative EEG between frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease as revealed by LORETA 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 122 
 9 
 1718 
 25 
 Epub 2011 Mar 10 
 21396882 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nobili 
 L 
 
 
 Sannita 
 WG 
 
 
 1997 
 12 
 Cholinergic modulation, visual function and Alzheimer’s dementia 
 Vision Res 
 37 
 24 
 3559 
 71 
 9425531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nuwer 
 M 
 
 
 1997 
 Assessment of digital EEG, quantitative EEG and brain mapping: report of the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society 
 Neurology (1997) 
 49 
 277 
 292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nuwer 
 MR 
 
 
 1988 
 Quantitative EEG. I: tecniques and problems of frequency analysis and topographic mapping 
 J Clin Neurophysiol 
 5 
 1 
 43 
 3074969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Taddei 
 G 
 
 
 Vitali 
 P 
 
 
 Bazzano 
 L 
 
 
 Catsafados 
 E 
 
 
 Mariani 
 G 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 1998 
 Relationships between 99m Tc-HMPAO ceraspect and quantitative EEG observations in Alzheimer’s disease 
 ArchGerontolGeriatr 
 6 
 363 
 368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ohnishi 
 T 
 
 
 Matsuda 
 H 
 
 
 Tabira 
 T 
 
 
 Asada 
 T 
 
 
 Uno 
 M 
 
 
 2001 
 Changes in brain morphology in Alzheimer disease and normal ageing: is Alzheimer disease an exaggerated aging process? 
 AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
 22 
 1680 
 1685 
 11673161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orsini 
 A 
 
 
 Grossi 
 D 
 
 
 Capitani 
 E 
 
 
 Laiacona 
 M 
 
 
 Papagno 
 C 
 
 
 Vallar 
 G 
 
 
 1987 
 Verbal and spatial immediate memory span: normative data from 1355 adults and 1112 children 
 Ital J Neurol Sci 
 8 
 539 
 48 
 3429213 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Osipova 
 D 
 
 
 Rantanen 
 K 
 
 
 Ahveninen 
 J 
 
 
 Ylikoski 
 R 
 
 
 Häppölä 
 O 
 
 
 Strandberg 
 T 
 
 
 Pekkonen 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 Source estimation of spontaneous MEG oscillations in mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurosci Lett 
 405 
 1–2 
 57 
 61 
 16854528 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Michel 
 CM 
 
 
 1994 
 LORETA (low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography): new authentic 3D functional images of the brain 
 ISBET Newsletter ISSN 
 5 
 4 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 D 
 
 
 Koenig 
 T 
 
 
 Kochi 
 K 
 
 
 Merlo 
 MC 
 
 
 Hell 
 D 
 
 
 Koukkou 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 Low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) functional imaging in acute, neuroleptic-naive, first-episode, productive schizophrenia 
 Psychiatry Res 
 90 
 3 
 169 
 179 
 10466736 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual-Marqui 
 RD 
 
 
 Esslen 
 M 
 
 
 Kochi 
 K 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 D 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional imaging with low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA): a review 
 Methods and findings in experimental and clinical pharmacology 
 24 
 91 
 95 
 12575492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 Tangalos 
 EG 
 
 
 Schaid 
 SN 
 
 
 Thibodeau 
 SN 
 
 
 Kokmen 
 E 
 
 
 Waring 
 SC 
 
 
 Kurland 
 LT 
 
 
 1995 
 Apolipoprotein E status as a predictor of the development of Alzheimer’s disease in memory-impaired individuals 
 JAMA 
 273 
 1274 
 1278 
 7646655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Smith 
 GE 
 
 
 Waring 
 SC 
 
 
 Ivnik 
 RJ 
 
 
 Kokmen 
 E 
 
 
 Tangelos 
 EG 
 
 
 1997 
 Aging, memory, and mild cognitive impairment 
 Int Psychogeriatr 
 9 
 Suppl 1 
 65 
 69 
 9447429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 RC 
 
 
 Doody 
 R 
 
 
 Kurz 
 A 
 
 
 Mohs 
 RC 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Rabins 
 PV 
 
 
 Ritchie 
 K 
 
 
 Rossor 
 M 
 
 
 Thal 
 L 
 
 
 Winblad 
 B 
 
 
 2001 
 Current concepts in mild cognitive impairment 
 Arch Neurol 
 58 
 12 
 1985 
 92 
 11735772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Systemic regularization of linear inverse solutions of the EEG source localization problem 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 287 
 301 
 12482084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinault 
 D 
 
 
 Deschênes 
 M 
 
 
 1992 
 12 
 Muscarinic inhibition of reticular thalamic cells by basal forebrain neurones 
 Neuroreport 
 3 
 12 
 1101 
 4 
 1362897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pizzagalli 
 DA 
 
 
 Oakes 
 TR 
 
 
 Fox 
 AS 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional but not structural subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in melancholia 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 9 
 393 
 405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ponomareva 
 NV 
 
 
 Selesneva 
 ND 
 
 
 Jarikov 
 GA 
 
 
 2003 
 EEG alterations in subjects at high familial risk for Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 48 
 3 
 152 
 9 
 14586166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portet 
 F 
 
 
 Ousset 
 PJ 
 
 
 Visser 
 PJ 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Vellas 
 B 
 
 
 Touchon 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 MCI Working Group of the European Consortium on Alzheimer’s Disease Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in medical practice: a critical review of the concept and new diagnostic procedure. Report of the MCI Working Group of the European Consortium on Alzheimer’s Disease 
 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
 77 
 6 
 714 
 8 
 Epub 2006 Mar 20. Review 
 16549412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prichep 
 
 
 
 2005 
 Decreased EEG synchronization in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 26 
 2 
 165 
 71 
 15582746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pucci 
 E 
 
 
 Cacchiò 
 G 
 
 
 Angeloni 
 R 
 
 
 Belardinelli 
 N 
 
 
 Nolfe 
 G 
 
 
 Signorino 
 M 
 
 
 1997 
 Angeleri F EEG spectral analysis Alzheimer’s disease and different degenerative dementias 
 Archives of Gereontology and Geriatrics 
 26 
 283 
 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pucci 
 E 
 
 
 Belardinelli 
 N 
 
 
 Cacchio 
 G 
 
 
 Signorino 
 M 
 
 
 Angeleri 
 F 
 
 
 1999 
 EEG power spectrum differences in early and late onset forms of Alzheimer’s disease 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 110 
 4 
 621 
 31 
 10378730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raven 
 
 
 1965 
 Guide to using coloured progressive matrices 
 London UK 
 K Lewis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rey 
 A 
 
 
 1958 
 Memorisation d’une serie de 15 mots en 5 repetitions 
 
 
 Rey 
 A 
 
 
 (Hrsg.) 
 L’examen clinique en psychologie 
 Presses Universitaires de France 
 Paris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rey 
 A 
 
 
 1968 
 Reattivo Della Figura Complessa Manuale 
 Organizzazioni Speciali 
 Firenze 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reitan 
 
 
 1958 
 Validity of the Trail Making Test as an indication of organic brain damage 
 Percept Motor Skill 
 271 
 276 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ricceri 
 L 
 
 
 Minghetti 
 L 
 
 
 Moles 
 A 
 
 
 Popoli 
 P 
 
 
 Confaloni 
 A 
 
 
 De Simone 
 R 
 
 
 Piscopo 
 P 
 
 
 Scattoni 
 ML 
 
 
 di Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Calamandrei 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Cognitive and neurological deficits induced by early and prolonged basal forebrain cholinergic hypofunction in rats 
 Exp Neurol 
 189 
 1 
 162 
 72 
 15296846 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Rocca 
 G 
 
 
 DeCarli 
 F 
 
 
 Gianelli 
 MV 
 
 
 Rosadini 
 G 
 
 
 1998 
 Quantitative electroencephalography and regional Cerebral Blood Flow: discriminant analysis between Alzheimer’s patients and healthy controls 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 9 
 238 
 274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Copello 
 F 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Vitali 
 P 
 
 
 Perego 
 G 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 1999a 
 EEG spectral profile to stage Alzheimer’s disease 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 110 
 1831 
 1837 
 10574298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 Copello 
 F 
 
 
 Vitali 
 P 
 
 
 Gianelli 
 MV 
 
 
 Taddei 
 G 
 
 
 Catsafados 
 E 
 
 
 Mariani 
 G 
 
 
 1999b 
 99mTc-HMPAO regional Cerebral Blood Flow and quantitative Electroencephalography in Alzheimer’s disease: a correlative study 
 J Nucl Med 
 40 
 522 
 529 
 10210209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodriguez 
 G 
 
 
 Vitali 
 P 
 
 
 De Leo 
 C 
 
 
 De Carli 
 F 
 
 
 Girtler 
 N 
 
 
 Nobili 
 F 
 
 
 2002 
 Quantitative EEG changes in Alzheimer patients during long-term donepezil therapy 
 Neuropsychobiology 
 46 
 49 
 56 
 12207147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogers 
 J 
 
 
 Webster 
 S 
 
 
 Lue 
 LF 
 
 
 Brachova 
 L 
 
 
 Civin 
 WH 
 
 
 Emmerling 
 M 
 
 
 Shivers 
 B 
 
 
 Walker 
 D 
 
 
 McGeer 
 P 
 
 
 1996 
 Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 17 
 5 
 681 
 6 
 8892340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roman 
 GC 
 
 
 Tatemichi 
 TK 
 
 
 Erkinjuntti 
 T 
 
 
 Cummings 
 JL 
 
 
 Masdeu 
 JC 
 
 
 Garcia 
 JH 
 
 
 Amaducci 
 L 
 
 
 Orgogozo 
 JM 
 
 
 Brun 
 A 
 
 
 Hofman 
 A 
 
 
 1993 
 Vascular dementia: diagnostic criteria for research studies. Report of the NINDS-AIREN International Workshop 
 Neurology 
 43 
 2 
 250 
 60 
 8094895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 Witter 
 MP 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 2000 
 Unbiased whole-brain analysis of gray matter loss in Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neurosci Lett 
 19;285 
 3 
 231 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosen 
 WG 
 
 
 Terry 
 RD 
 
 
 Fuld 
 PA 
 
 
 Katzman 
 R 
 
 
 Peck 
 A 
 
 
 1980 
 Pathological verification of ischemic score in differentiation of dementias 
 Ann Neurol 
 7 
 5 
 486 
 8 
 7396427 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Desiato 
 MT 
 
 
 Lavaroni 
 F 
 
 
 Caramia 
 MD 
 
 
 1991 
 12 
 13 
 Brain excitability and electroencephalographic activation: non-invasive evaluation in healthy humans via transcranial magnetic stimulation 
 Brain Res 
 567 
 1 
 111 
 9 
 1815819 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossini 
 PM 
 
 
 Rossi 
 S 
 
 
 Babiloni 
 C 
 
 
 Polich 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Clinical neurophysiology of aging brain: from normal aging to neurodegeneration 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 83 
 6 
 375 
 400 
 Review. Epub 2007 Aug 8 
 17870229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin 
 EH 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Grant 
 EA 
 
 
 Vendegna 
 T 
 
 
 1989 
 Very mild senile dementia of the Alzheimer type. I. Clinical assessment 
 Arch Neurol 
 46 
 4 
 379 
 82 
 2650663 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shattuck 
 DW 
 
 
 Mirza 
 M 
 
 
 Adisetiyo 
 V 
 
 
 Hojatkashani 
 C 
 
 
 Salamon 
 G 
 
 
 Narr 
 KL 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 2008 
 Construction of a 3D Probabilistic Atlas of Human Brain Structures 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 3 
 1064 
 1080 
 18037310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Fox 
 N 
 
 
 Barkhof 
 F 
 
 
 De Carli 
 C 
 
 
 2002 
 Structural magnetic resonance imaging in the practical assessment of dementia: beyond exclusion 
 Lancet Neurol 
 1 
 1 
 13 
 21 
 12849541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sherman 
 SM 
 
 
 2005 
 Thalamic relays and cortical functioning 
 Prog Brain Res 
 149 
 107 
 26 
 16226580 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 KI 
 
 
 Gold 
 DP 
 
 
 Cohen 
 CA 
 
 
 Zucchero 
 CA 
 
 
 1993 
 Clock drawing and dementia in thecommunity: A longitudinal study 
 Int J Geriatr Psychiat 
 8 
 487 
 496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sloan 
 EP 
 
 
 Fenton 
 GW 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 NSJ 
 
 
 MacLennan 
 JM 
 
 
 1995 
 Electroencephalography and single photon emission computed tomography in dementia: a comparative study 
 Psychol Med 
 25 
 631 
 38 
 7480442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Small 
 GW 
 
 
 La Rue 
 A 
 
 
 Komo 
 S 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 A 
 
 
 Mandelkern 
 MA 
 
 
 1995 
 Predictors of cognitive change in middle-aged and older adults with memory loss 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 152 
 12 
 1757 
 64 
 8526242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spinnler 
 H 
 
 
 Tognoni 
 G 
 
 
 1987 
 Standardizzazione e taratura italiana di test neuropsicologici 
 Italian Journal Of Neurological Sciences 
 suppl 6 
 N°8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 Llinas 
 RR 
 
 
 1988 
 The functional states of the thalamus and the associated neuronal interplay 
 Physiol Rev 
 68 
 3 
 649 
 742 
 2839857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steriade 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Cerebello-cerebral interactions during states of vigilance 
 Cerebellum 
 2 
 2 
 82 
 3 
 12880174 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strijers 
 RL 
 
 
 Scheltens 
 P 
 
 
 Jonkman 
 EJ 
 
 
 de Rijke 
 W 
 
 
 Hooijer 
 C 
 
 
 Jonker 
 C 
 
 
 1997 
 Diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease in community-dwelling elderly: a comparison of EEG and MRI 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 8 
 3 
 198 
 202 
 9137899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szelies 
 B 
 
 
 Mielke 
 R 
 
 
 Kessler 
 J 
 
 
 Heiss 
 WD 
 
 
 1999 
 EEG power changes are related to regional cerebral glucose metabolism in vascular dementia 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 110 
 4 
 615 
 20 
 10378729 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain 
 Stuttgart 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 Y 
 
 
 Hanyu 
 H 
 
 
 Sakurai 
 H 
 
 
 Takasaki 
 M 
 
 
 Abe 
 K 
 
 
 2003 
 Atrophy of the substantia innominata on magnetic resonance imaging predicts response to donepezil treatment in Alzheimer’s disease patients 
 Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
 16 
 119 
 125 
 12826736 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Teipel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Flatz 
 WH 
 
 
 Heinsen 
 H 
 
 
 Bokde 
 AL 
 
 
 Schoenberg 
 SO 
 
 
 Stockel 
 S 
 
 
 Dietrich 
 O 
 
 
 Reiser 
 MF 
 
 
 Moller 
 HJ 
 
 
 Hampel 
 H 
 
 
 2005 
 Measurement of basal forebrain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease using MRI 
 Brain 
 128 
 Pt 11 
 2626 
 44 
 16014654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Testa 
 C 
 
 
 Laakso 
 MP 
 
 
 Sabattoli 
 F 
 
 
 Rossi 
 R 
 
 
 Beltramello 
 A 
 
 
 Soininen 
 H 
 
 
 Frisoni 
 GB 
 
 
 2004 
 A comparison between the accuracy of voxel-based morphometry and hippocampal volumetry in Alzheimer’s disease 
 J Magn Reson Imaging 
 19 
 3 
 274 
 82 
 14994294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Valdès 
 P 
 
 
 Picton 
 TW 
 
 
 Trujillo 
 N 
 
 
 Bosch 
 J 
 
 
 Aubert 
 E 
 
 
 Riera 
 J 
 
 
 1998 
 Constraining EEG-MEG source imaging with statistical neuroanatomy 
 Neuroimage 
 4 
 635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van der Hiele 
 K 
 
 
 Vein 
 AA 
 
 
 Reijntjes 
 RH 
 
 
 Westendorp 
 RG 
 
 
 Bollen 
 EL 
 
 
 van Buchem 
 MA 
 
 
 van Dijk 
 JG 
 
 
 Middelkoop 
 HA 
 
 
 2007 
 EEG correlates in the spectrum of cognitive decline 
 Clin Neurophysiol 
 118 
 9 
 1931 
 9 
 Epub 2007 Jun 28 
 17604688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Varela 
 FJ 
 
 
 Toro 
 A 
 
 
 John 
 ER 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 EL 
 
 
 1981 
 Perceptual framing and cortical alpha rhythm 
 Neuropsychologia 
 19 
 5 
 675 
 86 
 7312152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wolf 
 H 
 
 
 Jelic 
 V 
 
 
 Gertz 
 HJ 
 
 
 
 2003 
 A critical discussion of the role of neuroimaging in mild cognitive impairment 
 Acta Neurol Scand 
 107 
 Suppl 179 
 52 
 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yao 
 D 
 
 
 He 
 B 
 
 
 2001 
 A self-coherence enhancement algorithm and its application to enhancing three-dimensional source estimation from EEGs 
 Annals of biomedical Engineering 
 29 
 1019 
 1027 
 11791673 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Brady 
 M 
 
 
 Smith 
 S 
 
 
 2001 
 Segmentation of brain MR images through a hidden Markov random field model and the expectation-maximization algorithm 
 IEEE Trans Med Imag 
 20 
 1 
 45 
 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zappoli 
 R 
 
 
 Versari 
 A 
 
 
 Paganini 
 M 
 
 
 Arnetoli 
 G 
 
 
 Muscas 
 GC 
 
 
 Gangemi 
 PF 
 
 
 Arneodo 
 MG 
 
 
 Poggiolini 
 D 
 
 
 Zappoli 
 F 
 
 
 Battaglia 
 A 
 
 
 1995 
 Brain electrical activity (quantitative EEG and bit-mapping neurocognitive CNV components), psychometrics and clinical findings in presenile subjects with initial mild cognitive decline or probable Alzheimer-type dementia 
 Ital J Neurol Sci 
 16 
 6 
 341 
 76 
 Review 
 8626214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zaudig 
 M 
 
 
 1992 
 A new systematic method of measurement and diagnosis of “mild cognitive impairment” and dementia according to ICD-10 and DSM-III-R criteria 
 Int Psychogeriatr 
 4 
 Suppl 2 
 203 
 19 
 1288663 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Grand average across subjects of low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) solutions. These solutions estimate normalized current density at cortical voxels of the head model by LORETA software. Current density at a given cortical voxel was normalized to the mean value of current density across all cortical voxels and all frequency bins from 0.5 to 45 Hz. LORETA solutions estimate distributed EEG cortical sources for delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1 and beta 2 bands in healthy elderly (Nold), amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) subjects. Left side of the maps (top view) corresponds to left hemisphere, while nose is up. Color scale: for each frequency band, normalized current density at all cortical voxels was scaled to the maximum value of normalized current density found in the grand average of occipital (LORETA) alpha 1 solutions in the Nold group. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Mean values (± standard error, SE) of occipital gray matter density (GMD) as estimated from T1-weighted volumetric magnetic resonance images (MR1s) in Nold, MCI, and AD groups. Extraction of the GMD marker was performed by Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL). GMD was defined as the probability of a brain voxel belonging to gray matter and resulted from the use of FSL-BET and FSL-FNIRT tools See Methods for details. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Grand average across subjects of LORETA solutions for cortical regions of interest (ROIs) and frequency bands. These LORETA solutions refer to an ANOVA interaction (F(60,6930)=13.27; p<0.0001) among the factors Group (AD, MCI, Nold), Band (delta, theta, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta 1, beta 2), and ROI (central, frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, limbic). Legend: the rectangles indicate the cortical ROIs and frequency bands in which the LORETA solutions presented the following statistically significant LORETA patterns: Nold > MCI > AD (p<0.05. one way). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Scatterplot of occipital LORETA sources of alpha 1 rhythms (i.e. normalized source current density at occipital ROI) and occipital GMD in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between these two variables (p<0.05). The r and p values are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Scatterplot of temporal LORETA sources of alpha 1 rhythms (i.e. normalized source current density at temporal ROI) and temporal GMD in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between these two variables (p<0.05). The r and p values are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Scatterplot of occipital LORETA sources of alpha 1 rhythms (i.e. normalized source current density at occipital ROI) and mini mental state evaluation (MMSE) score in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between these two variables (p<0.05). The r and p values are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Scatterplot of occipital and temporal GMD in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between these two variables (p<0.05). The r and p values are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Mean ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve illustrating the results of the classification of individual Nold and AD subjects based on amplitude of (LORETA) cortical sources of alpha 1 rhythms (i.e. normalized source current density at central, frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, and limbic ROIs of brain model used by LORETA software). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 Mean ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve illustrating the results of the classification of individual Nold and AD subjects based on occipital GMD. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10 
 
 Scatterplot of occipital scalp alpha 1 power density and occipital GMD in all Nold, MCI and AD subjects. Pearson test evaluated the hypothesis of a correlation between these two variables (p<0.05). The r and p values are reported. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Brodmann areas included in the cortical regions of interest (ROIs) of the present study. LORETA solutions were collapsed in frontal, central, parietal, occipital, temporal and limbic ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 LORETA BRODMANN AREAS INTO THE REGIONS OF INTEREST (ROIs) 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal 
 8, 9, 10, 11, 44, 45, 46, 47 
 
 
 Central 
 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 
 
 
 Parietal 
 5, 7, 30, 39, 40, 43 
 
 
 Temporal 
 20, 21, 22, 37, 38, 41, 42 
 
 
 Occipital 
 17, 18, 19 
 
 
 Limbic 
 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Demographic (age, education, gender) and clinical (Mini Mental State Examination, MMSE) indexes in healthy elderly (Nold), amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nold 
 MCI 
 AD 
 
 
 
 
 
 N 
 
 45 
 100 
 90 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 
 70.1 (±1.1 SE) 
 70.7 (±0.8 SE) 
 72.3 (±0.8 SE) 
 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 
 9.4 (±0.7 SE) 
 8.8 (±0.4 SE) 
 8 (±0.5 SE) 
 
 
 
 Gender (F/M) 
 
 29/16 
 59/41 
 54/36 
 
 
 
 MMSE 
 
 29.1 (±0.2 SE) 
 27.4 (±0.1 SE) 
 19 (±0.4 SE) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Mean scores (± standard error, SE) of neuropsychological tests in two large sub-groups of 100 MCI and 90 AD subjects. Statistical comparison between the mean scores of the two subgroups was performed by t tests for independent populations (p<0.05, one way). The statistical results (t and p value) are reported. 
 TMT A= Trail Making Test part A; TMT B= Trail Making Test part B; TMT B-A= Trail Making Test part B-part A, Rey figures= copy of Rey figures; Rey figures recall= delayed recall of Rey figures; letter fluency= verbal fluency for letters; categorical fluency= verbal fluency for fruits, animals or car trades. 
 
 
 
 
 
 MCI 
 AD 
 t-test 
 
 
 
 
 
 TMT A 
 
 57.2 (±4.2 SE) 
 119.8 (±11.8 SE) 
 t=−5.2, p<0.000001, df=188 
 
 
 
 TMT B 
 
 171.7 (±13.1 SE) 
 340 (±25.8 SE) 
 t=−5.9, p<0.000001, df=188 
 
 
 
 TMT B-A 
 
 114.6 (±11 SE) 
 220.3 (±19.9 SE) 
 t=−4.6, p<0.000005, df=188 
 
 
 
 Rey figures 
 
 28.7 (±0.8 SE) 
 21.8 (±1.2 SE) 
 t=4.8, p<0.000005, df=188 
 
 
 
 Rey figures recall 
 
 12.6 (±0.8 SE) 
 8.1 (±0.6 SE) 
 t=4.4, p<0.00001, df=188 
 
 
 
 Letter fluency 
 
 29 (±1 SE) 
 24.7 (±1.2 SE) 
 t=2.73, p<0.01, df=188 
 
 
 
 Category fluency 
 
 34.5 (±1 SE) 
 28.1 (±1.1 SE) 
 t=4.2, p<0.00005, df=188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights (for review) 
 
 
 
 We tested whether the amplitude of occipital electroencephalographic (EEG) sources is related to neurodegeneration in occipital lobe as measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
 
 
 A positive correlation between occipital gray matter density (GMD) and amplitude of occipital alpha 1 (8–10.5 Hz) sources in healthy elderly (Nold), amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) subjects as a whole group was found. 
 
 
 The amplitude of occipital sources of resting state alpha rhythms is related to AD neurodegeneration in occipital lobe along pathological aging. 
 
 
 
 
