
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101541838 
 38415 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Developmental cognitive neuroscience 
 
 1878-9293 
 1878-9307 
 
 
 25459874 
 4385461 
 10.1016/j.dcn.2014.09.005 
 NIHMS636461 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The Potential of Infant fMRI Research and the Study of Early Life
Stress as a Promising Exemplar 
 
 
 
 
 Graham 
 Alice M. 
 
 a 
 * 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 Jennifer H. 
 
 b 
 
 
 
 Fisher 
 Philip A. 
 
 b 
 
 
 
 Lin 
 Weili 
 
 c 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 Wei 
 
 c 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 Damien A. 
 
 b 
 d 
 e 
 
 
 a Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR, 97239, United States 
 b Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, 1715 Franklin Blvd.,
Eugene, OR 97403, United States 
 c Departments of Radiology and Biomedical Research Imaging Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, United
States 
 d Department of Psychiatry, Oregon Health and Science University, 3181
SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR, 97239, United States 
 e Advanced Imaging Research Center, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR, 97239, United States 
 
 * grahaal@ohsu.edu ,
1-774-563-8299 
 
 
 7 
 11 
 2014 
 
 
 16 
 10 
 2014 
 
 
 4 
 2015 
 
 
 04 
 4 
 2015 
 
 12 
 12 
 39 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) research with infants and
toddlers has increased rapidly over the past decade, and provided a unique
window into early brain development. In the current report, we review the state
of the literature, which has established the feasibility and utility of
task-based fMRI and resting state functional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) during
early periods of brain maturation. These methodologies have been successfully
applied beginning in the neonatal period to increase understanding of how the
brain both responds to environmental stimuli, and becomes organized into
large-scale functional systems that support complex behaviors. We discuss the
methodological challenges posed by this promising area of research. We also
highlight that despite these challenges, early work indicates a strong potential
for these methods to influence multiple research domains. As an example, we
focus on the study of early life stress and its influence on brain development
and mental health outcomes. We illustrate the promise of these methodologies for
building on, and making important contributions to, the existing literature in
this field. 
 
 
 infancy 
 natural sleep fMRI 
 resting state functional connectivity MRI 
 developmental neuroimaging 
 early life stress 
 
 
 
 
 The Emerging Field of fMRI with Infants and Toddlers 
 Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become a widely utilized
tool to characterize brain function across multiple fields of inquiry, including
cognitive neuroscience, developmental and clinical psychology, and medical science
( Biswal et al., 2010 ;  Lee, Smyser, & Shimony, 2013 ;  Luna, Padmanabhan, & O’Hearn, 2010 ;  Mather, Cacioppo, & Kanwisher, 2013 ;  Matthews, Honey, & Bullmore, 2006 ;  Uddin, Supekar, & Menon, 2010 ). This
methodology has provided a means of non-invasively examining how brain systems
efficiently process and organize information. The use of this tool during infancy
and toddlerhood to characterize brain function is a more recent, yet quickly
expanding application of fMRI. In the current report, we provide a critical review
of the current state of the literature employing fMRI with infants and toddlers
during natural sleep. We include the pros and cons of utilizing task-based fMRI, as
well as the benefits and considerations of using resting state functional
connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) to study early brain development. We argue that the
research to date demonstrates the feasibility of conducting both forms of fMRI with
infants and toddlers. The utility of these methods for increasing our understanding
of early periods of brain development will be discussed. 
 We conclude our report by providing an example of an area of research in
which task-based and rs-fcMRI in early development has potential to build on the
existing literature and make a unique contribution. We focus on the study of early
life stress (ELS) and its influence on mental health outcomes across the lifespan.
We argue that the research to date employing task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI with
infants and toddlers indicates the potential for these methods to build on the
existing, rich body of human and animal literature in this area by providing insight
into the influence of ELS on early developing functional brain systems. We highlight
several specific ways in which infant fMRI can build on existing work in this area
and make unique contributions. 
 
 A Brief History of and Introduction to Infant fMRI 
 The use of fMRI methods with infants and toddlers in research settings is
a relatively recent phenomenon. While the earliest studies in the field were
conducted over a decade ago ( Anderson et al.,
2001 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz, Dehaene,
& Hertz-Pannier, 2002 ), only recently has infant functional
imaging begun to show marked growth across institutions. The reasons for this
delay relative to the use of fMRI in other special populations are several.
Collecting high quality MR images typically requires a participant to remain
still throughout one or more scans, lasting 4–8 minutes on average. In
childhood (including children as young as 4 years-of-age
[ Gabard-Durnam et al.,
2014 ;  Tottenham, Shapiro, Telzer,
& Humphreys, 2012 ]) and beyond, this is
accomplished by providing instructions, practice and incentives. For infants,
this is not an option. Early on this barrier was overcome with the use of
sedation ( Souweidane et al., 1999 ;  Yamada et al., 1997 ), which relegated
scanning to clinical settings, and likely produced blunted functional responses
( Qiu, Ramani, Swetye, Rajeevan, &
Constable, 2008 ). Several researchers then pioneered the technique of
conducting fMRI scans with infants during natural sleep ( Anderson et al., 2001 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ;  Redcay, Kennedy, & Courchesne, 2007 ). The success
of studies utilizing the natural sleep method has led to increasing utilization
of fMRI with infants in research contexts, resulting in over twenty currently
published studies ( Tables 1  &  2 ). Despite this success, many
important methodological issues require careful consideration, including the
effects of sleep on brain signaling, and are discussed under
‘Methodological and Ethical Considerations.’ 
 The two forms of functional MRI employed in infant studies are task-based
fMRI and rs-fcMRI. While both methods are based on the Blood Oxygen Level
Dependent (BOLD) signal ( M. D. Fox &
Raichle, 2007 ;  Logothetis &
Wandell, 2004 ;  Raichle & Mintun,
2006 ), they allow for examining two critical aspects of healthy brain
functioning. Task-based fMRI facilitates examination of the brain’s
response to specific aspects of the environment, including cues known to be
important for infant development. These include tactile stimulation, and smells
or sounds associated with caregivers. Rs-fcMRI provides information about how
the brain is intrinsically functionally organized. It is this organization,
which likely allows for proper stimulus response, as well as complex mental
processes necessary for cognitive, emotional and social functioning ( Raichle, 2010 ). Both of these methods rely
on the capacity of fMRI to index brain functioning in specific cortical and
subcortical regions throughout the brain. Below in ‘fMRI in the Context
of Other Developmental Neuroimaging Methods’ we will highlight the
unique advantages of fMRI in the context of other functional neuroimaging
techniques employed in developmental research. 
 
 
 Task-Based fMRI with Infants and Toddlers 
 Implementing task-based fMRI with infants is unquestionably challenging.
It requires infants to sleep through the excessive noise of the MRI during data
acquisition, as well as the sensory stimulation of the paradigm. Despite these
challenges, nine studies successfully using this methodology with participants
ranging from seven days postnatal ( Anderson et
al., 2001 ) to four years-of-age ( Redcay et al., 2007 ) have now been reported ( Table 1 ). The sample sizes and findings reported in
these studies ( Table 1 ) indicate the
feasibility of using this methodology with infants and toddlers to collect
adequate amounts of data to address study aims. 
 Beyond the feasibility of data collection, another important issue is
whether sleeping infants process stimuli presented during task-based paradigms,
and whether they do so in a manner captured by BOLD fMRI. Auditory stimuli are
most commonly used in infant fMRI research. Positive BOLD response in sleeping
infants and toddlers has been observed in auditory processing brain regions
(auditory cortex and auditory processing regions of the middle temporal gyri) in
response to tones, nonvocal naturalistic sounds, vocal sounds and speech ( Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ;  Graham, Fisher, & Pfeifer, 2013 ;  Redcay et al., 2007 ). However, it appears that this
response may be decreased from baseline in very young infants during
presentation of non-naturalistic stimuli (a tone;  Anderson et al., 2001 ). (See ‘Other methodological
considerations’ for further discussion about employing the BOLD
signal as an index of neural activity beginning in infancy.) In
addition to basic sensory processing of auditory stimuli, research to date
provides evidence for differentiation between distinct types of auditory stimuli
during natural sleep. Redcay and colleagues reported distinct patterns of brain
activation in sleeping toddlers (two to four years-old) during presentations of
tones versus nonvocal naturalistic sounds or vocal sounds ( Redcay et al., 2007 ). By establishing the capacity to
characterize neural processing of stimuli at a basic sensory level, this work
provides a foundation for using natural sleep fMRI to examine additional aspects
of stimulus processing. 
 Several studies have demonstrated the utility of natural sleep fMRI for
examining early language and emotion processing. Patterns of brain activation in
sleeping infants indicate registration of speech and vocal properties. For
example, Dehaene-Lambertz and colleagues ( Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ) observed greater activation in the
left angular gyrus and precuneus in response to forward versus backward speech
in sleeping two to three month-old infants. In adults, these regions have been
associated with differentiating between words and non-words ( Binder et al., 2000 ) and with memory retrieval of
verbal information ( Krause et al., 1999 ;
 Nyberg, Forkstam, Petersson, Cabeza, &
Ingvar, 2002 ) respectively. These results were replicated in a study
of two year-old children during natural sleep, which further identified
developmental changes in speech processing from two to three years-of-age ( Redcay, Haist, & Courchesne, 2008 ). In
comparison to two year-olds, three year-olds demonstrate greater engagement of
brain regions in line with speech processing in adults, such as the superior
temporal gyrus, in response to forward versus backward speech ( Redcay et al., 2008 ). Recent findings also indicate
differential brain processing of vocal non-speech sounds (e.g. crying or
laughing) based on emotion category for three to seven month-old infants during
natural sleep. Specifically, during sad versus neutral vocalizations, infants
demonstrate greater activation in the insula and part of the orbitofrontal
cortex ( Blasi et al., 2011 ). These
studies indicate the capacity for natural sleep fMRI to lead to increased
understanding of how the brain processes language and emotion beginning in
infancy. 
 An important consideration for fMRI with sleeping infants was raised by
Dehaene-Lambertz and colleagues ( Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2010 ) in their examination of BOLD
responses to sensory stimuli on an individual subject level. The authors
reported that less than half of sleeping two-month-old infants in their sample
demonstrated activation in auditory brain regions when contrasting stimulus
presentation to no sound (at a statistical threshold of alpha less than .05
uncorrected for multiple comparisons). They suggest that developmental
characteristics of the BOLD signal at this early age (discussed below
under ‘Other methodological considerations’) may
account for the lack of observed activation in auditory regions for some
infants. However, there are multiple factors that may influence whether or not a
BOLD response is captured during acquisition. These factors might include sleep
state, developmental stage, scanner noise and statistical power (these issues
will be discussed in more detail in a subsequent section-’Methodological
and Ethical Considerations’). Thus, it seems appropriate to consider
this larger context when interpreting the presence or absence of activation
within an individual subject. Including or excluding a subject based on the
presence or absence of activity can only be considered in this context, and
should be explained and justified. 
 
 
 Resting State Functional Connectivity MRI with Infants and Toddlers 
 In contrast to task-based fMRI, rs-fcMRI allows for examination of
intrinsic correlated brain activity in the absence of a specific task or
external stimulus. Rs-fcMRI typically involves examining changes in brain signal
over the course of a scan lasting between 5 to 10 minutes, or more. During the
scan, older children and adult participants rest with eyes open or closed, while
infants or toddler participants are asleep. Rs-fcMRI focuses on correlating
fluctuations in the brain signal between a region and all other voxels in the
brain, or between specific brain regions ( Biswal, Yetkin, Haughton, & Hyde, 1995 ). Low frequency changes
in brain signal observed in the absence of stimuli presentation likely reflect
endogenous neural activity ( Murayama et al.,
2010 ;  Schölvinck, Maier, Ye,
Duyn, & Leopold, 2010 ;  Shmuel
& Leopold, 2008 ). Correlations between spontaneous brain activity
over time are posited to represent connectivity between brain regions. Recent
findings provide support for this conceptualization, with patterns of functional
connectivity frequently in line with direct or indirect structural connectivity
between brain regions ( Damoiseaux &
Greicius, 2009 ;  Greicius, Supekar,
Menon, & Dougherty, 2009 ;  Honey
et al., 2009 ;  Miranda-Dominguez et
al., 2014 ;  Shmuel & Leopold,
2008 ). 
 Rs-fcMRI data can be characterized at three levels of analysis ( Churchland & Sejnowski, 1990 ). At the
first level of analysis (circuit level), connections between brain regions are
defined by the strength of the correlation between their signals. The second
level of analysis (network level) characterizes functional brain networks as a
whole instead of as individual connections within the system. Examples of
functional brain networks that have been characterized with rs-fcMRI include the
default network, a group of brain regions that demonstrate higher levels of
activity in the absence of specific external tasks ( Greicius, Krasnow, Reiss, & Menon, 2003 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ), and networks
underlying specific aspects of cognitive control, such as the fronto-parietal
and cingulo-opercular networks ( Dosenbach et
al., 2007 ;  Dosenbach, Fair, Cohen,
Schlaggar, & Petersen, 2008 ). The third level of analysis (global
topology) focuses on interactions within and between functional networks ( Rubinov & Sporns, 2010 ). All three of
these levels of analysis provide information about the functional organization
of the brain that have been shown to be relevant to mental health and specific
aspects of cognitive and emotional functioning ( Fair et al., 2010 ,  2012 ;
 Power, Fair, Schlaggar, & Petersen,
2010 ;  Stevens, Tappon, Garg, &
Fair, 2012 ). 
 For developmental research, rs-fcMRI has the distinct advantage of
documenting coordinated brain functioning across the whole brain in the absence
of tasks, which are challenging to adjust appropriately for a wide age range
( Casey, Galvan, & Hare, 2005 ;
 Uddin et al., 2010 ). Moreover,
research with adults has indicated that while a particular paradigm employed in
task-based fMRI may only activate a subset of regions involved in a broad domain
of functioning, such as memory, rs-fcMRI can yield a more complete
representation of the network of brain regions involved ( M. D. Fox & Raichle, 2007 ;  Vincent et al., 2006 ). This is particularly relevant
for infant fMRI. Because scans are conducted during natural sleep, there are
even more limitations on the types of stimuli and tasks that can be used in the
scanner, decreasing the chances of activating the full set of regions involved
in a behavioral domain of interest. 
 Investigations using rs-fcMRI have indicated the utility of this
methodology for studying the functional development of brain networks across a
wide age range ( Fair et al., 2007 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;  Grayson et al., 2014 ;
 Supekar et al., 2010 ;  Supekar, Musen, & Menon, 2009 ). For
example, several reports have documented a pattern of developmental changes in
the functional connectivity of brain networks from childhood to adulthood that
is characterized by increasing long-range connectivity (between anatomically
distant regions) and decreasing short-range (or localized) connectivity ( Fair et al., 2007 ,  2008 ,  2009 ;
 Kelly et al., 2009 ;  Supekar et al., 2009 ). A similar pattern has been
observed across the first two years-of-life ( Gao
et al., 2009 ,  2011 ,  2013 ;  Gao,
Alcauter, & Smith, 2014 ). Changes across this earlier age range
occur at an extremely rapid rate, such that from two-weeks to one year-of-age,
the number of regions overlapping with the adult default network that evidence
significant functional connectivity during natural sleep increases from six to
thirteen ( Gao et al., 2009 ). Development
does not appear to be linear, with many measures (including the number of
connections showing statistically significant changes in strength) indicating
less change across the second year-of-life in comparison to the first ( Gao et al., 2011 ,  2013 ,  2014 ;
 Figure 1 ). 
 Both environmental input and normative changes within the developing
brain, such as myelination, are posited to account for the observed changes in
connectivity during development ( Fair et al.,
2009 ) with different processes likely at work depending on the age
range of interest ( Gao et al., 2011 ).
These changes are described as reflecting increasing connectivity among regions
within a network (integration) and increasing segregation between regions in
distinct networks (segregation;  Fair et al.,
2007 ,  2009 ;  Gao et al., 2013 ). This demonstration of the
development of large scale, dissociable functional networks has led to increased
understanding of how information is efficiently processed and integrated to
support a range of complex behaviors ( Power et
al., 2011 ). 
 Recent work has drawn attention to the effects of subject
“micro-movements” on developmental rs-fcMRI results ( Fair et al., 2012 ;  Power, Barnes, Snyder, Schlaggar, & Petersen,
2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al.,
2012 ,  2013 ;  Van Dijk, Sabuncu, & Buckner, 2012 ). This issue
and the proposed solutions will be discussed in more detail in the next section.
However, it should be noted that this work focuses on the biasing effects of
motion in research spanning childhood to adulthood, during which time motion
decreases systematically with age. The potential for confounding motion effects
and developmental changes in studies of sleeping infants and toddlers will
likely be different, as movement during scanning is not expected to track with
age in the same manner during this time frame. Specifically, while an awake
middle-aged adult is expected to have greater self-control and therefore move
less than a child during scanning, there is no reason to expect that a sleeping
two-year-old will move less than a sleeping one-year-old during scanning (indeed
the opposite may be true;  Gao, Elton, et al.,
2014 ). 
 In addition to capturing developmental changes in the functional
organization of the brain, rs-fcMRI with infants allows for examination of
functional brain networks that support higher order cognitive and emotional
processes, which cannot be reliably assessed at a behavioral level during
infancy. For example, although the functional significance of the default
network is not definitively known, variability in default network connectivity
has repeatedly been associated with higher order cognitive skills (including
executive functioning [EF]) and related mental health disorders
in children and adults (e.g. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder;  Castellanos et al., 2008 ;  Fair et al., 2010 ,  2012 ;  Kelly, Uddin, Biswal,
Castellanos, & Milham, 2008 ). In addition to the default network,
rs-fcMRI with infants has been used to characterize the early development of the
dorsal attention network ( Gao et al.,
2013 ;  Figure 1 ), which underlies
goal driven selective and sustained attention in adults ( Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008 ), as well as the
salience and frontoparietal networks ( Gao,
Alcauter, & Smith, 2014 ). Advances in behavioral assessment have
allowed for reliable measurement of higher order cognitive skills beginning at
two years-of-age ( Beck, Schaefer, Pang, &
Carlson, 2011 ). However, rs-fcMRI makes it possible to examine the
development of relevant functional brain networks beginning at birth, prior to
the emergence of complex behaviors, potentially allowing for earlier
identification of individual differences that may confer risk or resiliency. 
 
 
 fMRI in the Context of Other Developmental Neuroimaging Methods 
 The primary methods used to date to study brain functioning in infants
are functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and electroencephalography
(EEG). These methods have been widely utilized such that even the more recent of
these techniques, fNIRS, has now been used to examine infant brain functioning
in nearly 100 studies ( Lloyd-Fox et al.,
2014 ). The specific advantages and disadvantages of fMRI are
complementary to these other methods. For example, EEG and fNIRS have superior
temporal resolution in comparison to fMRI and can be conducted in settings of
reduced noise (in contrast to noisy fMRI sequences). EEG and fNIRS can also be
conducted with awake infants engaged in a variety of tasks, which allows for
results that may generalize more readily to real world contexts ( Lloyd-Fox et al., 2009 ;  Lloyd-Fox, Blasi, & Elwell, 2010 ). In
addition, fNIRS facilitates examining aspects of brain metabolism that are
not possible to differentiate with fMRI ( Boas et al., 2003 ;  Dunn et al., 2003 ). Due to this capacity it has contributed
to our understanding of the BOLD signal during infancy (see ‘Other
methodological considerations’;  Liao et al., 2010 ). fMRI complements these other
methods by providing higher spatial resolution throughout the brain. The
specific location of brain activity at the level of millimeters across the
cortex is only possible with fMRI. It is also unique among these techniques in
that it provides the capacity to index functioning of specific subcortical brain
regions, not accessible by these other methods. In the concluding section of
this review we provide examples of how infant fMRI can build on the existing
body of EEG and fNIRS research in the context of ELS research. 
 Structural MRI (sMRI) is another important developmental neuroimaging
tool that provides information about brain morphology not captured by functional
neuroimaging methods. fMRI and sMRI methods can be seen as complementary in
several ways. First, they provide unique sources of information regarding
typical and atypical courses of brain development. For example, preterm infants
without prominent pathology in sMRI scans show differences in how various brain
regions are functionally connected ( Smyser et
al., 2010 ). It has been suggested that functional signal examined
with BOLD fMRI may be more sensitive to individual differences, or atypical
brain organization, in comparison to the structural phenomenon we are currently
able to characterize with sMRI. For this reason, it may be possible to use fMRI
to identify differences in brain functioning at early stages of development that
subsequently manifest as morphological changes observable in older age groups
( Tottenham & Sheridan, 2010 ).
sMRI also represents a complementary methodology because high resolution sMRI
scans are necessary for aligning fMRI scans with a common brain space to conduct
statistical analysis and localize activity. Thus, the two measures are well
suited to be used in tandem to examine brain development from multiple
perspectives. As with other neuroimaging techniques, the level of complexity
involved in fMRI methods is extremely high, allowing for multiple sources of
error in measurements. Thus, convergent evidence across modalities (e.g.  Fransson et al., 2013 ) will be crucial for
advancing the field. 
 
 
 Methodological and Ethical Considerations 
 
 Successful scan completion 
 Despite this promising foundational work with task-based fMRI and
rs-fcMRI during natural sleep, significant methodological challenges and
considerations require attention. As noted earlier, these methods require
infants to sleep in a novel environment with the loud noises of the MRI
machine. Potential sleep disturbances arising from stimuli in task-based
fMRI are a concern as well. Several procedures have been implemented to
improve scan success, and warrant consideration by research teams. To
prepare for a scan, families can be provided with a CD of scanner noises to
acclimate an infant to sleeping with scanner noises in the background ( Redcay et al., 2007 ). Additionally,
research staff can put caregivers and infants at ease through good
communication about what to expect prior to the scan, and demonstrations of
patience and confidence throughout the scan appointment. The scanning
environment can be set up to facilitate sleep by keeping the room relatively
dark, and providing an MRI compatible rocking chair, crib and weighted
blankets. 
 In order to reduce disturbance of sleep due to the sounds of the MRI
machine, researchers often use MRI compatible head phones small enough to
fit an infant or toddler ( Blasi et al.,
2011 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al.,
2010 ;  Redcay et al.,
2007 ). Neonatal ear shields (“Minimuffs,” Natus
Medical Inc., San Carlos, CA;  Anderson et
al., 2001 ;  Blasi et al.,
2011 ) or foam ear plugs ( Redcay
et al., 2007 ) can be used as additional sound protection under
headphones ( Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Redcay et al., 2007 ), or in
conjunction with a vacuum pillow that molds to an infant’s head and
provides additional noise protection ( Lin,
Zhu, Gao, & Chen, 2008 ). Several groups have also added sound
shielding foam to the inside of the scanner bore to reduce the noise of scan
sequences ( Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ).
Additionally, a scan sequence with a lower volume or less jarring quality of
sound can be presented at the beginning of an experiment to help infants
gradually adjust to the noise of the scanner (e.g., a proton density
weighted scan). Finally, to avoid waking infants due to sudden changes in
volume when a scan sequence ends, researchers can play consistent background
noise ( Blasi et al., 2011 ), or
minimize time between scan sequences. Due to the challenging nature of this
methodology, systematic study of malleable factors likely to impact scan
success is warranted. 
 Individual differences, such as age, temperament and health, may
impact scan success, and bias results due to exclusion of highly sensitive
infants. In studying factors that impact scan success, it will be important
to take into account such individual differences as different approaches may
be more or less effective depending on the population being studied. For
example, approaches that increase scan success rate in neonates may be less
effective, or even counter-productive, for obtaining good data with
one-year-old infants. However, this issue is not unique to fMRI with
infants, and also applies to behavioral and physiological measures (e.g.
 Azak, Murison, Wentzel-Larsen, Smith,
& Gunnar, 2012 ). Moreover, successful use of task-based fMRI
with toddlers with ASD (reviewed by  Pierce,
2011 ), which is often associated with sensory sensitivity ( Lane, Young, Baker, & Angley,
2010 ), provides support for the potential utility of this method even
with highly sensitive infants and toddlers. See  Tables 1  and  2  for a review of successful scans included in analyses
(‘N Analyses’) and scans lost due to sleep difficulties,
motion or other reasons (‘N Excluded’) in published studies
employing fMRI or rs-fcMRI with infants during natural sleep. 
 
 
 Effects of sleep on brain signaling 
 Another important issue involves understanding effects of sleep and
variations in sleep stage on brain signal. Methodological challenges have
thus far prevented simultaneous use of EEG and fMRI in infants and toddlers
to allow for tracking sleep state during scans with this age group (although
this work is likely soon to appear as such research has been conducted in
adults;  Boly et al., 2012 ;  Czisch et al., 2002 ;  Horovitz et al., 2008 ;  Kaufmann et al., 2006 ;  Larson-Prior et al., 2009 ;  Portas et al., 2000 ;  Sämann et al., 2011 ;  Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ). While this confound
will need to be addressed in future work, there is evidence that comparable,
albeit not identical, neural processing of auditory stimuli (i.e. infant EEG
and fMRI) and rs-fcMRI occurs during sleep and wake states ( Czisch et al., 2002 ;  Horovitz et al., 2008 ;  Larson-Prior et al., 2009 ;  Portas et al., 2000 ). For example, one ERP study
revealed similar processing of auditory stimuli during sleep and wake states
with preservation of response amplitude and latency across different sleep
stages ( Martynova, Kirjavainen, &
Cheour, 2003 ). Moreover, it appears that learning involving
auditory and basic somatosensory stimuli occurs during sleep for infants
( Cheour et al., 2002 ;  Fifer et al., 2010 ;  Reeb-Sutherland et al., 2011 ), suggesting that
these stimuli are processed beyond a basic, sensory level during sleep. 
 Patterns of brain activation involved in distinguishing between
different types of auditory stimuli (in particular, a subject’s name
versus a tone) also demonstrate similarities across sleep and wake states
( Portas et al., 2000 ). These
results are in line with findings of sleeping infants and toddlers showing
distinct patterns of brain activation in response to different types of
auditory stimuli ( Redcay et al.,
2007 ) and different emotional tones ( Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Graham et al., 2013 ). Finally, simultaneous EEG
and fMRI studies with adults indicate a potentially reduced spatial extent
of activation in the auditory cortex during sleep versus wakefulness, but
consistent amplitude of activation across sleep stages ( Czisch et al., 2002 ;  Portas et al., 2000 ). 
 Combined rs-fcMRI and EEG research with adults indicate functional
connectivity within higher order brain networks, including the default
network ( Horovitz et al., 2009 ), an
attention network, and a cognitive control network ( Larson-Prior et al., 2009 ), remains consistent
across the transition from an awake state to light sleep (non-slow wave and
non-rapid eye movement [non-REM] sleep, respectively).
Rs-fcMRI with sleeping infants has demonstrated functional connectivity
between default network regions ( Gao et al.,
2009 ,  2011 ;  Smyser et al., 2010 ) and patterns of
negative correlations (also referred to as anticorrelations) between default
and dorsal attention network regions ( Gao et
al., 2013 ). These patterns are in line with those observed in
adults in an awake state ( M. D. Fox et al.,
2005 ;  Fransson, 2005 ).
Taken together this work indicates the potential for capturing the
functional architecture of multiple higher order brain networks with
rs-fcMRI during sleep. 
 Despite these similarities, differences in task-based fMRI and
rs-fcMRI results during sleep versus wake, or across different sleep stages
have also been observed. For example, in an fMRI study with adults,
deactivation in the visual cortex during presentation of an auditory
stimulus was observed during sleep stages 1 and 2, and interpreted as a
potential sleep protective mechanism (or a process that prevents
waking despite sensory stimulation;
 Czisch et al., 2002 ). Lower levels of
activation during sleep in higher level processing regions have also been
observed, including reduced parietal, prefrontal and cingulate activation to
auditory stimuli during sleep versus wake ( Portas et al., 2000 ). With regard to rs-fcMRI, simultaneous use
of EEG and rs-fcMRI has revealed preserved functional connectivity between
cortical regions, during light sleep, but decreased connectivity during slow
wave sleep ( Spoormaker et al.,
2010 ). Although connectivity among default network regions is
generally preserved across sleep stages, there is also evidence for region
specific differences, such as decreased posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)
connectivity with other default regions during light sleep (stages 1 and 2;
 Sämann et al., 2011 ),
and decreased medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) connectivity with default
network regions during slow wave sleep ( Horovitz et al., 2009 ;  Sämann et al., 2011 ). These findings indicate the
importance of continued efforts to characterize variation in fMRI and
rs-fcMRI results due to sleep stage. However, these issues are not unique to
rs-fcMRI and fMRI during sleep as variation in attention ( Sander et al., 2005 ) and arousal ( Logothetis, 2008 ;  Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ) impacts results in
studies conducted during awake states. 
 
 
 Motion 
 As noted previously, subject motion constitutes an important
methodological consideration in developmental fMRI and rs-fcMRI studies. Two
key issues include violation of assumptions underlying traditional motion
correction strategies, and the potential for small amounts of motion (i.e.
“micro-movements”) to have systematic biasing effects on
results ( Fair et al., 2012 ;  Power et al., 2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al., 2012 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2012 ;  Yan, Craddock, He, & Milham, 2013 ). Although
these issues are pertinent to all fMRI and rs-fcMRI work, they are
particularly important in developmental samples typically characterized by
larger amounts of motion. Recent work indicates that parameters calculated
with traditional motion correction strategies are not tightly linked to
changes in signal due to motion ( Fair et
al., 2012 ;  Power et al.,
2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al.,
2012 ;  Van Dijk et al.,
2012 ), and that the association between motion and signal change
is not necessarily linear ( Fair et al.,
2012 ;  Van Dijk et al.,
2012 ). Traditional motion correction methods thus leave
substantial amounts of motion related signal unaccounted for. Motion related
signal has been found to have a specific effect on rs-fcMRI data that is
particularly problematic for developmental studies. Motion appears to bias
results toward fewer/weaker long range connections and more/stronger local
connections ( Fair et al., 2012 ;  Power et al., 2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al., 2012 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2012 ;  Yan et al., 2013 ). Although averaging across
multiple trials may diminish effects of motion to some degree in task-based
fMRI compared to rs-fcMRI, similar efforts to understand confounds of motion
are critical for all types of fMRI research ( Power et al., 2012 ;  Siegel et al., 2013 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2012 ;  Yuan et al., 2009 ). 
 Recent work has outlined improved strategies to account for effects
of motion on brain signal. First, examination of motion from frame to frame
(known as framewise displacement; FD), as opposed to a single reference
frame, provides an index more closely related to motion induced changes in
brain signal ( Power et al., 2012 ).
In addition, examination of frame to frame changes in BOLD signal allows for
differentiation of motion versus biologically based signal due to magnitude
( Power et al., 2012 ;  Smyser et al., 2010 ). These two
measures can be used for removal of individual frames (
“scrubbing”;  Power et al.,
2012 ), and as regressors to account for motion ( Fair et al., 2012 ;  Van Dijk et al., 2012 ). Other aspects of data
processing relevant for motion effects on rs-fcMRI include the number of
confound regressors, regression of global whole brain signal and selection
of frequencies to include (band pass filtering)( Satterthwaite et al., 2013 ). Studies utilizing
these new procedures indicate attenuated strength of previously reported
associations between age and increasing long range and decreasing short
range functional connectivity, although the pattern of results remains
( Fair et al., 2012 ;  Satterthwaite et al., 2012 ). 
 Patterns of motion may be markedly different for sleeping infants
and toddlers compared to awake children and adolescents. Sleeping infants
have been noted to startle at the beginning of a new scan sequence and
settle down as the scan progresses, although efforts have been made to
reduce startle by playing consistent background scanner noise ( Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ). A sleeping infant
may also have one or two large, circumscribed movements while adjusting
sleeping position during a scan. Proactive approaches to reducing such
motion during infant scans include swaddling infants prior to scanning
( Anderson et al., 2001 ;  Blasi et al., 2011 ;  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ), and use of a
vacuum pillow fixation device around the body and head ( Blasi et al., 2011 ), or the head only ( Lin et al., 2008 ). Further
investigation of the optimal approach for handling motion in fMRI and
rs-fcMRI research with sleeping infants and toddlers will be necessary to
understand potential advantages and disadvantages of different methods.
However, the methods outlined for older developmental samples provide a
solid framework and powerful tools for this work. 
 
 
 Atlas space 
 Aligning each participant into a common coordinate system or common
stereotaxic space is critical for group studies, but is a particular
challenge for infant studies. Most algorithms to align a brain to an atlas
rely on grey and white matter contrast. Because that contrast is weak in the
newborn (due to reduced myelination), using traditional means to register
the infant brain is problematic. The other difficulty is brain size. By the
time children reach school age the brain is approximately 90% the
size of the adult brain ( Lenroot &
Giedd, 2006 ). Thus, registering children and adult brains to
similar atlas space (e.g. Talairach – see below) is relatively
straightforward. However, the neonatal brain is approximately one-half the
volume of the adult brain ( Knickmeyer et
al., 2008 ), making accurate registration to an adult atlas more
challenging. Several approaches have been taken thus far. The adult
Talaraich atlas ( Talairach & Tournoux,
1988 ) has been used in studies of toddlers ( Dinstein et al., 2011 ;  Eyler, Pierce, & Courchesne, 2012 ;  Redcay & Courchesne, 2008 ;  Redcay et al., 2008 ). The authors
provide evidence for similar within group variability for toddlers and
adults with regard to central sulcus alignment of individual structural
images with the atlas ( Redcay et al.,
2008 ). However, coordinates of the Talaraich atlas do not
accurately indicate specific brain regions in toddlers, necessitating the
use of anatomical landmarks to identify location of fMRI signal ( Redcay et al., 2008 ). This
registration procedure also involves stretching infant brain images to fit
an adult atlas. As an infant brain image is composed of fewer voxels, this
can lead to less independence among voxels. The use of infant
specific atlases, discussed below, represents a potential solution to
this issue. However, direct comparison across age groups requires
transformation to a common stereotaxic space, and therefore reintroduces
this problem. Ongoing efforts are needed to establish an optimal
solution for direct comparison of fMRI results across a wide age
span. 
 The use of an adult or even a pediatric atlas with infant brain
images (including those of neonates, one and two year-olds) can also lead to
misclassification of brain tissue ( Altaye,
Holland, Wilke, & Gaser, 2008 ;  Kazemi, Moghaddam, Grebe, Gondry-Jouet, & Wallois,
2007 ;  Shi et al., 2011 ),
which is improved by using an age-appropriate infant atlas ( Altaye et al., 2008 ;  Kazemi et al., 2007 ;  Shi et al., 2011 ). Some investigators have
created an atlas based on one subject in the age range of interest for the
particular study ( Alcauter, Lin, Smith,
Gilmore, & Gao, 2013 ;  Gao et
al., 2009 ,  2011 ,  2013 ). This approach facilitates focus
on the age range of interest and does not require stretching to an adult
size brain. However, creating an atlas based on one or two individuals can
lead to biases based on the particular morphology of an individual brain.
Moreover, continued use of different atlases across studies may lend to
difficulties in synthesizing the literature as the field grows. 
 High quality atlases for infants within various age ranges have
recently become publicly available ( Fonov,
Evans, Mckinstry, Almli, & Collins, 2009 ;  Sanchez, Richards, & Almli, 2012 ;  Shi et al., 2011 ). One of these is
particularly noteworthy for age-appropriate atlases (for the neonatal period
through adulthood), and conversion algorithms for coordinates corresponding
to frequently used adult atlases ( Fonov et
al., 2011 ,  2009 ). Even
with these advancements, the best solution for making comparisons across age
groups remains unclear. Due to rapid early brain development ( Knickmeyer et al., 2008 ), researchers
have suggested using fine grained atlases for each three month period or
greater during the first year-of-life ( Almli,
Rivkin, & McKinstry, 2007 ;  Sanchez et al., 2012 ). It may therefore be most appropriate to
register to a specific atlas for each age group in a study and then
transform to a common child or adult atlas for making comparisons across
ages. However, research into the effects of such transformations will be
important. Finally, it will be necessary to take into account variation in
the number of voxels for specific atlases and how this impacts correction
for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 Types of stimuli for task-based fMRI 
 Auditory stimuli have been most frequently used in task-based fMRI
with infants. This work has focused on basic differentiation among different
types of sounds ( Redcay et al.,
2007 ), as well as language ( Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ;  Redcay & Courchesne, 2008 ;  Redcay et al., 2008 ), and emotion processing (including vocal
non-speech emotional stimuli [ Blasi
et al., 2011 ] and emotional prosody of speech
[ Graham et al.,
2013 ]). Auditory stimuli specific to the infants’
caregiving environment have also been employed in a study in which
Dehaene-Lambertz and colleagues examined processing of maternal voice in 2
month-old infants ( Dehaene-Lambertz et al.,
2010 ). Visual stimuli have been employed in infant fMRI in one
study, which examined response to flashing lights during natural sleep
( Redcay et al., 2007 ). 
 Conducting scans during natural sleep creates some limitations for
task-based fMRI as only passive stimuli presentation can be employed, and
stimuli of greater intensity may wake infants. However, within these
limitations there are a great range of possible stimuli, which are relevant
to infants’ social, emotional and cognitive development. For
example, adult fMRI work has employed hand holding to examine response to
social somatosensory cues ( Coan, Schaefer,
& Davidson, 2006 ). Response to touch by caregivers and other
forms of somatosensory stimulation can be similarly examined with
infants’ during natural sleep scans. Additional variations on
auditory stimuli involving personally relevant social and emotional cues,
such as parents’ calling an infant’s name or engaging in
conflict with one another. Research with infants documenting basic learning
with auditory and somatosensory stimuli during natural sleep ( Cheour et al., 2002 ;  Fifer et al., 2010 ;  Reeb-Sutherland et al., 2011 ), also suggests the
intriguing possibility of studying the neural basis of early learning with
fMRI. At present, the range of potential stimuli for task-based fMRI studies
with sleeping infants and toddlers remains largely unexplored. 
 
 
 Other methodological considerations 
 With the limited gradient capability, the spatial resolution of
task-based fMRI is normally limited to 2×2×2 millimeters.
While this spatial resolution is generally adequate for adult studies, with
the small size of the infant brain, it imposes limitations for detailed
separation of specific brain regions. Furthermore, preprocessing of
task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI data typically involves spatially smoothing
images prior to group level analyses, further worsening spatial resolution.
It may be beneficial to skip this spatial smoothing step in analysis of fMRI
data with infants, particularly when trying to localize signal to smaller
brain regions, such as the nucleus accumbens and amygdala. Although improved
signal to noise ratio associated with spatially smoothing fMRI data has been
demonstrated ( Strother et al., 2004 ;
 Van Dijk et al., 2010 ), recent
work indicates that the effects on both task-based results and rs-fcMRI
correlations are minimal ( Molloy, Meyerand,
& Birn, 2014 ). In the case of examining small brain
structures, it can even be detrimental. If researchers choose to employ
spatial smoothing it is important to consider that due to dramatic brain
volume growth across infancy and early childhood, effective voxel size
(relative to the whole brain volume) changes over time (given the same
absolute voxel size). One potential remedy is to use adaptive smoothing
strategies (e.g., using brain size normalized smoothing kernels) to reduce
the impact of different “relative voxel sizes” inherent in
developmental studies ( Gao, Alcauter, Elton,
et al., 2014 ). 
 Standard analysis methods for both task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI can
be directly applied to infant studies. However, developmental considerations
and the relative paucity of existing literature should be taken into account
when selecting an analytic method. This is especially true for rs-fcMRI
since there are a multitude of different analysis methods. One example is
the choice between seed-based analysis and more data-driven independent
component analysis (ICA). While seed-based analysis requires identifying
 a priori  brain regions of interest for analysies, ICA
can be used to examine signal from voxels across the whole brain and to
categorize voxels into networks based on statistically identified shared
variance. ICA has been utilized in initial infant studies to examine
putative precursors of adult functional brain networks without biasing
results by anchoring networks in regions identified in adult research as
part of specific brain networks ( Fransson et
al., 2009 ;  Gao et al.,
2009 ;  Liu, Flax, Guise, Sukul,
& Benasich, 2008 ). However, ICA results can be biased due to
decisions about how many components to incorporate into the model, and how
to interpret which components represent functional brain networks ( M. D. Fox, Snyder, Vincent, & Raichle,
2007 ). Both types of analyses have strengths and weaknesses
( M. D. Fox & Raichle, 2007 ;
 Hagmann, Grant, & Fair,
2012 ), and there is some evidence for convergent results across these
methodologies. Such evidence has been provided through direct comparison of
results in healthy adult subjects ( Rosazza,
Minati, Ghielmetti, Mandelli, & Bruzzone, 2012 ), and through
consistent findings regarding the emergence of functional networks in infant
studies that utilize seed-based analytic techniques ( Gao et al., 2011 ,  2013 ) and ICA ( Gao, Alcauter,
& Smith, 2014 ;  Gao et al.,
2009 ). 
 Finally, both task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI rely on the BOLD signal
as an index of brain functioning. It is therefore very important to take
into account potential developmental changes in neurovascular coupling,
which refers to the relationship between neural activity and the ratio of
oxygenated to deoxygenated hemoglobin (oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhomoglobin) -
the source of the BOLD signal. For example, some studies suggest differences
in the BOLD signal between older and younger adults may be attributable to
aging-related changes in non-neuronal factors ( D’Esposito, Deouell, & Gazzaley,
2003 ), such as resting cerebral blood flow ( Ances et al., 2009 ). In contrast, developmental
fMRI research provides evidence for consistency in the association between
neural activity and the BOLD signal among children and adults ( Kang, Burgund, Lugar, Petersen, &
Schlaggar, 2003 ;  Wenger,
Visscher, Miezin, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2004 ), and among
children with and without neurodevelopmental disabilities ( Feczko et al., 2012 ). This work provides support
for interpreting differences in the BOLD signal between these groups as
reflective of differences in neural activity. 
 However, this work has been conducted in children, and unique
aspects of brain vasculature during early infancy warrant attention, as
divergent patterns of neurovascular coupling may exist (see  Hagmann et al., 2012 ). Findings with animals and
humans have indicated potential differences in the latency, amplitude ( Arichi et al., 2012 ;  Colonnese, Phillips, Constantine-Paton, Kaila, &
Jasanoff, 2008 ), and direction ( Kozberg, Chen, Deleo, Bouchard, & Hillman, 2013 ) of the BOLD
response to stimulus in early infancy compared to later developmental
stages. More direct evidence from fNIRS studies with infants reveals a
pattern of response to stimuli (increasing oxy- and decreasing
deoxyhomoglobin) that is qualitatively similar to the adult pattern of
neurovascular coupling ( Karen et al.,
2008 ;  Liao et al., 2010 ;
 Taga, Asakawa, Maki, Konishi, &
Koizumi, 2003 ;  Watanabe, Homae,
Nakano, & Taga, 2008 ). However, additional research in this
area is needed as fNIRS studies have also yielded some mixed evidence ( Bortfeld, Wruck, & Boas, 2007 ;
 Fava, Hull, Baumbauer, & Bortfeld,
2013 ;  Kusaka et al.,
2004 ;  Meek et al., 1998 ).
Perhaps most importantly, functional neuroimaging modalities that do not
depend on the BOLD signal, including EEG and diffuse optical tomography,
have demonstrated consistency with fMRI findings in neonates ( Fransson et al., 2013 ;  White, Liao, Ferradal, Inder, & Culver,
2013 ). Thus, although additional research into developmental
differences in the link between neural activity and the BOLD signal will be
of great importance, the findings to date provide support for the capacity
of infant fMRI to meaningfully characterize early brain functioning. 
 
 
 Ethical considerations 
 In addition to methodological considerations, important ethical
issues in conducting fMRI research with infants and toddlers warrant
attention. Many of these issues, while highly relevant to research with
infants, are not unique to fMRI, and are beyond the scope of the present
review (see  Axelin & Salanterä,
2008 ;  Diekema, 2009 ).
Ethical considerations specific to infant fMRI research include the need to
adequately explain the fMRI procedure to caregivers with varying levels of
education and from different cultural backgrounds to allow them to give
informed consent. As part of this process, caregivers need to have a good
understanding of safety protocols related to fMRI, including fMRI
contraindications ( Downie & Marshall,
2007 ;  Hinton, 2002 ). As an
additional safety measure for infants, pre-screening for fMRI
contraindications should include caregivers and the primary care physician
to ensure that there is no reason an fMRI protocol would pose a risk to a
particular infant. 
 Beyond ensuring safety, the extent to which an fMRI protocol may be
distressing to an infant is an important ethical consideration. First, it
should be noted that because infants are sleeping during the protocol it has
potential to be less distressing than common behavioral paradigms used in
research with infants to illicit stress responses (for a review see  Gunnar, Talge, & Herrera, 2009 ).
However, infants often wake up during scans and may experience distress due
to the novel surroundings and fMRI scan noises. These issues can be
addressed by the use of high quality sound protection throughout scanning
(as discussed under ‘Successful scan completion’), and
careful monitoring throughout the scan. Careful monitoring involves having a
researcher in close proximity to the infant throughout the scan, and use of
various techniques to monitor infant wakefulness (including infrared cameras
in darker settings or strategically placed mirrors in lighter settings that
allow for viewing the infant’s face in the scanner). Through careful
monitoring researchers can observe and respond quickly to any signs of
wakefulness or distress. Contingent response to distress by caregivers or
researchers experienced in working with infants is an important component of
ensuring that infant fMRI protocols don’t serve as a significant
source of stress to infants. As with the methodological factors discussed
previously, systematic study of these issues will add to
researchers’ ability to make informed decisions about the best
protocols to employ. For example, peripheral measures of the autonomic
nervous system or neuroendocrine stress response system could be employed to
assess physiological arousal before and after different scanning
protocols. 
 
 
 
 
 Application of Infant fMRI to Build on Current Approaches for Studying
 Early Life Stress  (ELS) 
 The foundational work employing fMRI with infants during natural sleep
indicates the potential utility of this method for advancing research in multiple
areas. However, at present, few domains of study have harnessed this potential. As a
notable exception, investigators examining the etiology of autism have successfully
employed infant fMRI to identify early biological markers of autism, and provide a
model for the early neurodevelopmental trajectory of this disorder ( Eyler et al., 2012 ;  Pierce, 2011 ). In the remainder of this article we provide an example of
one area of research that has yet to take full advantage of the potential
contributions of infant fMRI, but seems particularly well poised to benefit from
this methodolology. We focus on the study of ELS, and specifically research into the
effects of ELS on functional brain development with implications for subsequent
mental health. The guiding theoretical principles and extensive empirical work in
this area involving fMRI with older children and adults, and other imaging
approaches with infants, set the stage for infant fMRI research to make a
significant contribution. While it is beyond the scope of this article to provide a
thorough review of the research examining effects of ELS on brain development and
mental health (for reviews see  Loman & Gunnar,
2010 ;  Lupien, McEwen, Gunnar, &
Heim, 2009 ;  Shonkoff & Garner,
2012 ;  Tottenham & Sheridan,
2010 ), we highlight aspects of this literature that illustrate the
potential role of infant fMRI in advancing the state of this field. 
 
 Typical Development and Developmental Programming 
 The concept of developmental programming represents a guiding
theoretical principle in the study of ELS on brain development. This concept
suggests that during times of rapid growth, systems are more vulnerable to
disorganizing influences ( Buss, Entringer, &
Wadhwa, 2012 ;  Gluckman & Hanson,
2004 ;  Seckl, 2008 ). During
the prenatal period, brain development proceeds from the basic foundational
level of neural tube formation, to the migration of neurons, to the initial
myelination of axons and formation of synapses (reviewed by  Fair & Schlaggar, 2008 ;  Lenroot & Giedd, 2006 ). Rapid brain development
continues during infancy with frontal and primary sensory cortex showing
70–80% increases in synaptic density over the first year and
half of life ( Huttenlocher & Dabholkar,
1997 ), and brain volume increasing four-fold from birth to four years
of age, accompanied by a rapid decline in the ratio of gray to white matter
volume (indicative of increasing myelination;  Courchesne et al., 2000 ). During these periods of rapid change the
brain is sensitive to environmental input, which is both necessary for healthy
development, and potentially harmful depending on multiple factors, including
the nature and timing of the input ( S. E. Fox,
Levitt, & Nelson, 2010 ;  Knudsen,
2004 ). In order to understand healthy or maladaptive patterns of
brain development, it has been suggested that examination of brain systems begin
as early as possible to tease apart environmental influences from development of
compensatory strategies or psychopathology ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2006 ). 
 
 
 Building on the Dominant Functional Neuroimaging Techniques Used with Infants
to Study ELS 
 To date, fNIRs and EEG have been the most common functional neuroimaging
methodologies used to study effects of ELS on brain functioning in infancy.
fNIRS and EEG studies have shed light on infants’ neural processing of a
range of stimuli highly relevant to experiences of ELS and the caregiving
environment including touch ( Kida &
Shinohara, 2013 ), human vocalization ( Grossmann, Oberecker, Koch, & Friederici, 2010 ), emotional tone
of voice ( Grossmann, Striano, & Friederici,
2005 ;  Santesso, Schmidt, &
Trainor, 2007 ), maternal voice ( Saito, Fukuhara, Aoyama, & Toshima, 2009 ) and breast milk odor
( Aoyama et al., 2010 ). This work has
been conducted in normative samples, as well as in infants exposed to ELS and at
risk for poor outcomes. Infant fMRI has potential to contribute to this
literature by increasing capacity to localize neural processing of stressor
relevant stimuli, and to identify emerging differences in specific brain systems
relevant to mental health outcomes. 
 
 Application of infant fMRI to preterm birth and experiences of pain in
the NICU 
 Infants born prematurely are a population at increased risk of
exposure to ELS, as well as poor mental health and neurodevelopmental
outcomes ( Grunau, 2013 ;  Johnson & Marlow, 2014 ). This
phenomenon has been well studied with fNIRS and EEG. For example, fNIRS has
been used to shed light led on preterm infants’ neural processing of
routine, painful medical procedures (e.g. heel stick) in the neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU). This work has identified cortical involvement in
pain processing beginning at 25 weeks postmenstrual age ( Bartocci, Bergqvist, Lagercrantz, & Anand,
2006 ;  Slater et al.,
2006 ). Additional fNIRS and EEG research with preterm infants has
indicated heightened sensitivity of the neonatal brain (compared to term
infants) to painful stimuli ( Slater et al.,
2010 ), and limited capacity to distinguish painful stimuli from
other forms of somatosensory stimulation prior to 35 weeks gestational age
( Fabrizi et al., 2011 ). This
cortical involvement in pain processing and heightened sensitivity is
proposed to impact developing brain systems, and contribute to long term
differences in pain perception, and other neurodevelopmental outcomes ( Fabrizi et al., 2011 ;  Grunau, 2013 ;  Slater et al., 2010 ). However, the specific brain regions and
systems involved, and how these systems are implicated in mental health
outcomes known to be impacted by preterm birth, remain unknown. 
 The examination of preterm infants with fMRI during natural sleep
has the potential to fill this void. Rs-fcMRI studies with preterm infants
have demonstrated the feasibility and sensitivity of this method for
examining brain functioning in this population. Specifically, preterm birth
has been associated with decreased connectivity among two key default
network regions ( Smyser et al.,
2010 ). Other work has shown that a high number of cumulative medical
procedures from birth until term age equivalent predicts decreased
inter-hemispheric connectivity in the temporal lobe ( G. C. Smith et al., 2011 ). The association
between preterm birth and emerging default network connectivity may be
relevant for subsequent mental health, as connectivity of this network has
repeatedly been associated with mental health outcomes in children and
adults ( Berman et al., 2011 ;  Fair et al., 2010 ,  2012 ;  M. D. Fox
& Greicius, 2010 ;  Uddin et
al., 2010 ;  Whitfield-Gabrieli
& Ford, 2012 ). Future studies can build on this initial work
by examining functional brain systems implicated in pain processing or in
aspects of cognition and emotion often impacted by preterm birth. 
 In addition to lending insight into cumulative effects of preterm
birth and medical procedures on brain functioning, infant fMRI can likely
contribute to understanding the immediate neural sequelae of processing pain
and somatosensory stimuli. Although it would not be possible to conduct fMRI
with infants simultaneous to painful medical procedures (as in the EEG and
fNIRS research), scans conducted soon afterwards may identify residual
effects of stress on functional brain systems. This possibility is suggested
by rs-fcMRI work in adults demonstrating alterations in functional
connectivity among brain regions important for processing stress following
the conclusion of a stress induction paradigm ( van Marle, Hermans, Qin, & Fernández,
2010 ). Task-based fMRI can also contribute information about
specific cortical and subcortical brain regions involved in processing of
somatosensory stimuli, which will likely be relevant for understanding
preterm infants’ processing of pain ( Fabrizi et al., 2011 ). This work will be important for building
on the extant EEG and fNIRS research to increase understanding of preterm
infants’ experiences in the NICU that may contribute to differences
in neurodevelopmental and mental health outcomes. 
 
 
 Application of infant fMRI to understanding effects of moderate, common
forms of familial stress 
 Preterm birth and medical procedures represent relatively extreme
forms of ELS. fMRI with infants can also build on the extant literature
focused on functional brain development in the context of more normative
variation in the early environment, or moderate forms of ELS. EEG work with
infants has indicated that normative variation in maternal caregiving
behaviors (e.g. maternal sensitivity and intrusiveness during feeding and
changing) during the first year of life is associated with differences in
brain activity. For example, lower quality maternal caregiving at 9 months
has been associated with infants showing greater right frontal EEG asymmetry
at a concurrent assessment ( Hane & Fox,
2006 ) and at 3 years of age ( Hane, Henderson, Reeb-Sutherland, & Fox, 2010 ). Frontal EEG
asymmetry is of interest for research into the effects of ELS on development
due to associations of this measure with temperament ( N. A. Fox et al., 1995 ;  N. A. Fox, Henderson, Rubin, Calkins, & Schmidt,
2001 ;  McManis, Kagan, Snidman,
& Woodward, 2002 ) and internalizing and externalizing
behaviors in young children ( C. L. Smith
& Bell, 2010 ), and symptoms of depression and anxiety in
adults ( Stewart, Bismark, Towers, Coan,
& Allen, 2010 ;  Thibodeau,
Jorgensen, & Kim, 2006 ). However, frontal EEG asymmetry is a
broad measure of brain functioning that does not distinguish among the
contributions of specific frontal or subcortical brain regions. 
 Recent work in adults has demonstrated the utility of fMRI to
localize asymmetry to the functioning of specific frontal brain regions in
order to increase understanding of the associations between asymmetry and
behavioral outcomes and psychopathology (Miller et al 2013 and Herrington,
2010). Miller reviews evidence suggesting that inconsistencies in the
associations between frontal EEG asymmetry and behavioral outcomes can be
addressed to some extent by taking advantage of information about distinct
roles for different parts of the frontal cortex in cognitive and emotional
functioning. Along these lines, fMRI research in infants has potential to
build on the rich foundation of frontal EEG asymmetry research to examine
effects of ELS on functional asymmetry within specific frontal and
subcortical brain regions. While frontal asymmetry has not yet been examined
with infant fMRI, existing work has demonstrated the capacity for infant
fMRI to reveal an association between a moderate form of ELS and functioning
of specific regions of the frontal cortex ( Graham et al., 2013 ). Specifically, higher levels of nonphysical
conflict between parents appear to be associated with 6–12 month-old
infants showing greater reactivity of the rostral anterior cingulate cortex
(rACC; along with subcortical regions including the thalamus and
hypothalamus) to very angry tone of voice ( Graham et al., 2013 ;  Figure
2 ). Although this study did not identify a lateralized prefrontal
region, it demonstrates the sensitivity of infant fMRI to identify an
association between a moderate source of ELS and the functioning of a
specific prefrontal brain region implicated in mental health outcomes at
later developmental stages. 
 
 
 
 Building on the fMRI Literature in Children to Study ELS 
 Research with children old enough to comply with instructions for
scanning while awake has taken advantage of the greater spatial resolution of
fMRI to study effects of ELS on the functioning of specific brain systems.
Differences in brain functioning in school-aged children and adolescents have
been associated with various forms of ELS ranging from more severe (e.g.
maltreatment [ Bruce et al., 2013 ;
 McCrory et al., 2013 ;  Mueller et al., 2010 ] and
institutionalized rearing [ Mehta et
al., 2010 ;  Tottenham et al.,
2011 ]) to more moderate (e.g. differences in socioeconomic
status [ Muscatell et al., 2012 ;
 Sheridan, Sarsour, Jutte,
D’Esposito, & Boyce, 2012 ]). These differences in
brain functioning are evident in the context of tasks targeting multiple domains
relevant to mental health, and cognitive and emotional functioning more
generally, such as inhibitory control ( Bruce et
al., 2013 ;  Mueller et al.,
2010 ), reward processing ( Mehta et
al., 2010 ), encoding of social information ( Muscatell et al., 2012 ) and emotion processing ( Gee et al., 2013 ;  McCrory et al., 2011 ,  2013 ;  Suzuki et al.,
2014 ;  Tottenham et al.,
2011 ). Multiple cortical and subcortical brain regions appear to be
involved in mediating effects of ELS on functioning in these domains, including
among others, the amygdala ( McCrory et al.,
2011 ,  2013 ;  Muscatell et al., 2012 ;  Tottenham et al., 2011 ), rACC ( Gee et al., 2013 ;  Suzuki et al., 2014 ), dorsal ACC ( Bruce et al., 2013 ;  Mueller et al.,
2010 ), and striatum ( Mehta et al.,
2010 ). Rs-fcMRI research in adolescents also indicates associations
between ELS and coordinated functioning of the amygdala and MPFC in the absence
of a specific task ( Burghy et al., 2012 ;
 Herringa et al., 2013 ). 
 This work suggests widespread effects of ELS involving multiple brain
systems both at rest and during engagement in a range of cognitive, social and
emotional tasks. In addition, this research has provided an important bridge to
the extensive animal literature documenting the particular sensitivity of
certain brain regions, such as the amygdala, to ELS ( Malter Cohen et al., 2013 ;  Sánchez et al., 2001 ;  Tottenham & Sheridan, 2010 ;  Tottenham, 2014 ). Extending this work down to infancy
with natural sleep fMRI can facilitate investigation of several topics that are
challenging to examine at older ages. First, infant fMRI has potential to
address unanswered questions about the effects of timing of ELS on functional
brain systems. Second, infant fMRI may be used to hone in on initial, core
effects of ELS that precede a more widespread impact on multiple brain systems
and behavioral domains. In a related line of inquiry, this tool will likely be
helpful for distinguishing between aspects of brain functioning that precede ELS
exposure and confer risk for poor outcomes, versus aspects of brain functioning
that are particularly malleable in the context of ELS. Investigation of such
topics with infant fMRI has potential to increase understanding of the
heterogeneous outcomes associated with ELS, and the methods to best support
optimal outcomes. 
 
 Potential for infant fMRI to examine timing effects of ELS 
 Due to the rapid pace of brain development during the pre- and
postnatal periods, the timing of exposure to ELS has important implications
for how brain systems and mental health will be impacted. This has been
demonstrated repeatedly in the animal literature ( Sánchez et al., 2001 ;  Tottenham & Sheridan, 2010 ;  Uchida et al., 2010 ;  Vázquez, Van Oers, Levine, & Akil,
1996 ), and to some extent in the human literature ( Buss, Davis, et al., 2012 ;  Rutter, 1998 ;  Tottenham et al., 2010 ). However, basic questions
regarding effects of timing remain unanswered in the human literature. For
example, potentially distinct effects of pre- versus postnatal stress on
functional brain development are poorly understood. As stressful
environments are not usually confined to the postnatal period, this is an
important area of inquiry. Because infant fMRI can characterize neural
response to environmental stimuli and intrinsic functional brain networks
shortly after birth, it increases the capacity to isolate potential effects
of the prenatal environment. Moreover, neonatal brain functioning can be
used as a baseline to examine effects of postnatal stress on functional
brain development over time. Importantly, the animal literature has shown
that pre- and postnatal stress can have opposing effects on biological
systems ( Lehmann, Stöhr, &
Feldon, 2000 ;  Love &
Williams, 2008 ;  Vallée
et al., 1999 ). Thus, examining brain functioning with fMRI
beginning in childhood, or even late infancy, may obscure opposing effects
of stress at different time points. 
 Although only experimental manipulations with animal models can
distinguish causal effects of pre- versus postnatal stress, and specific
effects of timing within the pre- and postnatal periods, infant fMRI can
move human research closer to this foundational work. Infant fMRI studies
beginning in the neonatal period cannot feasibly be conducted in certain
settings, such as in the context of institutionalized rearing. However, such
work is possible in other samples at risk for exposure to ELS. For example,
previous study designs have involved recruitment of mothers with
psychopathology during pregnancy, and scanning of infants beginning in the
neonatal period (e.g.  Gilmore et al.,
2010 ;  Shi et al.,
2012 ). 
 
 
 Infant fMRI to increase understanding of the initial impact of ELS on
core brain regions and networks 
 Related to the issue of timing of ELS, is the timing of emerging
differences in brain functioning following exposure to ELS. Infant fMRI has
potential to increase understanding of the core, initial effects of ELS on
functional brain systems. Different brain regions and networks will be more
vulnerable to the impact of ELS at different stages of development ( Knudsen, 2004 ;  Le Grand, Mondloch, Maurer, & Brent, 2003 ;
 Tottenham & Sheridan, 2010 ).
However, environmentally induced changes affecting one aspect of brain
functioning are likely to have a ripple effect as brain regions and networks
function in concert to support higher level emotional and cognitive
processes ( S. E. Fox et al., 2010 ;
 Le Grand, Mondloch, Maurer, &
Brent, 2001 ). The fMRI work in children suggests a widespread
impact of ELS on multiple brain systems. However this work has not addressed
whether altered functioning in certain brain regions or networks represents
a core feature of the initial impact of ELS, which precedes broader
effects. 
 fMRI research with infants beginning within a proximal time frame of
ELS provides an opportunity to examine the initial impact of ELS on brain
functioning, and subsequent potential ripple effects. For example, a recent
rs-fcMRI study with infants demonstrated effects of low socioeconomic status
within the first year of life on the connectivity of the default mode
network, but not on later developing functional networks involved in
cognitive control ( Gao, Alcauter, Elton, et
al., 2014 ). Continued longitudinal work with such a sample could
examine whether these initial differences in the strength of default network
connectivity predict subsequent differences in other functional networks,
and in cognitive and mental health outcomes of interest. 
 
 
 Preexisting aspects of brain functioning that confer risk 
 Similarly, there is a lack of clarity regarding preexisting aspects
of brain functioning that predispose infants to maladjustment following
stress exposure (i.e. risk factors), versus aspects of brain functioning
impacted by ELS that confer risk for poor outcomes. Research with adults
demonstrates how longitudinal fMRI studies can begin to shed light on this
issue. For example, in adult combat paramedics, preexisting high levels of
amygdala reactivity (prior to deployment) predict emergence of stress
related symptoms following deployment, while changes in reactivity and
functional connectivity of the hippocampus over the course of deployment are
associated with increases in stress related symptoms ( Admon et al., 2009 ). Additional work suggests
that greater preexisting amygdala reactivity (prior to deployment) in
combination with decreased nucleus accumbens activity over the course of
deployment is a particularly strong predictor of increases in stress
symptomatology ( Admon et al., 2012 ).
It remains unknown whether mental health outcomes associated with ELS are
similarly influenced by preexisting activity in certain brain regions and
plasticity in the functioning of others. Infants with certain neural risk
factors may require additional support to avoid poor outcomes even if only
exposed to very mild levels of ELS, while infants without such risk factors
may thrive even when exposed to higher levels of ELS. Infant fMRI is the
only methodology that allows for examining the early functioning of specific
subcortical brain regions that are likely to be important for understanding
maladaptive and adaptive responses to ELS. 
 
 
 Relevance of Infant fMRI for Intervention Related to ELS 
 Application of infant fMRI to the study of ELS has potential to
inform prevention and intervention efforts during early developmental
periods when such services are likely to be most impactful for establishing
healthy developmental trajectories. First, increased understanding of
individual differences which contribute to vulnerability or resilience to
ELS can contribute to targeted prevention work. Although fMRI scans do not
represent a feasible means of identifying at-risk infants and toddlers, such
work can lead to an increasingly in depth understanding of risk and
resilience, and more readily identifiable behavioral or physiological
markers. Second, prevention work can be informed by associations between
sources of ELS during specific time frames, and changes in brain functioning
associated with later developing behavioral symptoms. Identification of
early changes in brain functioning may provide a link between specific
sources of ELS and behavioral symptoms that emerge later when the complexity
of behavioral repertoires and environmental demands increase. These methods
additionally provide a means of examining neural mechanisms underlying
effective intervention for children exposed to ELS. Targeted prevention and
intervention strategies based on this work can facilitate efficient use of
resources. 
 
 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 The use of fMRI during natural sleep represents a promising methodology for
advancing understanding of functional brain development. Research employing
task-based and rs-fcMRI methods with infants during natural sleep has become
increasingly popular to the extent that a foundational literature has been
established. This foundational work demonstrates the feasibility and utility of
these methods for examining how the infant brain responds to environmental stimuli,
and how it becomes organized into functional networks that facilitate efficient
communication among brain regions. Considered in the context of more widely used
functional neuroimaging methods for infants (including EEG and fNIRs), fMRI has
great potential to complement and advance the existing literature due to its unique
advantage with regard to spatial resolution. Indeed, convergent evidence across
modalities will be essential for deepening the current understanding of early brain
development. 
 The methodological challenges associated with task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI
with infants and toddlers during natural sleep necessitate careful consideration and
further study. However, progress has already been made in understanding and
addressing these challenges. Moreover, the literature to date documenting the
approaches of various research groups provides a framework to inform careful
decision making about methodological issues. We hope that the increasing use of
sleep fMRI, and systematic study of methodological questions will lead to further
insight into the best means of addressing these challenges. Some of the challenges
may also highlight aspects of brain development that receive little attention. For
example, increasing study of the issues regarding sleep state may draw attention to
the sensitivity of the infant brain to environmental conditions even during
sleep. 
 Despite the methodological challenges, task-based fMRI and rs-fcMRI during
natural sleep have potential to advance research across multiple domains. The
literature examining effects of ELS on brain functioning and associated mental
health difficulties is a prime example of an area that stands to benefit from the
application of infant fMRI. The research to date in this area indicates an important
role for specific brain systems in mediating effects of ELS on mental health
outcomes. The use of infant fMRI allows for examining these systems within a
proximal time frame of ELS, and within the window of rapid brain development and
heightened vulnerability to disorganizing influences. The wide ranging effects of
ELS on multiple domains of functioning may be understood through a new lens by
examining early emerging effects on developing brain systems and their potential to
subsequently influence additional aspects of brain functioning. Comprehensive
developmental models stemming from such work are needed to increase understanding of
how brain development proceeds under a variety of environmental conditions. 
 
 
 
 Support for this work was provided by NRSA F31-10667639 (AG); R00 MH091238 (DF), and
R01 MH096773 (DF). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Admon 
 R 
 
 
 Lubin 
 G 
 
 
 Rosenblatt 
 JD 
 
 
 Stern 
 O 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Assaf 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 2012 
 Imbalanced Neural Responsivity to Risk and Reward Indicates
Stress Vulnerability in Humans 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 10.1093/cercor/bhr369 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Admon 
 R 
 
 
 Lubin 
 G 
 
 
 Stern 
 O 
 
 
 Rosenberg 
 K 
 
 
 Sela 
 L 
 
 
 Ben-Ami 
 H 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 Human vulnerability to stress depends on amygdala’s
predisposition and hippocampal plasticity 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 106 
 33 
 14120 
 5 
 10.1073/pnas.0903183106 
 19666562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alcauter 
 S 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 2013 
 Consistent Anterior-Posterior Segregation of the Insula During
the First 2 Years of Life 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1 
 12 
 10.1093/cercor/bht312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 Rivkin 
 MJ 
 
 
 McKinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 2007 
 The NIH MRI study of normal brain development (Objective-2):
newborns, infants, toddlers, and preschoolers 
 NeuroImage 
 35 
 1 
 308 
 25 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.08.058 
 17239623 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Altaye 
 M 
 
 
 Holland 
 S 
 
 
 Wilke 
 M 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 2008 
 Infant brain probability templates for MRI segmentation and
normalization 
 NeuroImage 
 43 
 4 
 721 
 730 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.060.Infant 
 18761410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ances 
 BM 
 
 
 Liang 
 CL 
 
 
 Leontiev 
 O 
 
 
 Perthen 
 JE 
 
 
 Fleisher 
 AS 
 
 
 Lansing 
 AE 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of aging on cerebral blood flow, oxygen metabolism, and
blood oxygenation level dependent responses to visual
stimulation 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 30 
 4 
 1120 
 32 
 10.1002/hbm.20574 
 18465743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AW 
 
 
 DP 
 
 
 Marois 
 R 
 
 
 Colson 
 ER 
 
 
 DM 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 Ment 
 LR 
 
 
 2001 
 Neonatal auditory activation detected by functional magnetic
resonance imaging 
 Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 19 
 1 
 5 
 11295339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aoyama 
 S 
 
 
 Toshima 
 T 
 
 
 Saito 
 Y 
 
 
 Konishi 
 N 
 
 
 Motoshige 
 K 
 
 
 Ishikawa 
 N 
 
 
 Kobayashi 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Maternal breast milk odour induces frontal lobe activation in
neonates: a NIRS study 
 Early Human Development 
 86 
 9 
 541 
 5 
 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2010.07.003 
 20675084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arichi 
 T 
 
 
 Fagiolo 
 G 
 
 
 Varela 
 M 
 
 
 Melendez-Calderon 
 A 
 
 
 Allievi 
 A 
 
 
 Merchant 
 N 
 
 
 Edwards 
 AD 
 
 
 2012 
 Development of BOLD signal hemodynamic responses in the human
brain 
 NeuroImage 
 63 
 2 
 663 
 73 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.054 
 22776460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Axelin 
 A 
 
 
 Salanterä 
 S 
 
 
 2008 
 Ethics in neonatal pain research 
 Nursing Ethics 
 15 
 4 
 492 
 9 
 10.1177/0969733007086017 
 18515438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Azak 
 S 
 
 
 Murison 
 R 
 
 
 Wentzel-Larsen 
 T 
 
 
 Smith 
 L 
 
 
 Gunnar 
 MR 
 
 
 2012 
 Maternal depression and infant daytime cortisol 
 Developmental Psychobiology 
 55 
 4 
 334 
 51 
 10.1002/dev.21033 
 22488245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bartocci 
 M 
 
 
 Bergqvist 
 LL 
 
 
 Lagercrantz 
 H 
 
 
 Anand 
 KJS 
 
 
 2006 
 Pain activates cortical areas in the preterm newborn
brain 
 Pain 
 122 
 1–2 
 109 
 17 
 10.1016/j.pain.2006.01.015 
 16530965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 C 
 
 
 Pang 
 K 
 
 
 Carlson 
 SM 
 
 
 2011 
 Executive Function in Preschool Children: Test-Retest
Reliability 
 Journal of Cognition and Development 
 12 
 2 
 169 
 193 
 10.1080/15248372.2011.563485.Executive 
 21643523 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berman 
 MG 
 
 
 Peltier 
 S 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Kross 
 E 
 
 
 Deldin 
 PJ 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 Depression, rumination and the default network 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 6 
 5 
 548 
 55 
 10.1093/scan/nsq080 
 20855296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Springer 
 JA 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 JN 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 2000 
 Human Temporal Lobe Activation by Speech and Nonspeech
Sounds 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 10 
 512 
 528 
 10847601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Zuo 
 XN 
 
 
 Gohel 
 S 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Toward discovery science of human brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 107 
 10 
 4734 
 9 
 10.1073/pnas.0911855107 
 20176931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Yetkin 
 FZ 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 1995 
 Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human
brain using echo-planar MRI 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 34 
 4 
 537 
 41 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8524021 
 8524021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blasi 
 A 
 
 
 Mercure 
 E 
 
 
 Lloyd-Fox 
 S 
 
 
 Thomson 
 A 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Sauter 
 D 
 
 
 Murphy 
 DGM 
 
 
 2011 
 Early Specialization for Voice and Emotion Processing in the
Infant Brain 
 Current Biology 
 21 
 14 
 1 
 5 
 10.1016/j.cub.2011.06.009 
 21129968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boas 
 DA 
 
 
 Strangman 
 G 
 
 
 Culver 
 JP 
 
 
 Hoge 
 RD 
 
 
 Jasdzewski 
 G 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 Ra 
 
 
 Mandeville 
 JB 
 
 
 2003 
 Can the cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen be estimated with
near-infrared spectroscopy? 
 Physics in Medicine and Biology 
 48 
 15 
 2405 
 18 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12953906 
 12953906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boly 
 M 
 
 
 Perlbarg 
 V 
 
 
 Marrelec 
 G 
 
 
 Schabus 
 M 
 
 
 Laureys 
 S 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Benali 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Hierarchical clustering of brain activity during human nonrapid
eye movement sleep 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 109 
 15 
 5856 
 61 
 10.1073/pnas.1111133109 
 22451917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bortfeld 
 H 
 
 
 Wruck 
 E 
 
 
 Boas 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 Assessing infants’ cortical response to speech using
near-infrared spectroscopy 
 Neuroimage 
 34 
 1 
 407 
 415 
 Retrieved from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S105381190600869X 
 17045812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brier 
 MR 
 
 
 Thomas 
 JB 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Benzinger 
 TL 
 
 
 Zhang 
 D 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Ances 
 BM 
 
 
 2012 
 Loss of intranetwork and internetwork resting state functional
connections with Alzheimer’s disease progression 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 32 
 26 
 8890 
 9 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5698-11.2012 
 22745490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruce 
 J 
 
 
 Fisher 
 PA 
 
 
 Graham 
 AM 
 
 
 Moore 
 WE 
 
 
 Peake 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mannering 
 AM 
 
 
 2013 
 Patterns of brain activation in foster children and nonmaltreated
children during an inhibitory control task 
 Development and Psychopathology 
 25 
 4 Pt 1 
 931 
 41 
 10.1017/S095457941300028X 
 24229540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burghy 
 CA 
 
 
 Stodola 
 DE 
 
 
 Ruttle 
 PL 
 
 
 Molloy 
 EK 
 
 
 Armstrong 
 JM 
 
 
 Oler 
 Ja 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 2012 
 Developmental pathways to amygdala-prefrontal function and
internalizing symptoms in adolescence 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 11 
 1 
 8 
 10.1038/nn.3257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buss 
 C 
 
 
 Davis 
 EP 
 
 
 Shahbaba 
 B 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 JC 
 
 
 Head 
 K 
 
 
 Sandman 
 CA 
 
 
 2012 
 Maternal cortisol over the course of pregnancy and subsequent
child amygdala and hippocampus volumes and affective
problems 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 109 
 20 
 10.1073/pnas.1201295109/-/DCSupplemental. 
 
 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1201295109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buss 
 C 
 
 
 Entringer 
 S 
 
 
 Wadhwa 
 PD 
 
 
 2012 
 Fetal Programming of Brain Development - Role of Intrauterine
Stress and Stress Biology in Susceptibility for
Psychopathology 
 Science Signalling 
 5 
 245 
 pt7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 2005 
 Changes in cerebral functional organization during cognitive
development 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 15 
 2 
 239 
 44 
 10.1016/j.conb.2005.03.012 
 15831409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Ghaffari 
 M 
 
 
 Kirsch 
 A 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Cingulate - Precuneus Interactions: A New Locus of Dysfunction in
Adult Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 63 
 3 
 332 
 337 
 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.06.025.Cingulate 
 17888409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cheour 
 M 
 
 
 Martynova 
 O 
 
 
 Näätänen 
 R 
 
 
 Erkkolall 
 R 
 
 
 Sillanpää 
 M 
 
 
 Kero 
 P 
 
 
 Hämäläinen 
 H 
 
 
 2002 
 Speech sounds learned by sleeping newborns 
 Nature 
 415 
 6872 
 599 
 600 
 10.1038/415599a 
 11832930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Churchland 
 PS 
 
 
 Sejnowski 
 T 
 
 
 1990 
 Neural Representation and Neural Computation 
 
 
 Tomberlin 
 JE 
 
 
 Philosophical Perspectives, Vol. 4, Action Theory and Philosophy of
Mind 
 343 
 382 
 Atascadero, California 
 Ridgeview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coan 
 JA 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 HS 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Lending a hand: social regulation of the neural response to
threat 
 Psychological Science 
 17 
 12 
 1032 
 9 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01832.x 
 17201784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colonnese 
 MT 
 
 
 Phillips 
 Ma 
 
 
 Constantine-Paton 
 M 
 
 
 Kaila 
 K 
 
 
 Jasanoff 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Development of hemodynamic responses and functional connectivity
in rat somatosensory cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 11 
 1 
 72 
 9 
 10.1038/nn2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2008 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to
theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 3 
 306 
 24 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.017 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 Chisum 
 HJ 
 
 
 Townsend 
 J 
 
 
 Cowles 
 A 
 
 
 Covington 
 J 
 
 
 Egaas 
 B 
 
 
 Press 
 GA 
 
 
 2000 
 Normal Brain Development and Aging_: Quantitative Analysis at in
Vivo MR 
 Neuroradiology 
 216 
 672 
 682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Czisch 
 M 
 
 
 Wetter 
 TC 
 
 
 Kaufmann 
 C 
 
 
 Pollmächer 
 T 
 
 
 Holsboer 
 F 
 
 
 Auer 
 DP 
 
 
 2002 
 Altered processing of acoustic stimuli during sleep: reduced
auditory activation and visual deactivation detected by a combined fMRI/EEG
study 
 NeuroImage 
 16 
 1 
 251 
 8 
 10.1006/nimg.2002.1071 
 11969332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Deouell 
 LY 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 Alterations in the BOLD fMRI signal with ageing and disease: a
challenge for neuroimaging 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 4 
 11 
 863 
 72 
 10.1038/nrn1246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damoiseaux 
 JS 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 2009 
 Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining
structural connectivity and resting-state functional
connectivity 
 Brain Structure & Function 
 213 
 6 
 525 
 33 
 10.1007/s00429-009-0208-6 
 19565262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Kloet 
 ER 
 
 
 Vreugdenhil 
 E 
 
 
 Oitzl 
 MS 
 
 
 Joels 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Brain Corticosteroid Receptor Balance in Health and
Disease 
 Endocrine Reviews 
 19 
 3 
 269 
 301 
 9626555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Hertz-Pannier 
 L 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional Neuroimaging of Speech Perception in
Infants 
 Science 
 298 
 2013 
 2015 
 10.1126/science.1077066 
 12471265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 Montavont 
 A 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Allirol 
 L 
 
 
 Dubois 
 J 
 
 
 Hertz-Pannier 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Language or music, mother or Mozart? Structural and environmental
influences on infants’ language networks 
 Brain & Language 
 114 
 2 
 53 
 65 
 10.1016/j.bandl.2009.09.003 
 19864015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diekema 
 DS 
 
 
 2009 
 Ethical issues in research involving infants 
 Seminars in Perinatology 
 33 
 6 
 364 
 71 
 10.1053/j.semperi.2009.07.003 
 19914520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dinstein 
 I 
 
 
 Pierce 
 K 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Solso 
 S 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Behrmann 
 M 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 Disrupted neural synchronization in toddlers with
autism 
 Neuron 
 70 
 6 
 1218 
 25 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.018 
 21689606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2008 
 A dual-networks architecture of top-down control 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 12 
 3 
 99 
 105 
 10.1016/j.tics.2008.01.001 
 18262825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 RaT 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2007 
 Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in
humans 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 104 
 26 
 11073 
 8 
 10.1073/pnas.0704320104 
 17576922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downie 
 J 
 
 
 Marshall 
 J 
 
 
 2007 
 Pediatric Neuroimaging Ethics 
 Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 
 16 
 02 
 147 
 160 
 10.1017/S096318010707017X 
 17539467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dunn 
 AK 
 
 
 Devor 
 A 
 
 
 Bolay 
 H 
 
 
 Andermann 
 ML 
 
 
 Moskowitz 
 Ma 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Boas 
 Da 
 
 
 2003 
 Simultaneous imaging of total cerebral hemoglobin concentration,
oxygenation, and blood flow during functional activation 
 Optics letters 
 28 
 1 
 28 
 30 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12656525 
 12656525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Pierce 
 K 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2012 
 A failure of left temporal cortex to specialize for language is
an early emerging and fundamental property of autism 
 Brain 
 135 
 949 
 60 
 10.1093/brain/awr364 
 22350062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fabrizi 
 L 
 
 
 Slater 
 R 
 
 
 Worley 
 A 
 
 
 Meek 
 J 
 
 
 Boyd 
 S 
 
 
 Olhede 
 S 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 A shift in sensory processing that enables the developing human
brain to discriminate touch from pain 
 Current Biology 
 21 
 18 
 1552 
 8 
 10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.010 
 21906948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2008 
 The maturing architecture of the brain’s default
network 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 105 
 10 
 4028 
 32 
 Retrieved from  http://www.pnas.org/content/105/10/4028.short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional brain networks develop from a “local to
distributed” organization 
 PLoS Computational Biology 
 5 
 5 
 e1000381 
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000381 
 19412534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Brahmbhatt 
 S 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2007 
 Development of distinct control networks through segregation and
integration 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 104 
 33 
 13507 
 12 
 10.1073/pnas.0705843104 
 17679691 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Nigg 
 JT 
 
 
 Iyer 
 S 
 
 
 Bathula 
 D 
 
 
 Mills 
 KL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 Distinct neural signatures detected for ADHD subtypes after
controlling for micro-movements in resting state functional connectivity MRI
data 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 6 
 February 
 80 
 10.3389/fnsys.2012.00080 
 23382713 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Posner 
 J 
 
 
 Nagel 
 BJ 
 
 
 Bathula 
 D 
 
 
 Dias 
 TGC 
 
 
 Mills 
 KL 
 
 
 Nigg 
 JT 
 
 
 2010 
 Atypical default network connectivity in youth with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 68 
 12 
 1084 
 91 
 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.07.003 
 20728873 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2008 
 Brain Development 
 Encyclopedia of Infant and Early Childhood Development 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fava 
 E 
 
 
 Hull 
 R 
 
 
 Baumbauer 
 K 
 
 
 Bortfeld 
 H 
 
 
 2013 
 Hemodynamic responses to speech and music in preverbal
infants 
 Child Neuropsychology 
 20 
 4 
 430 
 48 
 10.1080/09297049.2013.803524 
 23777481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feczko 
 E 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Constantino 
 JN 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Pruett 
 JR 
 
 
 2012 
 The hemodynamic response in children with Simplex
Autism 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2 
 4 
 396 
 408 
 10.1016/j.dcn.2012.06.001.The 
 22795455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fifer 
 WP 
 
 
 Byrd 
 DL 
 
 
 Kaku 
 M 
 
 
 Eigsti 
 IM 
 
 
 Isler 
 JR 
 
 
 Grose-Fifer 
 J 
 
 
 Balsam 
 PD 
 
 
 2010 
 Newborn infants learn during sleep 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 107 
 22 
 10320 
 3 
 10.1073/pnas.1005061107 
 20479232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fonov 
 VS 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Botteron 
 K 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 McKinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 2011 
 Unbiased average age-appropriate atlases for pediatric
studies 
 NeuroImage 
 54 
 1 
 313 
 27 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033 
 20656036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fonov 
 VS 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Mckinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 2009 
 Unbiased nonlinear average age-appropriate brain templates from
birth to adulthood 
 NeuroImage 
 47 
 Supplement 1 
 S102 
 10.1016/S1053-8119(09)70884-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 2010 
 Clinical applications of resting state functional
connectivity 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 4 
 1 
 13 
 10.3389/fnsys.2010.00019 
 20204156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2007 
 Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 8 
 9 
 700 
 11 
 10.1038/nrn2201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2005 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 102 
 27 
 9673 
 8 
 10.1073/pnas.0504136102 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2007 
 Intrinsic fluctuations within cortical systems account for
intertrial variability in human behavior 
 Neuron 
 56 
 1 
 171 
 84 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.023 
 17920023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 NA 
 
 
 Henderson 
 HA 
 
 
 Rubin 
 KH 
 
 
 Calkins 
 SD 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 LA 
 
 
 2001 
 Continuity and Discontinuity of Behavioral Inhibition and
Exuberance: Psychophysiological and Behavioral Influences across the First
Four Years of Life 
 Child Development 
 72 
 1 
 1 
 21 
 11280472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 NA 
 
 
 Rubin 
 KH 
 
 
 Calkins 
 SD 
 
 
 Marshall 
 TJ 
 
 
 Coplan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Porges 
 SW 
 
 
 Stewart 
 S 
 
 
 1995 
 Frontal Activation Asymmetry and Social Competence at Four Years
of Age 
 Child Development 
 66 
 1770 
 1784 
 8556898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 SE 
 
 
 Levitt 
 P 
 
 
 Nelson 
 Ca 
 
 
 2010 
 How the timing and quality of early experiences influence the
development of brain architecture 
 Child Development 
 81 
 1 
 28 
 40 
 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01380.x 
 20331653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI
investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function
hypothesis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 26 
 1 
 15 
 29 
 10.1002/hbm.20113 
 15852468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 Metsäranta 
 M 
 
 
 Blennow 
 M 
 
 
 Aden 
 U 
 
 
 Lagercrantz 
 H 
 
 
 Vanhatalo 
 S 
 
 
 2013 
 Early Development of Spatial Patterns of Power-Law Frequency
Scaling in fMRI Resting-State and EEG Data in the Newborn
Brain 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 23 
 3 
 638 
 646 
 10.1093/cercor/bhs047 
 22402348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fransson 
 P 
 
 
 Skiöld 
 B 
 
 
 Engström 
 M 
 
 
 Hallberg 
 B 
 
 
 Mosskin 
 M 
 
 
 Aden 
 U 
 
 
 Blennow 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn brain during natural
sleep--an fMRI study in infants born at full term 
 Pediatric Research 
 66 
 3 
 301 
 5 
 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181b1bd84 
 19531974 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabard-Durnam 
 LJ 
 
 
 Flannery 
 J 
 
 
 Goff 
 B 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 Telzer 
 E 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2014 
 The development of human amygdala functional connectivity at rest
from 4 to 23 years: A cross-sectional study 
 NeuroImage 
 95 
 193 
 207 
 24662579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Alcauter 
 S 
 
 
 Elton 
 A 
 
 
 Hernandez-Castillo 
 CR 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Ramirez 
 J 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 2014 
 Functional Network Development During the First Year: Relative
Sequence and Socioeconomic Correlations 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1 
 10 
 10.1093/cercor/bhu088 
 23010747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Alcauter 
 S 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 2014 
 Development of human brain cortical network architecture during
infancy 
 Brain Structure and Function 
 Advanced Online Access 
 10.1007/s00429-014-0710-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Elton 
 A 
 
 
 Zhu 
 H 
 
 
 Alcauter 
 S 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 2014 
 Intersubject Variability of and Genetic Effects on the
Brain’s Functional Connectivity during Infancy 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 34 
 34 
 11288 
 96 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5072-13.2014 
 25143609 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Giovanello 
 KS 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 Zhu 
 H 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 2011 
 Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during
the first two years of life 
 PloS One 
 6 
 9 
 e25278 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0025278 
 21966479 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Zhu 
 H 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 2013 
 The synchronization within and interaction between the default
and dorsal attention networks in early infancy 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 23 
 3 
 594 
 603 
 10.1093/cercor/bhs043 
 22368080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Zhu 
 H 
 
 
 Giovanello 
 KS 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 2009 
 Evidence on the emergence of the brain’s default network
from 2-week-old to 2-year-old healthy pediatric subjects 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 106 
 16 
 6790 
 6795 
 Retrieved from  http://www.pnas.org/content/106/16/6790.short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Gabard-Durnam 
 LJ 
 
 
 Flannery 
 J 
 
 
 Goff 
 B 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2013 
 Early developmental emergence of human amygdala –
prefrontal connectivity after maternal deprivation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 110 
 39 
 15638 
 15643 
 10.1073/pnas.1307893110/-/DCSupplemental 
 
 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1307893110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Kang 
 C 
 
 
 Evans 
 DD 
 
 
 Wolfe 
 HM 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 JA 
 
 
 Gerig 
 G 
 
 
 2010 
 Prenatal and Neonatal Brain Structure and White Matter Maturation
in Children at High Risk for Schizophrenia 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 167 
 9 
 1083 
 1091 
 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09101492.Prenatal 
 20516153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gluckman 
 PD 
 
 
 Hanson 
 Ma 
 
 
 2004 
 Living with the past: evolution, development, and patterns of
disease 
 Science 
 305 
 5691 
 1733 
 6 
 10.1126/science.1095292 
 15375258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graham 
 AM 
 
 
 Fisher 
 PA 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 2013 
 What Sleeping Babies Hear: A Functional MRI Study of
Interparental Conflict and Infants’ Emotion
Processing 
 Psychological Science 
 24 
 5 
 782 
 789 
 10.1177/0956797612458803 
 23538912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grayson 
 DS 
 
 
 Ray 
 S 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 S 
 
 
 Iyer 
 S 
 
 
 Dias 
 TGC 
 
 
 Stevens 
 C 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 2014 
 Structural and functional rich club organization of the brain in
children and adults 
 PloS One 
 9 
 2 
 e88297 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0088297 
 24505468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis
of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 100 
 1 
 253 
 8 
 10.1073/pnas.0135058100 
 12506194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 RF 
 
 
 2009 
 Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural
connectivity in the default mode network 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 1 
 72 
 8 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn059 
 18403396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grossmann 
 T 
 
 
 Oberecker 
 R 
 
 
 Koch 
 SP 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 2010 
 The developmental origins of voice processing in the human
brain 
 Neuron 
 65 
 6 
 852 
 8 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.001 
 20346760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grossmann 
 T 
 
 
 Striano 
 T 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 2005 
 Infants’ electric brain responses to emotional
prosody 
 Neuroreport 
 16 
 16 
 1825 
 8 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16237335 
 16237335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grunau 
 RE 
 
 
 2013 
 Neonatal pain in very preterm infants: long-term effects on
brain, neurodevelopment and pain reactivity 
 Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal 
 4 
 4 
 e0025 
 10.5041/RMMJ.10132 
 24228168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gunnar 
 MR 
 
 
 Talge 
 NM 
 
 
 Herrera 
 A 
 
 
 2009 
 Stressor paradigms in developmental studies: What does and does
not work to produce mean increases in salivary cortisol 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology 
 34 
 953 
 967 
 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.02.010 
 19321267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Grant 
 PE 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 2012 
 MR connectomics: a conceptual framework for studying the
developing brain 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 6 
 June 
 43 
 10.3389/fnsys.2012.00043 
 22707934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hane 
 AA 
 
 
 Fox 
 Na 
 
 
 2006 
 Ordinary variations in maternal caregiving influence human
infants’ stress reactivity 
 Psychological Science 
 17 
 6 
 550 
 6 
 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01742.x 
 16771807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hane 
 AA 
 
 
 Henderson 
 HA 
 
 
 Reeb-Sutherland 
 BC 
 
 
 Fox 
 NA 
 
 
 2010 
 Ordinary variations in human maternal caregiving in infancy and
biobehavioral development in early childhood: A follow-up
study 
 Developmental Psychobiology 
 52 
 6 
 558 
 67 
 10.1002/dev.20461 
 20806328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herringa 
 RJ 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Ruttle 
 PL 
 
 
 Burghy 
 Ca 
 
 
 Stodola 
 DE 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Essex 
 MJ 
 
 
 2013 
 Childhood maltreatment is associated with altered fear circuitry
and increased internalizing symptoms by late adolescence 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 110 
 47 
 19119 
 24 
 10.1073/pnas.1310766110 
 24191026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hinton 
 VJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Ethics of neuroimaging in pediatric development 
 Brain and Cognition 
 50 
 3 
 455 
 68 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12480490 
 12480490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Honey 
 C 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Thiran 
 JP 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from
structural connectivity 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 106 
 6 
 2035 
 Retrieved from  http://www.pnas.org/content/106/6/2035.short 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 Braun 
 AR 
 
 
 Carr 
 WS 
 
 
 Picchioni 
 D 
 
 
 Balkin 
 TJ 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 2009 
 Decoupling of the brain’s default mode network during
deep sleep 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 106 
 27 
 11376 
 81 
 10.1073/pnas.0901435106 
 19549821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horovitz 
 SG 
 
 
 Fukunaga 
 M 
 
 
 de Zwart 
 JA 
 
 
 van Gelderen 
 P 
 
 
 Fulton 
 SC 
 
 
 Balkin 
 TJ 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 2008 
 Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness and
light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 29 
 6 
 671 
 82 
 10.1002/hbm.20428 
 17598166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huttenlocher 
 PR 
 
 
 Dabholkar 
 AS 
 
 
 1997 
 Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human cerebral
cortex 
 The Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 387 
 2 
 167 
 78 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9336221 
 9336221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 S 
 
 
 Marlow 
 N 
 
 
 2014 
 Growing up after extremely preterm birth: lifespan mental health
outcomes 
 Seminars in Fetal & Neonatal Medicine 
 19 
 2 
 97 
 104 
 10.1016/j.siny.2013.11.004 
 24290907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 Burgund 
 ED 
 
 
 Lugar 
 HM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2003 
 Comparison of functional activation foci in children and adults
using a common stereotactic space 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 1 
 16 
 28 
 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00038-7 
 12781724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karen 
 T 
 
 
 Morren 
 G 
 
 
 Haensse 
 D 
 
 
 Bauschatz 
 AS 
 
 
 Bucher 
 HU 
 
 
 Wolf 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Hemodynamic response to visual stimulation in newborn infants
using functional near-infrared spectroscopy 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 29 
 4 
 453 
 60 
 10.1002/hbm.20411 
 17525986 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaufmann 
 C 
 
 
 Wehrle 
 R 
 
 
 Wetter 
 TC 
 
 
 Holsboer 
 F 
 
 
 Auer 
 DP 
 
 
 Pollmächer 
 T 
 
 
 Czisch 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain activation and hypothalamic functional connectivity during
human non-rapid eye movement sleep: an EEG/fMRI study 
 Brain 
 129 
 Pt 3 
 655 
 67 
 10.1093/brain/awh686 
 16339798 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kazemi 
 K 
 
 
 Moghaddam 
 HA 
 
 
 Grebe 
 R 
 
 
 Gondry-Jouet 
 C 
 
 
 Wallois 
 F 
 
 
 2007 
 A neonatal atlas template for spatial normalization of
whole-brain magnetic resonance images of newborns: preliminary
results 
 NeuroImage 
 37 
 2 
 463 
 73 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.05.004 
 17560795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of anterior cingulate functional connectivity from
late childhood to early adulthood 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 3 
 640 
 57 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn117 
 18653667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Competition between functional brain networks mediates behavioral
variability 
 NeuroImage 
 39 
 1 
 527 
 37 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.08.008 
 17919929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kida 
 T 
 
 
 Shinohara 
 K 
 
 
 2013 
 Gentle touch activates the prefrontal cortex in infancy: an NIRS
study 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 541 
 63 
 6 
 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.01.048 
 23416324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knickmeyer 
 RC 
 
 
 Gouttard 
 S 
 
 
 Kang 
 C 
 
 
 Evans 
 D 
 
 
 Wilber 
 K 
 
 
 Smith 
 JK 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 2008 
 A structural MRI study of human brain development from birth to 2
years 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 28 
 47 
 12176 
 12182 
 19020011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knudsen 
 EI 
 
 
 2004 
 Sensitive periods in the development of the brain and
behavior 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 16 
 8 
 1412 
 25 
 10.1162/0898929042304796 
 15509387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kozberg 
 MG 
 
 
 Chen 
 BR 
 
 
 Deleo 
 SE 
 
 
 Bouchard 
 MB 
 
 
 Hillman 
 EMC 
 
 
 2013 
 Resolving the transition from negative to positive blood oxygen
level-dependent responses in the developing brain 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 110 
 11 
 4380 
 4385 
 10.1073/pnas.1212785110/-/DCSupplemental 
 
 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1212785110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krause 
 BJ 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 D 
 
 
 Mottaghy 
 FM 
 
 
 Taylor 
 J 
 
 
 Halsband 
 U 
 
 
 Herzog 
 H 
 
 
 Müller-Gärtner 
 HW 
 
 
 1999 
 Episodic retrieval activates the precuneus irrespective of the
imagery content of word pair associates. A PET study 
 Brain 
 122 
 255 
 63 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10071054 
 10071054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kusaka 
 T 
 
 
 Kawada 
 K 
 
 
 Okubo 
 K 
 
 
 Nagano 
 K 
 
 
 Namba 
 M 
 
 
 Okada 
 H 
 
 
 Itoh 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Noninvasive optical imaging in the visual cortex in young
infants 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 22 
 2 
 122 
 32 
 10.1002/hbm.20020 
 15108300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lane 
 AE 
 
 
 Young 
 RL 
 
 
 Baker 
 AEZ 
 
 
 Angley 
 MT 
 
 
 2010 
 Sensory processing subtypes in autism: association with adaptive
behavior 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
 40 
 1 
 112 
 22 
 10.1007/s10803-009-0840-2 
 19644746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson-Prior 
 LJ 
 
 
 Zempel 
 JM 
 
 
 Nolan 
 TS 
 
 
 Prior 
 FW 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2009 
 Cortical network functional connectivity in the descent to
sleep 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 106 
 11 
 4489 
 94 
 10.1073/pnas.0900924106 
 19255447 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Le Grand 
 R 
 
 
 Mondloch 
 CJ 
 
 
 Maurer 
 D 
 
 
 Brent 
 HP 
 
 
 2001 
 Early visual experience essential for facial
recognition 
 Nature 
 410 
 6831 
 890 
 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04463-9 
 11309606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Le Grand 
 R 
 
 
 Mondloch 
 CJ 
 
 
 Maurer 
 D 
 
 
 Brent 
 HP 
 
 
 2003 
 Expert face processing requires visual input to the right
hemisphere during infancy 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 10 
 1108 
 12 
 10.1038/nn1121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 M 
 
 
 Smyser 
 CD 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 2013 
 Resting-State fMRI: A Review of Methods and Clinical
Applications 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 34 
 10 
 1866 
 72 
 10.3174/ajnr.A3263 
 22936095 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lehmann 
 J 
 
 
 Stöhr 
 T 
 
 
 Feldon 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 Long-term effects of prenatal stress experience and postnatal
maternal separation on emotionality and attentional
processes 
 Behavioural Brain Research 
 107 
 133 
 144 
 Retrieved from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166432899001229 
 10628737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain development in children and adolescents: insights from
anatomical magnetic resonance imaging 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 30 
 6 
 718 
 29 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2006.06.001 
 16887188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liao 
 SM 
 
 
 Gregg 
 NM 
 
 
 White 
 BR 
 
 
 Zeff 
 BW 
 
 
 Bjerkaas 
 Ka 
 
 
 Inder 
 TE 
 
 
 Culver 
 JP 
 
 
 2010 
 Neonatal hemodynamic response to visual cortex activity:
high-density near-infrared spectroscopy study 
 Journal of Biomedical Optics 
 15 
 2 
 026010 
 10.1117/1.3369809 
 20459255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 Zhu 
 Q 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Chen 
 Y 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional connectivity MR imaging reveals cortical functional
connectivity in the developing brain 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 29 
 10 
 1883 
 1889 
 10.3174/ajnr.A1256.Functional 
 18784212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 WC 
 
 
 Flax 
 JF 
 
 
 Guise 
 KG 
 
 
 Sukul 
 V 
 
 
 Benasich 
 Aa 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional connectivity of the sensorimotor area in naturally
sleeping infants 
 Brain Research 
 1223 
 42 
 9 
 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.05.054 
 18599026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lloyd-Fox 
 S 
 
 
 Blasi 
 A 
 
 
 Elwell 
 CE 
 
 
 2010 
 Illuminating the developing brain: the past, present and future
of functional near infrared spectroscopy 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 34 
 3 
 269 
 84 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.07.008 
 19632270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lloyd-Fox 
 S 
 
 
 Blasi 
 A 
 
 
 Volein 
 A 
 
 
 Everdell 
 N 
 
 
 Elwell 
 CE 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MH 
 
 
 2009 
 Social perception in infancy: a near infrared spectroscopy
study 
 Child Development 
 80 
 4 
 986 
 99 
 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01312.x 
 19630889 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lloyd-Fox 
 S 
 
 
 Papademetriou 
 M 
 
 
 Darboe 
 MK 
 
 
 Everdell 
 NL 
 
 
 Wegmuller 
 R 
 
 
 Prentice 
 aM 
 
 
 Elwell 
 CE 
 
 
 2014 
 Functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to assess cognitive
function in infants in rural Africa 
 Scientific Reports 
 4 
 4740 
 10.1038/srep04740 
 24751935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logothetis 
 NK 
 
 
 2008 
 What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI 
 Nature 
 453 
 7197 
 869 
 878 
 10.1038/nature06976 
 18548064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logothetis 
 NK 
 
 
 Wandell 
 Ba 
 
 
 2004 
 Interpreting the BOLD signal 
 Annual Review of Physiology 
 66 
 735 
 69 
 10.1146/annurev.physiol.66.082602.092845 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loman 
 MM 
 
 
 Gunnar 
 MR 
 
 
 2010 
 Early experience and the development of stress reactivity and
regulation in children 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 34 
 6 
 867 
 76 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.05.007 
 19481109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Love 
 OP 
 
 
 Williams 
 TD 
 
 
 2008 
 Plasticity in the adrenocortical response of a free-living
vertebrate: the role of pre- and post-natal developmental
stress 
 Hormones and Behavior 
 54 
 4 
 496 
 505 
 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.01.006 
 18313054 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Padmanabhan 
 A 
 
 
 O’Hearn 
 K 
 
 
 2010 
 What has fMRI told us about the development of cognitive control
through adolescence? 
 Brain and Cognition 
 72 
 1 
 101 
 13 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2009.08.005 
 19765880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lupien 
 SJ 
 
 
 McEwen 
 BS 
 
 
 Gunnar 
 MR 
 
 
 Heim 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour
and cognition 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 10 
 6 
 434 
 45 
 10.1038/nrn2639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malter Cohen 
 M 
 
 
 Jing 
 D 
 
 
 Yang 
 RR 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Lee 
 FS 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2013 
 Early-life stress has persistent effects on amygdala function and
development in mice and humans 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 110 
 45 
 18274 
 8 
 10.1073/pnas.1310163110 
 24145410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martynova 
 O 
 
 
 Kirjavainen 
 J 
 
 
 Cheour 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Mismatch negativity and late discriminative negativity in
sleeping human newborns 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 340 
 2 
 75 
 8 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12668240 
 12668240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Cacioppo 
 JT 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2013 
 Introduction to the Special Section: 20 Years of fMRI--What Has
It Done for Understanding Cognition? 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 8 
 1 
 41 
 43 
 10.1177/1745691612469036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Honey 
 GD 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2006 
 Applications of fMRI in translational medicine and clinical
practice 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 7 
 9 
 732 
 44 
 10.1038/nrn1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCrory 
 EJ 
 
 
 De Brito 
 Sa 
 
 
 Kelly 
 Pa 
 
 
 Bird 
 G 
 
 
 Sebastian 
 CL 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Viding 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Amygdala activation in maltreated children during pre-attentive
emotional processing 
 The British Journal of Psychiatry 
 202 
 4 
 269 
 76 
 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.116624 
 23470285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCrory 
 EJ 
 
 
 De Brito 
 SA 
 
 
 Sebastian 
 CL 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Bird 
 G 
 
 
 Kelly 
 PA 
 
 
 Viding 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 Heightened neural reactivity to threat in child victims of family
violence 
 Current Biology 
 21 
 23 
 R947 
 8 
 10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.015 
 22153160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McManis 
 MH 
 
 
 Kagan 
 J 
 
 
 Snidman 
 NC 
 
 
 Woodward 
 Sa 
 
 
 2002 
 EEG asymmetry, power, and temperament in children 
 Developmental Psychobiology 
 41 
 2 
 169 
 77 
 10.1002/dev.10053 
 12209658 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meek 
 JH 
 
 
 Firbank 
 M 
 
 
 Elwell 
 CE 
 
 
 Atkinson 
 J 
 
 
 Braddick 
 O 
 
 
 Wyatt 
 JS 
 
 
 1998 
 Regional hemodynamic responses to visual stimulation in awake
infants 
 Pediatric Research 
 43 
 6 
 840 
 3 
 10.1203/00006450-199806000-00019 
 9621996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mehta 
 MA 
 
 
 Gore-Langton 
 E 
 
 
 Golembo 
 N 
 
 
 Colvert 
 E 
 
 
 Williams 
 SCR 
 
 
 Sonuga-Barke 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Hyporesponsive reward anticipation in the basal ganglia following
severe institutional deprivation early in life 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 
 10 
 2316 
 25 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21394 
 19929329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miranda-Dominguez 
 O 
 
 
 Mills 
 BD 
 
 
 Grayson 
 D 
 
 
 Woodall 
 A 
 
 
 Grant 
 Ka 
 
 
 Kroenke 
 CD 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 2014 
 Bridging the gap between the human and macaque connectome: a
quantitative comparison of global interspecies structure-function
relationships and network topology 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 34 
 16 
 5552 
 63 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4229-13.2014 
 24741045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Molloy 
 EK 
 
 
 Meyerand 
 ME 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 2014 
 The influence of spatial resolution and smoothing on the
detectability of resting-state and task fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 86 
 221 
 30 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.001 
 24021836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mueller 
 SC 
 
 
 Maheu 
 FS 
 
 
 Dozier 
 M 
 
 
 Peloso 
 E 
 
 
 Mandell 
 D 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Early-life stress is associated with impairment in cognitive
control in adolescence: an fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 48 
 10 
 3037 
 44 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.06.013 
 20561537 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murayama 
 Y 
 
 
 Biessmann 
 F 
 
 
 Meinecke 
 FC 
 
 
 Müller 
 K-R 
 
 
 Augath 
 M 
 
 
 Oeltermann 
 A 
 
 
 Logothetis 
 NK 
 
 
 2010 
 Relationship between neural and hemodynamic signals during
spontaneous activity studied with temporal kernel CCA 
 Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 28 
 8 
 1095 
 103 
 10.1016/j.mri.2009.12.016 
 20096530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muscatell 
 K 
 
 
 Morelli 
 S 
 
 
 Falk 
 E 
 
 
 Way 
 B 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Galinksy 
 AD 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 2012 
 Social status modulates neural activity in the mentalizing
network 
 NeuroImage 
 60 
 3 
 1771 
 1777 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.080.Social 
 22289808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Forkstam 
 C 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ingvar 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Brain imaging of human memory systems: between-systems
similarities and within-system differences 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 13 
 2 
 281 
 92 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11958972 
 11958972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pierce 
 K 
 
 
 2011 
 Early functional brain development in autism and the promise of
sleep fMRI 
 Brain Research 
 1380 
 162 
 74 
 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.028 
 20869953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Portas 
 CM 
 
 
 Krakow 
 K 
 
 
 Allen 
 P 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Armony 
 JL 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 2000 
 Auditory processing across the sleep-wake cycle: simultaneous EEG
and fMRI monitoring in humans 
 Neuron 
 28 
 3 
 991 
 9 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11163282 
 11163282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2012 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity
MRI networks arise from subject motion 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 3 
 2142 
 2154 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.018 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Church 
 Ja 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2011 
 Functional network organization of the human
brain 
 Neuron 
 72 
 4 
 665 
 78 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.006 
 22099467 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2010 
 The development of human functional brain
networks 
 Neuron 
 67 
 5 
 735 
 48 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.017 
 20826306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Qiu 
 M 
 
 
 Ramani 
 R 
 
 
 Swetye 
 M 
 
 
 Rajeevan 
 N 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 2008 
 Anesthetic effects on regional CBF, BOLD, and the coupling
between task-induced changes in CBF and BOLD: an fMRI study in normal human
subjects 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 60 
 4 
 987 
 96 
 10.1002/mrm.21759 
 18816821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2010 
 Two views of brain function 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 14 
 4 
 180 
 90 
 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.008 
 20206576 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Macleod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2001 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 2006 
 Brain work and brain imaging 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 29 
 449 
 76 
 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.112819 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redcay 
 E 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Deviant Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Patterns of Brain
Activity to Speech in 2 – 3-Year-Old Children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 64 
 589 
 598 
 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.05.020 
 18672231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redcay 
 E 
 
 
 Haist 
 F 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional neuroimaging of speech perception during a pivotal
period in language acquisition 
 Developmental Science 
 11 
 2 
 237 
 252 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00674.x 
 18333980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redcay 
 E 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DP 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 fMRI during natural sleep as a method to study brain function
during early childhood 
 NeuroImage 
 38 
 696 
 707 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.08.005 
 17904385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reeb-Sutherland 
 BC 
 
 
 Fifer 
 WP 
 
 
 Byrd 
 DL 
 
 
 Hammock 
 EAD 
 
 
 Levitt 
 P 
 
 
 Fox 
 NA 
 
 
 2011 
 One-month-old human infants learn about the social world while
they sleep 
 Developmental Science 
 14 
 5 
 1134 
 41 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01062.x 
 21884328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosazza 
 C 
 
 
 Minati 
 L 
 
 
 Ghielmetti 
 F 
 
 
 Mandelli 
 ML 
 
 
 Bruzzone 
 MG 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional connectivity during resting-state functional MR
imaging: study of the correspondence between independent component analysis
and region-of-interest-based methods 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 33 
 1 
 180 
 7 
 10.3174/ajnr.A2733 
 21998099 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubinov 
 M 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 2010 
 Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and
interpretations 
 NeuroImage 
 52 
 3 
 1059 
 69 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003 
 19819337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rutter 
 M 
 
 
 1998 
 Developmental catch-up, and deficit, following adoption after
severe global early privation 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 39 
 4 
 465 
 476 
 Retrieved from  http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0021963098002236 
 9599775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saito 
 Y 
 
 
 Fukuhara 
 R 
 
 
 Aoyama 
 S 
 
 
 Toshima 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 Frontal brain activation in premature infants’ response
to auditory stimuli in neonatal intensive care unit 
 Early Human Development 
 85 
 7 
 471 
 4 
 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2009.04.004 
 19411147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sämann 
 PG 
 
 
 Wehrle 
 R 
 
 
 Hoehn 
 D 
 
 
 Spoormaker 
 VI 
 
 
 Peters 
 H 
 
 
 Tully 
 C 
 
 
 Czisch 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Development of the brain’s default mode network from
wakefulness to slow wave sleep 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 21 
 9 
 2082 
 93 
 10.1093/cercor/bhq295 
 21330468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanchez 
 CE 
 
 
 Richards 
 JE 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 2012 
 Neurodevelopmental MRI brain templates for children from 2 weeks
to 4 years of age 
 Developmental Psychobiology 
 54 
 1 
 77 
 91 
 10.1002/dev.20579 
 21688258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sánchez 
 MM 
 
 
 Ladd 
 COCO 
 
 
 Plotsky 
 PMPM 
 
 
 2001 
 Early adverse experience as a developmental risk factor for later
psychopathology: evidence from rodent and primate models 
 Development and Psychopathology 
 13 
 419 
 449 
 11523842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sander 
 D 
 
 
 Grandjean 
 D 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 S 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Scherer 
 KR 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Emotion and attention interactions in social cognition: brain
regions involved in processing anger prosody 
 NeuroImage 
 28 
 4 
 848 
 58 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.06.023 
 16055351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santesso 
 DL 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 La 
 
 
 Trainor 
 LJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Frontal brain electrical activity (EEG) and heart rate in
response to affective infant-directed (ID) speech in 9-month-old
infants 
 Brain and cognition 
 65 
 1 
 14 
 21 
 10.1016/j.bandc.2007.02.008 
 17659820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Elliott 
 Ma 
 
 
 Gerraty 
 RT 
 
 
 Ruparel 
 K 
 
 
 Loughead 
 J 
 
 
 Calkins 
 ME 
 
 
 Wolf 
 DH 
 
 
 2013 
 An improved framework for confound regression and filtering for
control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional
connectivity data 
 NeuroImage 
 64 
 240 
 56 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.052 
 22926292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Wolf 
 DH 
 
 
 Loughead 
 J 
 
 
 Ruparel 
 K 
 
 
 Elliott 
 Ma 
 
 
 Hakonarson 
 H 
 
 
 Gur 
 RE 
 
 
 2012 
 Impact of in-scanner head motion on multiple measures of
functional connectivity: relevance for studies of neurodevelopment in
youth 
 NeuroImage 
 60 
 1 
 623 
 32 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.063 
 22233733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schölvinck 
 ML 
 
 
 Maier 
 A 
 
 
 Ye 
 FQ 
 
 
 Duyn 
 JH 
 
 
 Leopold 
 Da 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural basis of global resting-state fMRI
activity 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 107 
 22 
 10238 
 43 
 10.1073/pnas.0913110107 
 20439733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seckl 
 JR 
 
 
 2008 
 Glucocorticoids, developmental “programming” and
the risk of affective dysfunction 
 Progress in Brain Research 
 167 
 17 
 34 
 18037004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheridan 
 Ma 
 
 
 Sarsour 
 K 
 
 
 Jutte 
 D 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Boyce 
 WT 
 
 
 2012 
 The impact of social disparity on prefrontal function in
childhood 
 PloS One 
 7 
 4 
 e35744 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0035744 
 22563395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shi 
 F 
 
 
 Yap 
 PT 
 
 
 Gao 
 W 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 2012 
 Altered structural connectivity in neonates at genetic risk for
schizophrenia: a combined study using morphological and white matter
networks 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 3 
 1622 
 33 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.05.026 
 22613620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shi 
 F 
 
 
 Yap 
 PT 
 
 
 Wu 
 G 
 
 
 Jia 
 H 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Lin 
 W 
 
 
 Shen 
 D 
 
 
 2011 
 Infant brain atlases from neonates to 1- and
2-year-olds 
 PloS One 
 6 
 4 
 e18746 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0018746 
 21533194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shmuel 
 A 
 
 
 Leopold 
 Da 
 
 
 2008 
 Neuronal correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI signals
in monkey visual cortex: Implications for functional connectivity at
rest 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 29 
 7 
 751 
 61 
 10.1002/hbm.20580 
 18465799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shonkoff 
 JP 
 
 
 Garner 
 AS 
 
 
 2012 
 The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic
stress 
 Pediatrics 
 129 
 1 
 e232 
 46 
 10.1542/peds.2011-2663 
 22201156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegel 
 JS 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Dubis 
 JW 
 
 
 Vogel 
 AC 
 
 
 Church 
 Ja 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2013 
 Statistical improvements in functional magnetic resonance imaging
analyses produced by censoring high-motion data points 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 10.1002/hbm.22307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slater 
 R 
 
 
 Cantarella 
 A 
 
 
 Gallella 
 S 
 
 
 Worley 
 A 
 
 
 Boyd 
 S 
 
 
 Meek 
 J 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 2006 
 Cortical pain responses in human infants 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 14 
 3662 
 6 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0348-06.2006 
 16597720 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slater 
 R 
 
 
 Fabrizi 
 L 
 
 
 Worley 
 A 
 
 
 Meek 
 J 
 
 
 Boyd 
 S 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Premature infants display increased noxious-evoked neuronal
activity in the brain compared to healthy age-matched term-born
infants 
 NeuroImage 
 52 
 2 
 583 
 9 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.253 
 20438855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 CL 
 
 
 Bell 
 MA 
 
 
 2010 
 Stability in infant frontal asymmetry as a predictor of
toddlerhood internalizing and externalizing behaviors 
 Developmental Psychobiology 
 52 
 2 
 158 
 67 
 10.1002/dev.20427 
 20175143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 2009 
 Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture
during activation and rest 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 
 106 
 31 
 13040 
 5 
 10.1073/pnas.0905267106 
 19620724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 GC 
 
 
 Gutovich 
 J 
 
 
 Smyser 
 CD 
 
 
 Pineda 
 R 
 
 
 Newnham 
 C 
 
 
 Tjoeng 
 TH 
 
 
 Inder 
 T 
 
 
 2011 
 Neonatal intensive care unit stress is associated with brain
development in preterm infants 
 Annals of Neurology 
 70 
 4 
 541 
 9 
 10.1002/ana.22545 
 21976396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smyser 
 CD 
 
 
 Inder 
 TE 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 Hill 
 JE 
 
 
 Degnan 
 AJ 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Neil 
 JJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Longitudinal Analysis of Neural Network Development in Preterm
Infants 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 20 
 12 
 2852 
 2862 
 10.1093/cercor/bhq035 
 20237243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Souweidane 
 MM 
 
 
 Kim 
 KHS 
 
 
 McDowall 
 R 
 
 
 Ruge 
 MI 
 
 
 Lis 
 E 
 
 
 Krol 
 G 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 1999 
 Brain mapping in sedated infants and young children with
passive-functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Pediatric Neurosurgery 
 30 
 2 
 86 
 92 
 doi::10.1159/000028768 
 10325564 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spoormaker 
 VI 
 
 
 Schröter 
 MS 
 
 
 Gleiser 
 PM 
 
 
 Andrade 
 KC 
 
 
 Dresler 
 M 
 
 
 Wehrle 
 R 
 
 
 Czisch 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Development of a large-scale functional brain network during
human non-rapid eye movement sleep 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 30 
 34 
 11379 
 87 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2015-10.2010 
 20739559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stevens 
 AA 
 
 
 Tappon 
 SC 
 
 
 Garg 
 A 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional brain network modularity captures inter- and
intra-individual variation in working memory capacity 
 PloS One 
 7 
 1 
 e30468 
 10.1371/journal.pone.0030468 
 22276205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stewart 
 JL 
 
 
 Bismark 
 AW 
 
 
 Towers 
 DN 
 
 
 Coan 
 JA 
 
 
 Allen 
 JB 
 
 
 2010 
 Resting Frontal EEG Asymmetry as an Endophenotype for Depression
Risk: Sex-specific Patterns of Frontal Brain Asymmetry 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 119 
 3 
 502 
 512 
 10.1037/a0019196.Resting 
 20677839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strother 
 S 
 
 
 La Conte 
 S 
 
 
 Kai Hansen 
 L 
 
 
 Anderson 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 J 
 
 
 Pulapura 
 S 
 
 
 Rottenberg 
 D 
 
 
 2004 
 Optimizing the fMRI data-processing pipeline using prediction and
reproducibility performance metrics: I. A preliminary group
analysis 
 NeuroImage 
 23 
 Suppl 1 
 S196 
 207 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.022 
 15501090 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Musen 
 M 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2009 
 Development of large-scale functional brain networks in
children 
 PLoS Biology 
 7 
 7 
 e1000157 
 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000157 
 19621066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Prater 
 K 
 
 
 Amin 
 H 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Development of functional and structural connectivity within the
default mode network in young children 
 NeuroImage 
 52 
 1 
 290 
 301 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.009.Development 
 20385244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 H 
 
 
 Luby 
 JL 
 
 
 Botteron 
 KN 
 
 
 Dietrich 
 R 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 2014 
 Early Life Stress and Trauma and Enhanced Limbic Activation to
Emotionally Valenced Faces in Depressed and Healthy Children 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry 
 10.1016/j.jaac.2014.04.013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taga 
 G 
 
 
 Asakawa 
 K 
 
 
 Maki 
 A 
 
 
 Konishi 
 Y 
 
 
 Koizumi 
 H 
 
 
 2003 
 Brain imaging in awake infants by near-infrared optical
topography 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 100 
 19 
 10722 
 10727 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tagliazucchi 
 E 
 
 
 von Wegner 
 F 
 
 
 Morzelewski 
 A 
 
 
 Borisov 
 S 
 
 
 Jahnke 
 K 
 
 
 Laufs 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Automatic sleep staging using fMRI functional connectivity
data 
 NeuroImage 
 63 
 1 
 63 
 72 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.036 
 22743197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 P 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 J 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar Stereotaxic Altas of the Human Brain 
 Stuttgart, Germany 
 Georg Thieme Verlag 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thibodeau 
 R 
 
 
 Jorgensen 
 RS 
 
 
 Kim 
 S 
 
 
 2006 
 Depression, anxiety, and resting frontal EEG asymmetry: a
meta-analytic review 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 115 
 4 
 715 
 29 
 10.1037/0021-843X.115.4.715 
 17100529 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2014 
 The Importance of Early Experiences for Neuro-Affective
Development 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Andersen 
 SL 
 
 
 Current Topics in Behavioral Neuroscience, Volume 16: The Neurobiology
of Childhood 
 Berlin 
 Springer-Verlag 
 10.1007/7854 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Millner 
 A 
 
 
 Gilhooly 
 T 
 
 
 Zevin 
 JD 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Elevated amygdala response to faces following early
deprivation 
 Developmental Science 
 14 
 2 
 190 
 204 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00971.x 
 21399712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Quinn 
 BT 
 
 
 McCarry 
 TW 
 
 
 Nurse 
 M 
 
 
 Gilhooly 
 T 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Prolonged institutional rearing is associated with atypically
large amygdala volume and difficulties in emotion regulation 
 Developmental Science 
 13 
 1 
 46 
 61 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00852.x 
 20121862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 M 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 2012 
 Amygdala response to mother 
 Developmental Science 
 15 
 3 
 307 
 19 
 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01128.x 
 22490172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Sheridan 
 MA 
 
 
 2010 
 A review of adversity, the amygdala and the hippocampus: a
consideration of developmental timing 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 3 
 68 
 1 
 18 
 10.3389/neuro.09.068.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uchida 
 S 
 
 
 Hara 
 K 
 
 
 Kobayashi 
 A 
 
 
 Funato 
 H 
 
 
 Hobara 
 T 
 
 
 Otsuki 
 K 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 Y 
 
 
 2010 
 Early life stress enhances behavioral vulnerability to stress
through the activation of REST4-mediated gene transcription in the medial
prefrontal cortex of rodents 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 30 
 45 
 15007 
 18 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1436-10.2010 
 21068306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Supekar 
 K 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 2010 
 Typical and atypical development of functional human brain
networks: insights from resting-state fMRI 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 4 
 1 
 12 
 10.3389/fnsys.2010.00021 
 20204156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vallée 
 M 
 
 
 MacCari 
 S 
 
 
 Dellu 
 F 
 
 
 Simon 
 H 
 
 
 Le Moal 
 M 
 
 
 Mayo 
 W 
 
 
 1999 
 Long-term effects of prenatal stress and postnatal handling on
age-related glucocorticoid secretion and cognitive performance: a
longitudinal study in the rat 
 The European Journal of Neuroscience 
 11 
 8 
 2906 
 16 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10457187 
 10457187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KRA 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Venkataraman 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 KC 
 
 
 Lazar 
 SW 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2010 
 Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human
connectomics: theory, properties, and optimization 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 103 
 1 
 297 
 321 
 10.1152/jn.00783.2009 
 19889849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Dijk 
 KRA 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2012 
 The Influence of Head Motion on Intrinsic Functional Connectivity
MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 1 
 431 
 438 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.044 
 21810475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Marle 
 HJF 
 
 
 Hermans 
 EJ 
 
 
 Qin 
 S 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 2010 
 Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate
aftermath of acute psychological stress 
 NeuroImage 
 53 
 1 
 348 
 54 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.070 
 20621656 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vázquez 
 DM 
 
 
 Van Oers 
 H 
 
 
 Levine 
 S 
 
 
 Akil 
 H 
 
 
 1996 
 Regulation of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor mRNAs
in the hippocampus of the maternally deprived infant rat 
 Brain Research 
 731 
 1–2 
 79 
 90 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8883857 
 8883857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Shannon 
 BJ 
 
 
 Andrews 
 JR 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2006 
 Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal
memory network 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 96 
 6 
 3517 
 31 
 10.1152/jn.00048.2006 
 16899645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 H 
 
 
 Homae 
 F 
 
 
 Nakano 
 T 
 
 
 Taga 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional activation in diverse regions of the developing brain
of human infants 
 NeuroImage 
 43 
 346 
 357 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.014 
 18691660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 2004 
 Comparison of sustained and transient activity in children and
adults using a mixed blocked/event-related fMRI design 
 NeuroImage 
 22 
 2 
 975 
 85 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.02.028 
 15193629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 White 
 BR 
 
 
 Liao 
 SM 
 
 
 Ferradal 
 SL 
 
 
 Inder 
 TE 
 
 
 Culver 
 JP 
 
 
 2013 
 Bedside optical imaging of occipital resting-state functional
connectivity in neonates 
 NeuroImage 
 59 
 3 
 2529 
 2538 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.094.Bedside 
 21925609 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Ford 
 JM 
 
 
 2012 
 Default mode network activity and connectivity in
psychopathology 
 Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 
 8 
 49 
 76 
 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032511-143049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yamada 
 H 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 Konishi 
 Y 
 
 
 Kimura 
 K 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 M 
 
 
 Yonekura 
 Y 
 
 
 Ishii 
 Y 
 
 
 1997 
 A rapid brain metabolic change in infants detected by
fMRI 
 NeuroReport 
 8 
 17 
 3775 
 3778 
 Retrieved from  http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport/Abstract/1997/12010/A_rapid_brain_metabolic_change_in_infants_detected.24.aspx 
 9427369 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yan 
 CG 
 
 
 Craddock 
 RC 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2013 
 Addressing head motion dependencies for small-world topologies in
functional connectomics 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 7 
 910 
 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00910 
 24421764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yuan 
 W 
 
 
 Altaye 
 M 
 
 
 Ret 
 J 
 
 
 Schmithorst 
 V 
 
 
 Byars 
 AW 
 
 
 Plante 
 E 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 2009 
 Quantification of head motion in children during various fMRI
language tasks 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 30 
 5 
 1481 
 9 
 10.1002/hbm.20616 
 18636549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Gao et al., 2013 . Functional connectivity
maps for the default and dorsal attention networks in (a) neonates, (b) 1
year-olds, (c) and 2 year-olds. Right column shows composite maps of default and
dorsal attention networks (green=default, yellow=dorsal
attention, overlap=red). Color bar indicates correlation values. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Graham et al., 2013 . Association between
interparental-conflict scores and brain reactivity to very angry relative to
neutral speech ( p  < .05, family-wise-error corrected for
multiple comparisons) displayed on the group mean structural image. The image in
(a) shows activation in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC;
infant-atlas:  x  = 3,  y  = 29,
 z  = 13; MNI:  x  = 4,
 y  = 36,  z  = 17). The
images in (a) and (b) show activation in a subcortical cluster including
hypothalamus, caudate, and thalamus (infant-atlas:  x  =
3,  y  = −1,  z  = 1; MNI:
 x  = 4,  y  = −1,
 z  = 1), in which higher conflict scores predicted
greater neural response to very angry than to neutral speech. The scatter plots
(c and d; with best-fitting regression lines) reillustrate the association
between conflict score and parameter estimates for these two regions. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Review of Functional Activation Studies with Infants and Toddlers During Natural
Sleep 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 Population 
 N Analyses 
 N Excluded 
 Stimuli 
 Motion 
 Atlas 
 Statistical Threshold 
 Main Findings 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson et
al., 2001 
 
 Healthy term and preterm infants (M=21
days), adult males (M= 34 yrs) 
 9 Term, 5 Preterm, 4 Adults 
 6 infants for motion or not enough images 
 Tone 60–80 dB (gradually increased and
decreased to prevent startle) 
 Frame removal: images with > 2mm or 3
degrees; Scans excluded: < 50% of images retained or SD >
1 for translation or rotation 
 NA 
 % Signal Change 
 1) BOLD signal decrease to auditory for 9 and
increase for 5 infants; 2) Signal change in B superior temporal
regions 
 
 
 
 Blasi et al.,
2011 
 
 Healthy infants (M=159 days) 
 21 
 24 sleep difficulties 
 Nonvocal (environmental); Nonspeech
vocalizations (Neutral, Happy, Sad) 
 Rigid body transform based on spin-history
correction 
 Infant DL and transformed to Tal 
 p<0.005 uncorrected, cluster
size>=3 voxels 
 1) Age + associated with L STG
activity to Neutral>Nonvoice; 2) L Insula and gyrus rectus activity
for Sad>Neutral 
 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 
 
 Healthy infants (M=79 days) 
 20 (6 awake, 5 asleep, 9 both) 
 6 fussiness; 5 artifact or problems with
experiment 
 Forward speech (children’s stories);
Backward speech (reversed forward) 
 Frame removal: visual examination 
 Infant DL and transformed to MNI 
 voxel p<0.01, cluster p<0.05 corrected
for multiple comparisons 
 1) All sounds > rest: L STG; 2)
Forward>Backward: L angular gyrus and mesial parietal lobe; 3)
Forward>Backward for Awake>Asleep: R PFC 
 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2010 
 
 Healthy infants (M=72 days) 
 7 (1 awake, 2 asleep, 4 both) 
 6 fussiness; 11 no activation to
sound>rest 
 Classical music; Mother’s speech;
Stranger’s speech; For all-Repeated and Varied 
 Frame removal: visual examination; Adjusted
analysis to limit influence of large deviation in signal
(>=2.5 SD) 
 Infant DL 
 Random-effects: voxel p<0.01, cluster
p<0.05 corrected; Fixed-effects: voxel p<0.001, cluster p<0.05
corrected 
 1) Repetition Suppression Effect: L STG; 2)
Laterality effect speech>music in L planum temporale for
music>speech in R planum temporale; 3) Mother>stranger in B
anterior PFC, L posterior temporal and rest>mother in R amygdala, R
insula, R STS, R occipital sulcus 
 
 
 
 Eyler et al.,
2012 
 
 Typically developing (TD) children
(12–48 mo, M=32.0 mo); Children with current or
subsequently confirmed ASD diagnosis (12–48 mo, M=25.6
mo) 
 80 (40 TD, 40 ASD) 
 10 TD and 12 ASD waking before 2/3 scan
complete; 5 ASD not confirmed; 4 various reasons 
 Simple forward speech; complex forward speech;
backward speech ( Redcay et al.,
2008 ) 
 AFNI software for motion correction; Subject
removal: visually apparent residual motion on > 1/3 of images (none
excluded); Covary for residual motion in analyses 
 Tal 
 p<.05 monte carlo correction for multiple
comparisons (t>2.86 for within group; t>2.42 for a one-tailed
between-group, at least 32 voxels) 
 1) Each type of speech stimuli>rest,
TD>ASD: L STG; 2) In ASD group, L STG activation to simple
forward>rest is negatively correlated with age; 3) In TD group, left
laterality to forward speech in STG 4) In ASD group, right laterality to
forward speech in anterior STG 
 
 
 
 Graham et al.,
2013 
 
 Healthy infants from families reporting a
range of interparental conflict (M=8.33 mo) 
 20 
 15 for motion or sleep difficulties; 4 no
activation to sound>rest 
 Nonsense speech with varying prosody (Very
Angry, Angry, Happy and Neutral) 
 Frame removal: visual examination; Maximum
motion remaining=1.07mm 
 Infant 8–11 MRI NBD 
 voxel p<0.05, cluster p<0.05 corrected
for multiple comparisons 
 1) Higher conflict associated with very
angry>neutral in rostral anterior cingulate cortex, hypothalamus,
thalamus and caudate; 2) Emotion controlling for conflict: Very
Angry>Neutral: L temporal Pole; Angry>Neutral: None;
Happy>Neutral: lingual gyrus, fusiform, parahippocampal gyrus,
putamen, midcingulate, SMA, SFG, MFG 
 
 
 
 Redcay &
Couchesne, 2008 
 
 Children with provisional ASD (M=34.9
mo), age-(CA; M=35.7 mo), and mental age (MA; M=19.6 mo)
controls 
 13 ASD, 12 CA, 11 MA 
 8 sleep difficulties; 1 motion; 2 did not meet
criteria for ASD 
 Simple forward speech; complex forward speech;
backward speech 
 Frame removal: Images with sum of root mean
square of parameters > 0.4 
 Tal 
 p<.01, corrected at 960 mm 3 ;
Trend level p<.05, corrected at 384 mm 3 
 1) Forward>rest, both MA>ASD and
CA>ASD: frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital regions and
cerebellum; 2) Forward>rest for ASD > CA: right hemisphere
activation; 3) Receptive language + correlated with R frontal
and temporal region activation in ASD group 
 
 
 
 Redcay et
al., 2007 
 
 Healthy children (M=45.8 mo) 
 19 (12 with visual, 13 with auditory) 
 Auditory: 2 for motion and 6 for waking;
Visual: 9 for waking 
 Vocal (nonspeech); Nonvocal (environmental);
Tones; Flashing lights 
 Frame removal: Images with sum of root mean
square of parameters > 0.4; Scans excluded: > 10% of
images lost 
 Tal 
 p<.005, cluster corrected at
740mm 3 
 1) Nonvocal>vocal: frontal, temporal (R
STG), occipital (B lingual gyrus) and cerebellum 2) Tones>Vocal:
frontal, temporal (R STG), and parietal and cerebellum; 3)
Rest<visual: B cuneus, B lingual gyrus, L superior occipital
gyrus 
 
 
 
 Redcay et
al., 2008 
 
 Healthy toddlers (M=21 mo) and
3-yo’s (M=39 mo) 
 10 toddlers; 10 3-yo’s 
 5 sleep difficulties; 1 experimenter error; 2
did not attend 
 Simple forward speech; complex forward speech;
backward speech 
 Summed distance of translational and
rotational parameteres > 0.3 
 Tal 
 Voxel p < .01, cluster p< .05, (cluster
volume = 960 mm 3 ); Relaxed for certain contrasts to
voxel p<.05. 
 1) Forward>rest for
3-yo’s>toddler: B STG, frontal, parietal and occipital
regions; 2) Forward>rest for toddler>3-yo’s: Frontal,
parietal, occipital and subcortical regions (no temporal regions) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Studies with sedation not included. All experiments
conducted during natural sleep with the exception of  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ,  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2010 , in which infants
were scanned awake and during natural sleep. Atlas abbreviations: Infant
DL=Template created by  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ; Infant 8–11 MRI
NBD=8–11 month version of atlas from MRI Study of Normal
Brain Development ( Fonov et al.,
2009 ;  Fonov et al., 2011 );
Tal= Talairach & Tournoux. Other abbreviations:
wks=weeks; mo=months; yrs=years;
yo’s=year olds; B=Bilateral; L=left;
R=right; STG=superior temporal gyrus; SFG=superior
frontal gyrus; MFG=middle frontal gyrus; SMA=supplementary
motor areas; ASD=Autism Spectrum Disorder. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Review of Resting State Functional Connectivity Studies with Infants and Toddlers
During Natural Sleep 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 Population 
 N Analyses 
 N Excluded 
 Analysis Type 
 Motion 
 Atlas 
 Statistical Threshold 
 Findings 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 
 Healthy singleton and twin (only one twin per
pair) neonates (M=33 days), 1-yo’s (M=397 days),
2-yo’s (M=762 days); Longitudinal>= 2 time
points 
 112 neonates, 129 1-yo’s, 92
2-yo’s 
 No information provided, data identified from
previous studies 
 Insula segmentation based on adult atlas; K
means clustering with correlation matrix of insula voxels; Whole brain
seed-based correlation with insula clusters; ROIs based on 2yo’s
whole brain connectivity map; Graph theory metrics 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.5% signal
change and FD <.5mm 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 For cluster confirmation: validity indicator
and cluster consensus measures, bootstrapping method (% of
consistent cluster membership for each voxel based on 1,000 samplings);
p<.05, FDR corrected for tests with connectivity maps 
 1) Two clusters for all ages with high
consistency of voxel assignment to anterior or posterior based on
bootstrapping (range of consistency=74–95% for
all insula voxels and each age group); 2) Dissociable whole brain
connectivity for clusters across ages: AI connectivity with ACC, medial
temporal lobe, thalamus, orbitofrontal cortex, dlPFC; PI connectivity
with superior temporal sulcus, middle cingulate, motor and somatosensory
cortices 3) Change with age: AI=decreased local and increased
long range; PI=increases and decreases for local and long range;
greatest change 0 to 1yo for mean connectivity strength and graph theory
metrics 
 
 
 Alcauter et al., 2014 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 Adult ROIs ( Smith et al., 2009 ) to identify 9 cortical networks;
Non-overlapping network masks based on
“winner-takes-all”; Thalamus ROI from Harvard-Oxford
atlas; Thalamus subdivided by partial correlations of voxels with
network masks and “winner-takes-all”; Longitudinal
analysis with mixed-effect regression models 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.5% signal
change and FD <.5mm; Remaining FD as covariate; Subject removal:
= < 90 frames remaining 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 p<.05 FDR for whole brain seed-based
connectivity maps; r >= .1 to create masks of cortical
networks 
 1) In neonates, sensorimotor network
connectivity to large central thalamic cluster and salience networks to
anterior thalamus; 2) In 1-yo’s, medial-visual network
connectivity to posterior lateral thalamus and default to central
posterior thalamus; 3) 2-yo’s show similar thalamic
parcellations to 1-yo’s; 4) 1-yo’s thalamus-salience
connectivity predicted visual-spatial working memory and Mullen Early
Learning Composite Score at 2 yrs 
 
 
 
 Dinstein et
al., 2011 
 
 Toddlers with autism (M= 29 mo),
language delay (LD; M=19 mo), and typically developing
(M=28 mo) 
 29 with autism, 13 with LD, 30 typical
typical 
 No information provided, data from previous
studies 
 Regressed out stimuli; Anatomically defined
ROIs; Whole brain seed-based correlations 
 Frame removal: criteria not specified 
 Tal 
 r>.3 for whole brain seed correlations;
Two-tailed t-test p<.05 for group differences. 
 1) Weaker interhemispheric connectivity for
IFG and STG in autism; 2) Autism classification based on connectivity:
21/29 correctly and 7/43 incorrectly identified; 3) IFG connectivity
+ associated with expressive language language and -associated
with with autism severity autism severity 
 
 
 
 Fransson et
al., 2009 
 
 Healthy infants delivered by caesarean
(M=40 wks GA) 
 19 
 2 for motion 
 Probabalistic approach to ICA (PICA) 
 Frame removal: criteria not specified; Scans
excluded: criteria not specified 
 Infant DL 
 p<.05 (activation versus null across whole
brain and time series) 
 1) 6 networks identified (% variance
explained): medial occipital(1.63%), B sensorimotor
(3.18%), B temporal (0.70%), parietal (4.78%),
anterior PFC (1.60%), B basal ganglia (0.1%); 2)
PCC/precuneus to bilateral parietal connectivity observed 
 
 
 Fransson et al., 2011 
 Healthy infants from  Fransson et al., 2009 ; Healthy adults
(M=29 yrs) 
 18 Infants, 18 Adults 
 See  Fransson
et al., 2009 
 Voxel-based graph theoretical analysis; Whole
brain seed-based correlations of hub regions 
 For infants see  Fransson et al., 2009 
 Neonatal ( Kazemi et al., 2007 ) 
 Peak Z-values > 15mm apart for hubs;
p<.0005 for seed-based connectivity; Networks at 0.20 < r <
0.40, iteratively 
 1) Infants: hubs and networks in sensory and
motor cortices except for DLPFC, insula and parietal lobule; 2) Adults:
hubs and networks in heteromodal cortex espeically in default and
frontoparietal attention networks; 3) Small-world network organization
in infants 
 
 
 Fransson et al., 2012* 
 Healthy infants from  Fransson et al., 2009 ; Healthy adults
(M=29 yrs) 
 18 Infants, 17 adults 
 See  Fransson
et al., 2009 
 Spherical ROIs based on adult and infant atlas
coordinates; Power analysis 
 For infants see  Fransson et al., 2009 
 Neonatal ( Kazemi et al., 2007 ) 
 NA 
 1) Infants>adults for average power-law
exponent; 2) For adults power-law exponents higher in associative
networks and for infants higher in primary sensory networks 
 
 
 
 Gao et al.
2009 
 
 Healthy neonates (M=24 days),
1-yo’s (M=13 mo,), 2-yo’s (M=25 mo) and
adults (M=30 yrs) 
 20 neonates, 24 1-yo’s, 27
2-yo’s, 15 adults 
 22 for motion or medical problem (e.g. preterm
birth) 
 ICA; graph theory 
 Frame removal: Criteria not specified, but
based on screening unpreprocessed images for abrupt BOLD signal
changes 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 For default network definition: Z>1 to
determine voxel-wise connectivity; For correlation matrices p<.05 FDR
corrected 
 1) # default regions identified:
Neonates 6; 1yo o’s s 10, 2yo o’s s 13; 2) MPFC and PCC
identified in all groups with volume of cluster -associated with age; 3)
Nonlinear development of default network; 4) PCC as default network hub
in neonates 
 
 
 
 Gao et al.
2011 
 
 Healthy neonates (M=23 days),
1-yo’s (M=13 mo), and 2-yo’s (M=24
mo) 
 51 neonates, 50 1-yo’s, 46
2-yo’s 
 51 for motion or medical problem (e.g. preterm
birth) 
 ROIs from adult atlas based on sulcal
patterns; graphy theory 
 Frame removal: Screening unpreprocessed images
for abrupt BOLD signal changes (criteria not specified) 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 Whole brain analysis: p<.05 FDR; Regional
analysis: p<.05 uncorrected 
 1) Connection density increases from neonate
to 1yo, but stable from 1yo’s to 2yo’s; 2) Strength of
connectivity for anatomically distant nodes increases with age; 3)
Increase in small-worldness with age; 4) B insula consistent hub across
age groups 
 
 
 
 Gao et al.
2013 
 
 See  Gao et
al., 2011 
 See  Gao et
al., 2011 
 See  Gao et
al., 2011 
 Adult ROIs based on  Fox et al., 2005 ; Whole brain seed-based
correlations; Additional ROIs based on 1yo connectivity map;
nonparametric rank-sum test for age differences 
 Frame removal: Criteria not specified, but
based on screening unpreprocessed images for abrupt BOLD signal
changes 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 p<.05 FDR, cluster size > 10 voxels 
 1) Default (PCC seed) and dorsal attention
networks (IPS seed) show adult-like topology in 1yo’s (with
exception of frontal eye fields in dorsal attention); 2) Greater change
from 0 to 1yo and less from 1yo to 2yo for both networks; 3) Increasing
connection strength within each network, and increasing segregation
between networks over time (less overlap and negative correlations seen
in 1yo’s and 2 yo’s) 
 
 
 
 Gao, Alcauter,
Smith et al., 2014 
 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 See  Alcauter et
al., 2013 
 ICA; Spatial correlation to match components
to 9 adult networks; voxel-wise “winner-takes-all” to
define functional regions based on ICA; Growth models of mean
inter-regional connectivity, network connectivity and inter-regional
connectivity between 2 networks 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.5% signal
change and FD <.5mm, and examined results with thresholds of
<.3% and <.2mm; Remaining FD as covariate 
 Individual Infant and then UNC Infant 
 p<.05 FDR for connectivity 
 1) Adult-like topology in neonates for medial
visual and sensorimotor networks; 2) Adult-like topology for all
networks in 1 yos (medial visual, sensorimotor, occipital pole, lateral
visual, default, auditory/language, salience, frontoparietal) with
>= .40 spatial correlation between 1yo component and adult
network component and adult network 3) Network strucuture in
2yo’s consistent with 1yo’s; 4) Significant non-linear
growth of inter-regional connectivity for all networks with greater
change from 0 to 1yo’s (except medial visual, sensorimotor,
occipital pole); 5) Inter-network connectivity decreased over time; 6)
Greater growth in frontoparietal connectivity from 0 to 2yo’s
for boys vs girls 
 
 
 
 Gao, Alcauter,
Elton et al., 2014 
 
 Healthy infants scanned longitudinally
(<1-mo, 3-mo, 6-mo, 9-mo, 12-mo); Healthy adults (27–40
yrs) 
 65 infants (45 <1-mo, 34 3-mo, 33 6-mo, 29
9-mo, 35 12-mo); 19 adults 
 Retrospectively identified from larger
longitudinal sample 
 Adult ROIs ( Smith et al., 2009 ); Whole brain seed-based correlations;
t-tests to compare networks; network matching score=mean
connectivity within adult network mask - mean conn outside mask;
longitudinal modeling of network matching score 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.5% signal
change and FD <.5mm; Subject removal for >1/3 volumes removed;
Remaining FD and volumes removed as covariates 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 p<.05 FDR 
 1) Network specific growth periods: most
pronounced changes in V1, V2, default, salience and frontoparietal in
1st 3 months; 2) Over 12 months, significant log-linear growth in
network matching score (except sensorimotor and auditory networks) with
fastest growth in following order: visual, default, salience,
frontoparietal; 3) Sensorimotor and auditory show significant decreases
in outside network connectivity 4) Higher SES (income and maternal
education) associated with greater sensorimotor (higher matching score
and within network conn) and default (lower outside network conn)
development at 6 months. SES results did not survive correction for
multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 Gao, Elton et al., in press 
 Healthy singleton neonates (M=22
days), 1-yo’s (M=378 days), 2-yo’s
(M=741 days); Healthy monozygotic (MZ) twin neonates
(M=46 days), 1-yo’s (M=410 days), 2-yo’s
(M=766 days); Healthy dyzgotic (DZ) twin neonates (M=36
days), 1-yo’s (M=402 days), 2-yo’s
(M=779 days) 
 Singletons: 36 neonates, 46 1-yo’s, 26
2-yo’s; MZ pairs: 31 neonates, 18 1-yo’s, 18
2-yo’s; DZ pairs: 40 neonates, 25 1-yo’s, 19
2-yo’s 
 Identified from larger longitudinal sample
( Alcauter et al., 2013 ) 
 Whole brain voxel-wise connectivity maps;
Variability map = one minus correlation between corresponding
columns of correlation matrix for twin pairs and age matched singleton
pairs; Network variability maps based on masks from  Smith et al., 2009 ; Percentage of shared
genes (0%,50%,100%) and environment (0,1,1) as
predictors of similarity between twin and singleton pairs (voxel-wise
regression) 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.3% signal
change and FD <.2mm; Remaining FD as covariate; Subject removal: <
75 frames remaining 
 Individual Infant and then MNI 
 p<.005, 13 voxels, based on 3dClustSim in
AFNI 
 1) At all ages, greater intersubject
variability in association areas vs primary functional areas (similar to
adults); 2) Increasing similarity to adult spatial variability pattern
with age; 3) U shaped growth in intersubject variability from 0 to 2
yrs; 4) Greater intersubject variability associated with more long range
connectivity (similar to adults); 5) Higher percentage shared genes
predicts lower intersubject variability; 6) Genetic effects on
connectivity vary by brain region and by age; 6) Genetic effects grow
stronger from 0 to 1 yr and weaker from 1 to 2 yrs; 7) Weaker effects of
shared environment in contrast to genetic effects. 
 
 
 
 Lin
2008 
 
 Healthy neonates (Range=2–4
wks), 1-yo’s, and 2-yo’s 
 16 neonates, 12 1-yo’s, 7
2-yo’s 
 18 for motion; 14 premature birth, medical
problems, or parent disorder 
 Manually drawn ROIS; whole brain seed-based
correlations 
 Frame removal: Criteria not specified, but
based on screening unpreprocessed images for abrupt BOLD signal
changes 
 Individual Infant 
 z<1; p<.05 corrected for t-test
comparison of the 2 ROIs and for ANOVA of the 3 groups 
 1) Difference between maximum and minimum
signal intensity: 2-yo’s>neonates; 2) Average strength of
connectivity and brain volume evidencing connections to visual and
sensorimotor regions increases with age 
 
 
 
 Liu et al.
2008 
 
 Healthy infants (M=12.8 mo) 
 11 
 From larger structural MRI study with
63% scan success 
 PICA; Bold time series and power spectra
computed for each component 
 Frame removal: Images with >1 mm or > 1
degree of motion; 
 Infant DL 
 NA 
 1) 16–36 spatially independent
components for each subject with 3 in sensorimotor area; 2) More
intra-versus interhemispheric connectivity. 
 
 
 
 Smith et al.,
2011 
 
 Preterm infants <30 wks
(Range=36–44 wks PMA for scan); Healthy term
infants 
 Preterm: 10 low and 10 high stress; 10
term 
 Significant cerebral injury (N not
reported) 
 Whole brain seed-based correlations (ROIs not
specified); Group maps compared qualitatively 
 Frame removal: criteria not specified 
 Not reported 
 Qualitative comparisons for rs-fcMRI maps 
 1) Interhemispheric correlations with R
temporal lobe in low stress and term infants, but not high stress
infants; 2) Total brain injury + associated with stress; 3) R
temporal lobe anistropy -correlated with stress 
 
 
 
 Smyser et
al., 2010 
 
 Preterm infants scanned longitudinally; Term
infants (Range=2–3 days) 
 28 preterm with longitudinal data, 10
term 
 8 for prominent neuropathology; 10 for
motion 
 Spherical ROIs based on adult atlas
coordinates; Whole brain seed-based correlations 
 Frame removal: Software used to identify
frames with motion based on signal change; Scans excluded: < 4
minutes 
 Individual Infant and then Tal 
 For t-tests of correlation maps Z>1.65,
p<.05; Correlations between connectivity and age p<.05 
 1) Increasing interhemispheric connectivity
with age; 2) Term infants>term age preterm infants: local, long range
and interhemispheric connectivity; 3) Connectivity between MPFC and PCC
in half of term control infants, but not in preterm infants 
 
 
 Smyser et al., 2013 
 Preterm infants <30 wks with moderate to
severe white matter injury (WMI; Range=36–39 wks PMA for
scan); Preterm infants < 30 wks with mild white matter injury (PT;
Range=36–40 wks PMA for scan); Healthy term infants (HT;
Range=37-41 wks PMA for scan) 
 14 WMI; 25 PT; 25 HT 
 10 from WMI group for not meeting data quality
standards 
 ROIs based on  Brier et al., 2012  and manually adjusted for anatomic
variation due to injury; Correlations and covariances between ROI pairs
(homotopic counterparts, PCC to MPFC); t-tests to compare
correlations 
 Frame removal: DVARs <.3% signal
change and FD <.25mm; Subject removal: < 100 frames remaining 
 Individual Infant and then Tal 
 Bonferonni multiple comparison correction for
t-tests and rank-sum tests 
 1) WMI group < both control groups for
connectivity between homotopic regions (motor cortex, visual cortex,
medial cerebellum) and between motor cortex and thalamus; 2) WMI group
< HT only for connectivity between other homotopic regions (thalamus,
auditory cortex) and PCC to MPFC (but PCC-MPFC did not survive
Bonferonni); 3) For WMI group, reduced connectivity more pronounced in
injured hemisphere 4) In motor cortex and thalamus (regions usually
close to injury), greater injury severity associated with reduced
connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note.  Studies with sedation not included. All experiments
conducted during natural sleep with the exception of  Smyser et al., 2010 , in which infants were
scanned awake and during natural sleep. 
 
 
 ** 
 Combined EEG and fMRI study. 
 
 
 Atlas abbreviations: Infant DL=Template created by  Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002 ; Tal=
Talairach & Tournoux; Individual Infant=template based on single
infant with longitudinal data; UNC Infant=Template created by  Shi et al., 2011 . Other abbreviations:
wks=weeks; mo=months; yrs=years;
yo’s=year olds; ICA=Independent component analysis;
PMA=postmenstrual age; GA=gestational age;
B=Bilateral; L=left; R=right; AI=anterior
insulal; ACC=anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC=dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex; MPFC=medial prefrontal cortex;
IFG=inferior frontal gyrus; PCC=posterior cingulate cortex;
PI=posterior insula; STG=superior temporal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
