
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 25482265 
 4306569 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.051 
 NIHMS647018 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Frontoparietal networks involved in categorization and item working memory 
 
 
 
 
 Braunlich 
 Kurt 
 
 Colorado State University, Cognitive Psychology and Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Neurosciences 
 
 
 
 Gomez-Lavin 
 Javier 
 
 CUNY, Department of Philosophy 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 Carol A. 
 
 * 
 Colorado State University, Cognitive Psychology and Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Neurosciences 
 
 
 
 * Corresponding author: Carol A. Seger, Department of Psychology, 1876 Campus Delivery, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA, Tel: +1 970 491-3540, Fax: +1 970 491-1032,  Carol.Seger@colostate.edu 
 
 
 30 
 12 
 2014 
 
 
 04 
 12 
 2014 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2016 
 
 107 
 146 
 162 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Categorization and memory for specific items are fundamental processes that allow us to apply knowledge to novel stimuli. This study directly compares categorization and memory using delay match to category (DMC) and delay match to sample (DMS) tasks. In DMC participants view and categorize a stimulus, maintain the category across a delay, and at the probe phase view another stimulus and indicate whether it is in the same category or not. In DMS, a standard item working memory task, participants encode and maintain a specific individual item, and at probe decide if the stimulus is an exact match or not. Constrained Principal Components Analysis was used to identify and compare activity within neural networks associated with these tasks, and we relate these networks to those that have been identified with resting state-fMRI. We found that two frontoparietal networks of particular interest. The first network included regions associated with the dorsal attention network and frontoparietal salience network; this network showed patterns of activity consistent with a role in rapid orienting to and processing of complex stimuli. The second uniquely involved regions of the frontoparietal central-executive network; this network responded more slowly following each stimulus and showed a pattern of activity consistent with a general role in role in decision-making across tasks. Additional components were identified that were associated with visual, somatomotor and default mode networks. 
 
 
 working memory 
 categorization 
 connectivity 
 PCA 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 1 Introduction 
 Categorization and specific-item memory are fundamental processes which allow us to apply knowledge to novel situations. Categorization requires abstraction from inherent stimulus features to generalizable latent features, and plays an important role in the flexible transfer of knowledge and skills across stimuli and tasks (for review, see  Seger & Miller, 2010 ). In contrast, memory for specific items maintains these inherent stimulus features in order to enable us to make fine distinctions between items. Despite these fundamental differences, both categorization and specific item memory tasks recruit common cognitive control systems to support task performance ( Cole et al., 2013 ;  Gazzaley & Nobre, 2012 ;  Seger & Peterson, 2013 ), raising the question of how the same neural systems can serve different ends. This study directly compares categorization and specific item memory using delayed-match-to-category (DMC) and delayed-match-to-sample (DMS) tasks in which participants encode a stimulus, maintain information across a delay, see a second stimulus and then decide if it matches the first. The tasks share similar structure, and therefore place similar demands on perceptual (stimulus encoding), motor (response execution) and some executive functions (working memory and decision-making). The tasks differ in what is encoded at the first stimulus and in the basis of the match-mismatch decision occurring at probe: specific item identity in the DMS task and category in the DMC task. Our design, therefore, allows us to isolate differences between processes associated with categorization and those associated with item-specific memory, and also to identify shared processes. Below we first discuss proposed shared cognitive control functions across categorization and specific-item tasks and how they may rely on intrinsically connected frontoparietal neural networks. We then discuss aspects of cognitive processing specific to categorization and to item working memory. Finally we describe our task and our predictions. 
 
 1.1 Shared cognitive control processes and intrinsic neural systems 
 Much recent research has focused on how frontoparietal networks can be flexibly recruited to support cognitive control in diverse task environments ( Cole et al., 2013 ;  Dumontheil, Thompson, & Duncan, 2011 ;  Duncan, 2010 ). Multiple networks supporting cognitive control have been identified, and although there is currently little consensus concerning network nomenclature, we will focus on two networks that show coactivation across a variety of cognitive tasks and correlated patterns of intrinsic activity during resting-state fMRI ( Dosenbach et al., 2007 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ). The first, the salience network (abbreviated here as SA), which has important nodes in the anterior insula / frontoinsular cortex and dorsal anterior cingulate (ACC) / medial frontal gyrus, is thought to play an important role in bottom-up detection of salient external events, the coordination of functional networks to meet task demands, and in moderating autonomic arousal ( Medford & Critchley, 2010 ;  Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Menon, 2011 ;  Sridharan, Levitin, & Menon, 2008 ). The second, the central executive network (FP-CEN), which has important nodes in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex / intraparietal sulcus, is thought to operate on the salient stimuli marked by the SA network ( Seeley et al., 2007 ), and to play an important role in the manipulation and maintenance of these representations in working memory and rule-based processes ( Miller & Cohen, 2001 ). 
 Intrinsic connectivity has also identified other networks, such as the somatomotor network (SM; primary motor and somatosensory cortex), dorsal attentional network (DA; premotor and superior parietal cortex), default mode network (DMN; medial frontal and posterior cingulate regions, inferior parietal and medial temporal lobe), and visual network (VS; occipital and inferior temporal cortex) ( Buckner, Krienen, Castellanos, Diaz, & Yeo, 2011 ;  Choi, Yeo, & Buckner, 2012 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ). A focus of recent research has been to identify how these networks interact, and one particularly important finding is that the FP-CEN and SA, which show greater activity during cognitively-demanding tasks ( Chen et al., 2013 ;  Dang, Donde, & Madison, 2012 ;  Vanhaudenhuyse & Demertzi, 2011 ) are anticorrelated with the DMN. The SA is thought to play an important role in mediating this anticorrelated relationship, and in switching from the DMN to the FP-CEN in response to salient external events ( Bonnelle et al., 2012 ;  Goulden et al., 2014 ;  Menon, 2011 ;  Palaniyappan, Simmonite, White, Liddle, & Liddle, 2013 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ). 
 How these primarily cortical intrinsic connectivity networks interact with subcortical and cerebellar regions is an active area of research. Buckner and colleagues, for instance, examined functional connectivity between the cortical intrinsic connectivity networks and the basal ganglia and the cerebellum ( Buckner, Krienen, Castellanos, Diaz, & Yeo, 2011 ;  Choi, Yeo, & Buckner, 2012 ). Both basal ganglia and cerebellum had separate regions that correlated with each cortical network, consistent with known projections from cortex to these structures. Particularly relevant for our study are the interconnections with the FP-CEN, which are primarily correlated with the dorsal head and body of the caudate nucleus ( Choi et al., 2012 ), and the lateral cerebellar hemisphere ( Buckner et al., 2011 ). 
 
 
 1.2 Categorization 
 Cognitive neuroscience studies have associated categorization with a large distributed neural network including the basal ganglia ( Seger, 2008 ), lateral frontal ( Muhammad, Wallis, & Miller, 2006 ), lateral parietal cortex ( Daniel et al., 2011 ;  Freedman & Assad, 2009 ;  Rishel, Huang, & Freedman, 2013 ), precuneus ( Wenzlaff, Bauer, Maess, & Heekeren, 2011 ), premotor and supplementary motor areas ( Ashby, Ennis, & Spiering, 2007 ;  Little, Shin, Sisco, & Thulborn, 2006 ;  Waldschmidt & Ashby, 2011 ). Although still an active area of research, clues are emerging as to the individual contributions made by each region. The basal ganglia has been associated with multiple processes: posterior regions are involved in mapping visual stimuli to category, and category to motor response, whereas anterior regions and the ventral striatum are associated with feedback and reward processing ( Seger, 2008 ). Frontal regions have been associated with maintenance and implementation of categorization rules ( Antzoulatos & Miller, 2011 ;  Buschman, Denovellis, & Diogo, 2012 ;  Freedman, Riesenhuber, Poggio, & Miller, 2001 ;  Meyers, Freedman, Kreiman, Miller, & Poggio, 2008 ;  Muhammad et al., 2006 ;  Wallis & Miller, 2003 ). The parietal cortex combines category with motor response, and may be responsible for integration of relevant information for category membership ( Freedman & Assad, 2009 ;  Shadlen & Newsome, 2001 ;  Swaminathan & Freedman, 2012 ). The precuneus and SMA, along with regions of the basal ganglia they interact with, may be associated with setting a response criterion ( Forstmann et al., 2008 ;  Wenzlaff et al., 2011 ). In addition, inferotemporal cortex performs relevant visual processing necessary for categorization, though it is still unclear the degree to which this region changes with learning and contributes to the representation of novel categories. 
 Previous categorization studies in humans have typically required participants to view, categorize and respond to single stimuli in rapid succession. However, like the DMC task, real life situations often have a delay between the categorization of a stimulus and a subsequent behavioral response, or require that multiple categorical representations be integrated in order to determine the correct response. The DMC task is advantageous in that it allows us to examine category maintenance and integration across stimuli, and also allows the dissociation of categorization processes from those related to motor preparation. The DMC task was originally developed for research with non-human primates, which find category sensitivity independent of motor response for neurons in inferotemporal, parietal, frontal, and basal ganglia regions ( Freedman & Miller, 2008 ). Electrophysiological recordings suggest coordination between the frontoparietal network and regions within the inferior temporal lobe during this task, such that inferior temporal regions tend to be more sensitive to the visual features of individual exemplars, while prefrontal regions are more sensitive to features relevant for successful task performance (e.g., categorical-status of the first stimulus, and match-mismatch status of the second;  Freedman et al., 2003 ; Meyers et al., 2008a). 
 
 
 1.3 Working Memory 
 The DMS task has been used extensively to investigate specific-item working memory in human and non-human primates. A large body of research finds that frontoparietal regions are recruited during the performance of DMS tasks ( Sala, Rämä, & Courtney, 2003 ). However, there are some differences based on task demands; for example, working memory for objects rather than spatial location is particularly reliant on ventrolateral PFC regions in the middle and inferior frontal gyri ( Sala et al., 2003 ). There is also evidence that working memory for objects involves interactions between these frontoparietal networks and higher order visual cortical regions involved in representing the objects ( Gazzaley, Rissman, & D’Esposito, 2004 ), and evidence that memory for specific items can lead to interactions with the hippocampus ( Rissman, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2008 ). Neural networks recruited during DMS performance vary depending on task demands. Increased working memory demands have been associated with increased connectivity between regions in the inferotemporal cortex and the hippocampus, and decreased connectivity between inferotemporal regions and the inferior frontal gyrus ( Rissman et al., 2008 ). Similarly, during the delay epoch, inferotemporal regions associated with task-relevant processes show increased connectivity with the frontoparietal network while regions associated with task-irrelevant processes show increased connectivity with the default mode network ( Chadick and Gazzaley, 2011 ). 
 
 
 1.4 Present Study 
 In the present study, we directly compared patterns of activity during DMC and DMS tasks utilizing the same perceptually-similar stimuli (young Caucasian female faces) and the same timing and responses such that the tasks differed only in the requirement to either categorize the face or remember the specific face. As in several previous DMS studies, we chose to use facial stimuli, as the processing of these stimuli is known to occur with localized regions of the fusiform cortex (cf.,  Gazzaley et al., 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2008 ). Two versions of the DMC task were used, which we termed “Category” and “Label.” In both, participants viewed a face at encoding, categorized it, and maintained the category membership across a delay. At probe, the conditions differed: in the Category version participants viewed a second face, whereas in the Label version they viewed the category label (“A” or “B”). In both of these conditions, participants decided whether the categories matched. The Label condition allowed us to discriminate between activity due to comparing category labels and match-mismatch decision making, versus activity due to viewing and categorizing the face. Thus, we predicted that regions involved in stimulus categorization should have high activity at encoding for both Label and Category, but only for Category at probe. However, regions associated with category match-mismatch decision making should show activity more broadly in both tasks. 
 We predicted some common and some differing patterns of activity based on the shared and individual characteristics of categorization and item working memory. First, because of the paired task design that equated basic visual and motor demands, we predicted similar recruitment of the visual and motor systems. Second, as both tasks require weighing evidence towards the binary response options, we predicted that the tasks would commonly elicit activity in regions associated with general decision-making processes ( Freedman & Assad, 2011 ;  Seger & Peterson, 2013 ). We predicted that the primary differences between tasks would be found in regions associated with the FP-CEN. Categorization involves several different strategies that require cognitive control, including evaluating information with respect to categorization criteria and mapping the stimulus to category membership ( Seger & Peterson, 2013 ). In contrast, working memory requires different control processes for encoding and maintenance, potentially via interactions with inferotemporal cortex and the hippocampus ( Rissman et al., 2008 ). 
 
 
 
 2 Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Seventeen participants were recruited from the Colorado State University Community. All participants were healthy, right-handed adults (11 females, 6 males) with an average age of 27 (range: 20–37). Participants were screened for history of psychiatric or neurological disorders, for current use of psychoactive medications, and exclusionary criteria for fMRI (e.g., claustrophobia, metallic implants). 
 
 
 2.2 Stimuli 
 Twenty-five similar young adult female Caucasian faces were selected for the stimulus set. To discourage use of verbalizable memory strategies, all images were cropped so that the whole face, but no other defining characteristics, was shown. The faces were then warped and resized to subtend a visual angle of roughly 3.9 degrees horizontally and 6.9 degrees vertically. For each participant, eight stimuli were randomly assigned to category “A” and eight were randomly assigned to category “B.” This type of categorization task is sometimes referred to as arbitrary, or unstructured because the stimuli are randomly assigned to category and do not include any intentional within-category similarities. Unstructured tasks rely on procedural knowledge to a similar degree as structured implicit categorization tasks ( Crossley, Madsen, & Ashby, 2012 ), and recruit similar cortical and striatal systems ( Seger, Dennison, Lopez-Paniagua, Peterson, & Roark, 2011 ;  Seger, Peterson, Cincotta, Lopez-Paniagua, & Anderson, 2010 ). The remaining stimuli were used in the Item condition. 
 
 
 2.3 Procedure 
 Prior to scanning, participants performed two tasks on a laptop computer; they first learned to categorize faces and then trained on a task that was similar to what they would later perform in the scanner. In the category-learning task, participants learned to categorize each of the 16 faces into category “A” or category “B” via trial and error. On each trial, a face was presented in the center of the computer screen, and the category labels were presented at the bottom left and right of the screen. To encourage participants to learn category labels rather than specific motor responses, the locations of the labels were randomly determined on each trial (i.e., “A” appeared at the bottom left of the screen on some trials, but at the bottom right on others). Participants responded by pressing the “d” key on the laptop keyboard if the chosen category label was on the bottom left side of the screen, and the “k” key if it was on the bottom right. Each image remained on the screen until the participant made a response. Following each response, auditory and visual feedback was presented for 0.75 seconds. Following correct responses, the word “Correct” was presented in the center of the computer screen with a pleasant tone. Following incorrect responses, the word “Wrong” was presented with an unpleasant tone. Every 100 trials, participants were given a self-paced break. Participants trained until they reached an 85% correct performance criterion on the final block of 100 trials. 
 To gain familiarity with the task that would later be used in the scanner, after reaching the 85% performance criterion, participants performed a second training task similar to that they would perform in the scanner ( Figure 1  illustrates the task performed in the scanner). At the beginning of each trial, a cue was presented for 1.5 seconds, which instructed participants to either “Match the Specific Face,” or “Match the Category.” After this cue was presented, a face stimulus was presented for 1.5 seconds in the center of the computer screen. After a nine-second delay (during which time participants saw only a blank screen), a second face stimulus (or, in the Label condition, the category label “A” or “B”) was presented for three seconds. Two response cues, “Match” and “Mismatch” were then added to the display (at the bottom left and bottom right of the screen, respectively). On trials in which participants were cued to remember the specific face, participants had to indicate whether the second face was the same as the first. On trials in which participants were instructed to remember the category, they had to indicate whether the second stimulus (face or category label) belonged to the same category as the first. No feedback was delivered. Trials were separated by a 1.5 second inter-trial interval (ITI) during training. All participants performed 30 trials of the second training task. The assignment of condition to trial was random (selected with replacement), such that there were 10 trials per condition. As in the first training task, participants made their responses via the index fingers of their right and left hands using the “d” and “k” keys. 
 In the scanner, the task was similar to the second pretraining task described above. Stimuli were, however, presented via a back-projection mirror positioned above the participant, and responses were made with fingers of the right and left hands via separate button boxes. The ITI was jittered according to a positively-skewed geometric distribution ranging from 1.5 to 9 seconds. Participants performed two 15-minute runs. In order to increase power for analyses of the Item trials in contrast with Categorical Encoding trials, we presented fewer Category (14) and Label (14) trials than Item trials (17) during each run. Both correct and incorrect trials were included in the analyses to maximize statistical power. 
 
 
 2.4 Image Acquisition 
 Images were obtained with a 3.0 Tesla MRI scanner (Siemens) at the Intermountain Neuroimaging Consortium (Boulder, CO). The scanner was equipped with a 12-channel head coil. Structural images were collected using a 3D T1-weighted rapid gradient-echo (MPRAGE) sequence (256 × 256 matrix; FOV, 256; 192 1-mm sagittal slices). Functional images were reconstructed from 28 axial oblique slices obtained using a T2* -weighted 2D-EPI sequence (TR, 1500ms; TE, 25ms; FA, 75; FOV, 220-mm, 96 × 96 matrix; 4.5-mm thick slices; no inter-slice gap). Each run consisted of 597 volumes. The first three volumes, which were collected before the magnetic field reached a steady state, were discarded. 
 
 2.4.1 Preprocessing 
 Image preprocessing was performed using SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8 ). Preprocessing involved correction of slice time acquisition differences (images were adjusted to the 14th slice), motion correction of each volume to the first volume of the first run using 3rd degree B spline interpolation, coregistration of the functional to the structural data, normalization to the MNI template, smoothing (with a 6 mm Gaussian kernel), and temporal filtering (with a 128 sec. high-pass filter). One participant had excessive head-movement (defined as greater than 3mm translational or 2.5° rotational movement). This participant’s data were excluded from subsequent analyses. 
 
 
 
 2.5 FMRI Analyses 
 
 2.5.1 Univariate General Linear Model 
 Trial epochs (i.e., encoding, delay, and probe) were modeled as independent regressors in a univariate whole-brain analysis. All trials were included in this analysis. The encoding regressor was coded as a 1.5 s. boxcar coinciding with the presentation of the first stimulus (1.5–3 sec. after cue onset). The delay period was modeled as a 2 second boxcar placed halfway through the delay period (6–8 sec. after cue onset). The probe period was modeled as a 3 second boxcar coinciding with the presentation of the second stimulus (12–15 sec. after cue onset). As in previous research, the onsets of these regressors were placed at least 4 seconds apart to minimize the influence of preceding trial epochs ( Barde & Thompson-Schill, 2002 ;  Druzgal & D’Esposito, 2003 ;  Gazzaley et al., 2007 ,  2004 ;  Pessoa, Gutierrez, Bandettini, & Ungerleider, 2002 ;  Postle, Zarahn, & D’Esposito, 2000 ;  Rissman, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2004 ;  Rissman et al., 2008 ;  Zarahn, Aguirre, & D’Esposito, 1997 ). We convolved each boxcar with the canonical SPM HRF. For each contrast, we generated maps at an uncorrected threshold of  p  < 0.001 and corrected for multiple comparisons using the topological false-discovery rate ( Chumbley & Friston, 2009 ). 
 
 
 2.5.2 Constrained Principal Component Analyses (CPCA) 
 To investigate task-related differences across functional networks, we used Constrained Principal Component Analyses (CPCA) using a finite-impulse response (FIR) model, as implemented in the fMRI-CPCA toolbox ( www.nitrc.org/projects/fmricpca ). CPCA combines multivariate regression and principal component analysis to identify multiple functional networks involved in a given task, and has been used successfully with similar experimental paradigms ( Metzak et al., 2012 ;  Metzak et al., 2011 ;  Woodward, Feredoes, Metzak, Takane, & Manoach, 2013 ). This approach is mathematically similar to Partial Least Squares analysis ( McIntosh, Bookstein, Haxby, & Grady, 1996 ), and is attractive, as it allows estimation of changes in the BOLD response across peristimulus time within each functional network, and also allows statistical inference concerning the importance of each column of the design matrix for each component. 
 CPCA involves preparation of two matrices:  Z , and  G. Z  contains the BOLD time course of each voxel, with one column per voxel and one row per scan. The design matrix,  G  contains a FIR model of the BOLD response related to the event onsets. The BOLD time-series in  Z  is regressed onto the design matrix,  G , yielding a matrix,  C , of regression weights.  GC  thus contains the variance in  Z , that is accounted for by the design matrix,  G . Components are then extracted from the variance in  GC  via singular value decomposition, yielding  U , a matrix of left singular vectors,  D  a diagonal matrix of singular values, and  V , a matrix of right singular vectors. The columns of  VD , which reflect component loadings, can be overlaid on a structural image to visualize the functional networks. To maximize the variance of the squared loadings, we orthogonally rotated  VD  prior to display. The top 5% of these rotated loadings for each component are illustrated in  Figures 3B ,  4B ,  5B ,  6B  and  7A . Several previous studies (e.g.,  Metzak et al., 2012 ;  Metzak et al., 2011 ) have used a similar threshold. For each combination of peristimulus time-point, condition and participant, CPCA estimates a set of predictor weights ( P ), which are the values that relate the design matrix,  G , to the networks associated with each component, such that  U  =  G  ×  P . All trials were included in this analysis. 
 We conducted a repeated measures ANOVA using SPSS, which allowed us to investigate the consecutive scans where the slope of the predictor weight time course differed between conditions. This allows investigation of differences between conditions or contiguous time points, without considering the complex hemodynamic shape (cf.,  Metzak et al., 2012 ). For these analyses, and in  Figures 3B ,  4B ,  5B ,  6B  and  7A , we adjusted the time-series so that the first observation was zero for all conditions (cf.,  Metzak et al., 2011 ,  2012 ;  Woodward et al., 2013 ). We tested assumptions of sphericity, and controlled for violations using Greenhouse-Geisser adjusted degrees of freedom. 
 Readers more familiar with the interpretation of statistical maps derived from univariate analyses should take care when interpreting the multivariate results shown in  Figures 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6  and  7 . Whereas statistical maps derived from univariate analyses provide information about activity occurring within specific regions, each CPCA component reflects a pattern of task-related variance derived from all voxels in the brain. The maps derived from CPCA analyses, therefore, provide information about regions that cooperate to subserve a particular function. Whereas most univariate analyses assume a HDR shape by using a standard GLM with a canonical HRF, CPCA uses a FIR model which uncovers network-specific HDR shapes of task-related variance in a data-driven manner. This is valuable, as it can help segregate and characterize task-related processes that might not have been predicted by the experimenter. 
 In the present paper, we use univariate analyses to characterize activity occurring within specific regions of the brain, and we use CPCA to investigate how distributed regions coordinate to subserve different processes. In the tables provided, we label cluster peaks according to a 7-network parcellation identified in previous research ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ), but refer to some regions that these papers term the ventral attentional network as the salience network (SA), in line with current usage ( Buckner, Krienen, & Yeo, 2013 ). 
 
 
 
 
 3 Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral 
 All trials for which participants made a behavioral response were included in all analyses. Accuracy was highest for the Item conditions ( M  = 94.87% correct,  SD  = 5.83), lower for the Label condition ( M = 81.11%,  SD =12.36) and lowest for the Category condition ( M  = 75.46%,  SD  = 16.71),  F (2,45) = 10.25,  p  < .001, η 2  = 0.31. The accuracy difference between the Label and Category conditions is likely related to the different number of categorization decisions required for each condition: the Category trials required participants to categorize stimuli at encoding and probe, and an error on either decision could lead to an incorrect response, whereas the Label trials required participants to categorize stimuli only at encoding. Performance in the Label condition was close to that of the 85% accuracy criterion from the learning phase. We did not collect reaction time data because it was unlikely to be of interest due to the requirement that participants delay their response until the response cue was presented. 
 
 
 3.2 Neuroimaging 
 
 3.2.1 Univariate GLM Analyses 
 Whole brain GLM analyses were used to examine regions of activity during each trial epoch: encoding, delay and probe (cf.,  Gazzaley et al., 2007 ,  2004 ). Because the Category and Label trials were identical until the onset of the second stimulus, these conditions were combined as the “categorical-encoding” condition for examination of activity during the encoding and delay epochs. In this section we present univariate regions of activity across the whole brain; we also discuss these results masked by each component later following the CPCA results. 
 As can be seen in  Table A.1  and  Figure 2 , during encoding, the Categorical-Encoding trials elicited greater activity than Item trials primarily within frontal lobe regions (middle cingulate, superior medial gyrus, inferior frontal / anterior insula) and subcortical regions that are known to interact with the frontal lobe (right caudate, left cerebellar lobule VI). These regions participate in the frontoparietal intrinsic connectivity network ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). In addition, categorical encoding recruited visual regions including the bilateral calcarine gyri. The Item condition elicited greater activity than Categorical-Encoding trials in the left inferior frontal gyrus, regions of the temporal and occipital lobe associated with high level visual processing, and the bilateral hippocampus. All of these regions have been identified in previous studies as being recruited during visual working memory encoding ( Gazzaley et al., 2007 ;  Sala et al., 2003 ). The only region showing significant activation in response to both conditions (conjunction analysis, contrast with implicit baseline) at encoding was the crus I region of the right cerebellum. 
 During the delay period, the majority of regions sensitive to differences between conditions showed patterns of activity suppressed below implicit baseline (cf.  Gazzaley, Rissman, & D’Esposito, 2004 ). To avoid difficulties in interpreting deactivation, we conducted a conjunction analysis, and have reported only regions that showed activity greater than implicit baseline and were also sensitive to direct contrasts between conditions. We found that regions in the right superior temporal lobe and middle cingulate gyrus showed significantly greater activity during Item trials than during Categorical-Encoding trials. No regions showed greater activity during Categorical-Encoding trials than during Item trials. 
 During the probe epoch, Category and Label trials were analyzed separately, and compared with each other and with Item trials. Not surprisingly, during the probe epoch, conditions in which participants viewed faces (Category and Item) had greater activity in higher order visual processing regions than the Label condition (in which participants viewed the Category Label, “A” or “B”). As shown in  Figure 2 , these included bilateral inferior occipital and bilateral fusiform gyri. Conversely, Label trials led to greater activity than Category and Item trials in other visual processing regions including the right cuneus / superior occipital gyrus, and a region of the left fusiform (Label > Category only). These differences are likely due to visual processing differences between faces and letters. In addition to visual regions, the Category > Label contrast during the probe epoch revealed recruitment of frontoparietal regions including the right superior medial gyrus, and the middle and posterior cingulate, along with a region of the cerebellum (left cerebellar crus II). 
 The Category versus Item contrast (see  Figure 2 , bottom row) was the most direct comparison between categorization and item recognition; both conditions had similar requirements for viewing and processing face stimuli and making same-different judgments. The only region showing greater activity during Item trials than during Category trials was a region in the left middle temporal gyrus. Category trials elicited greater activity than Item trials in executive regions of the cerebellum, frontal (middle frontal, anterior insula/inferior frontal, and superior medial gyrus) and parietal regions (inferior parietal, angular gyrus, and precuneus), including the salience network. Finally a conjunction analysis revealed that motor planning regions of the SMA were recruited in all three conditions, consistent with the similar motor response demands across the conditions. 
 
 
 3.2.2 CPCA 
 The GLM model,  GC , accounted for 36.31% of the variance in the BOLD signal. Based on inspection of the scree-plot, we extracted five components. After varimax rotation, the first through fifth components accounted for 14.15%, 8.13%, 4.95%, 4.90%, and 4.16% of the task-related variance, respectively. 
 
 3.2.2.1 Component 1 
 Component 1 is illustrated in  Figure 3 ; cluster coordinates are given in  Table A.2 . This component was characterized by activity in the bilateral fusiform gyrus and occipital regions, bilateral thalamus, bilateral parietal regions, bilateral inferior frontal gyrus and anterior insula, and bilateral medial frontal gyrus. Overall this component overlapped with the visual, dorsal attentional, FP-CEN, and SA networks ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Dosenbach, Visscher, & Palmer, 2006 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ). Inspection of the predictor weights ( Figure 3b ) revealed a bimodal shape, and an ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of condition,  F (2,30) = 6.1,  p  < .05, η 2 = .01, a significant main effect of time-point,  F (17,255) = 27.29,  p  < .001, η 2  = .56, and an interaction between condition and time-point,  F (34,510) = 9.88,  p  < .001, η 2  = .04. This interaction was driven by differences following the second stimulus. The slope of the predictor weight timecourse differed between the Category and Label trials for the two consecutive time points between 2.25 and 5.25 seconds ( p <.001 for both time points), and the time points between 6.75 and 11.25 seconds ( p <.05;  p <.001;  p <.001) following the second stimulus. The slope also differed between the Category and Item conditions (2.25 to 3.75, 6.75 to 8.25, 9.75 to 11.25, and 14.25 to 15.75 seconds;  p <.05 for all time-points), and between the Item and Label trials (2.25 to 5.25 seconds and 6.75 to 12.75 seconds;  p <.05 for all time points). Following the second stimulus, the predictor weights associated with the Category and Item conditions showed greater amplitude than those of the Label condition, suggesting that the Category and Item conditions placed greater demands on the Component 1 network than did the Label condition. This might have been due to the visual differences between faces and labels, or due to differences in higher-order cognitive demands. 
 
 
 3.2.2.2 Component 2 
 Component 2 loadings ( Figure 4  and  Table A.3 ) were associated with regions largely involved in motor and visual processing, including motor and premotor cortex (e.g., precentral and postcentral gyri, and the SMA) and visual regions (superior occipital, lateral occipital and lingual gyri). This component largely overlaps with the visual and somatomotor networks, along with some adjoining areas of the salience network and dorsal and ventral attentional networks ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). Inspection of the predictor weights revealed a unimodal peak occurring roughly 8 seconds after the onset of the second stimulus. An ANOVA on the predictor weights revealed a significant main effect of condition,  F (2,30) = 19.23,  p < .001, η 2 =.03, a main effect of time-point  F (17,255) = 5.00,  p  < .001, η 2 =.18, and an interaction between condition and time-point  F (34,510) = 2.9,  p  < .001, η 2 =.04. There was a significant difference in the slope of the predictor weight time course between the Category and Label condition following the first peak (6.75–8.25 seconds after the first stimulus;  p < .05), but the effects predominantly followed the second stimulus. The slope between the Category and Label Trials differed between 2.25 and 3.75 seconds and 12.75 to 14.25 seconds following the second stimulus ( p <.05 for both time points). The slopes associated with the Label and Item conditions differed for the consecutive time points between .75 and 3.75 seconds ( p <.05); and the slopes of the Category and Item conditions differed between 3.75 and 5.25 seconds ( p .<.05). Overall, following the second stimulus, the predictor weight peak was greatest for the Label condition followed by the Item condition, and then the Category Condition. 
 
 
 3.2.2.3 Component 3 
 The top 5% of loadings on Component 3 (see  Figure 5  and  Table A.4 ) were associated primarily with regions within the FP-CEN network ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ), including extensive regions of the inferior and medial parietal lobe, regions of the inferior, middle, and superior frontal gyri, and subcortical regions including the caudate nucleus and cerebellar regions. In addition, this component included primary visual cortex and regions of the medial frontal gyrus, inferior parietal lobe, and cerebellum associated with the default network. Inspection of the predictor weights associated with Component 3 revealed a bimodal shape similar to that of Component 1, but with peaks delayed several seconds in time. An ANOVA on the predictor weights (shown in  Figure 5B ) revealed a significant main effect of condition,  F (2,30) = 13.24,  p  < .001, η 2 =.04, a main effect of time-point  F (17,255) = 4.67,  p  < .001, η 2 =.16, and an interaction between condition and time-point  F (34,510) = 2.34,  p  < .001, η 2 =.03. This interaction was driven by effects following the second stimulus. The predictor weight slopes were significantly steeper in the Category condition than in the Label conditions from 6.75 to 8.25 seconds following the second stimulus ( p <.01). The slope was steeper in the item condition than the Label condition from 2.25 to 3.75 seconds ( p <.05) and during the consecutive time points from 6.75 to 9.75 seconds ( p <.01;  p <.05). From 8.25 to 9.75 seconds, the slope associated with the Item condition was steeper than that of the Category condition ( p  < .05), an effect driven by a slightly shorter time-to-peak in the Category condition. 
 
 
 3.2.2.4 Component 4 
 Component 4 (see  Figure 6  and  Table A.5 ) was associated exclusively with regions of the visual network ( Yeo et al., 2011 ), and included regions extending from the primary visual cortex superiorly to the precuneus and anteriorly to the inferior temporal lobe. An ANOVA on the predictor weight timecourse indicated a significant main effect of condition,  F (1.44,21.63) = 4.55,  p  < .05, η 2 =.01, and a main effect of time-point  F (4.25,63.78) = 7.76,  p  < .001, η 2 =.26. The interaction between condition and time-point was not significant,  F (7.78,116.69) = 1.63,  p  >.05, η 2 =.02. 
 
 
 3.2.2.5 Component 5 
 The top 5% of loadings ( Table A.6  &  Figure 7 ) were associated primarily with regions within the default mode network, including medial parietal, medial prefrontal, middle temporal gyrus, and the hippocampus ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ). An ANOVA on the predictor weight time course revealed a significant main effect of condition,  F (2,30) = 12.56,  p  < .01, η 2 = .46, a significant main effect of time-point,  F (17,255) = 19.24,  p  < .001, η 2  = .41, and an interaction between condition and time-point,  F (34,510) = 2.5,  p  < .001, η 2  = .14. 
 The interaction was driven by differences following the second stimulus: the slopes differed between the Category and Label conditions from 2.25 to 3.75 seconds ( p <.05), from 5.25 8.25 ( p <.01;  p <.01), and between the Category and Item conditions from .75 to 2.25 ( p <.05), and from 11.25 to 14.25 ( p <.05;  p <.05) seconds following the second stimulus. As predicted based on task difficulty, we found that Category ( M  = −0.11,  SD = .08,  t (15)=3.04,  p  < .01,  g = .61) and Label ( M = −.13,  SD = .09,  t (15)= 4.97,  p  < .001,  g = 0.7) trials elicited greater suppression across the predictor weight time series than Item trials ( M = −.05,  SD = .11). 
 
 
 
 3.2.3 CPCA-masked Univariate GLM Analyses 
 In order to further explore how regions within CPCA components were affected by task differences, we examined our univariate results within masks formed by each individual component. However, it is important to understand the limitations of this approach. Whereas the CPCA results highlight patterns of task-related variance shared between brain regions, univariate analyses ignore these patterns of shared variance and consider only variance within specific clusters. As a result, univariate results can represent several sources of overlapping variance, and may, therefore, not closely resemble the patterns revealed by CPCA (e.g., Components 1 and 3 overlapped in regions of the bilateral precuneus, and Components 3 and 4 overlapped in bilateral regions of the lingual gyrus). While univariate analyses can be conceptualized as providing a view of task-related variance that slices across network variance, CPCA can be conceptualized as providing a view that slices across the variance within specific brain regions. The evaluation of the statistical reliability of the results from each analysis reflects this distinction; univariate results are evaluated for each cluster separately, while CPCA results are evaluated at the level of the hemodynamic response of the entire network. Additionally, whereas the univariate analyses assume a canonical hemodynamic response associated with each task epoch, CPCA uses a flexible FIR model, and is capable of uncovering patterns of task-related variance in a data-driven manner. Because the univariate analyses are sensitive to matches between the network-unspecific hemodynamic response and the canonical hemodynamic response function modeling each task epoch separately, whereas the multivariate analysis reflect network-specific, data-driven, hemodynamic response shapes during overall task performance, we consider the pattern of univariate results to convey a broader, network-unspecific view of task related activity, although this activity is restricted to matches to the canonical HRFs. 
 
 3.2.3.1 Component 1 
 As shown in  Table A.7 , consistent with the predictor weight time course, we found that visual regions within Component 1 tended to respond preferentially to visual stimulus features at probe; regions in the bilateral inferior occipital gyrus, bilateral fusiform, and the left calcarine showed greater activity when a face was presented (i.e., during both Category and Item trials) than when a Label was presented. Interestingly, neighboring regions within the fusiform showed greater activity during the encoding epoch when it was necessary to encode a specific stimulus (Item trials) than when it was necessary to categorize it (Category and Label trials), indicating that this region was sensitive to specific-item encoding demands. Taken together, these results indicate that these visual regions have both feature specific processing roles, and functional roles within the task-related salience network in responding to stimuli. 
 A second pattern was that frontal and parietal regions associated with FP-CEN and SA tended to show sensitivity to categorization demands. Regions in the superior medial frontal cortex, the left cerebellar crus 1, and the bilateral precuneus showed greater activity for categorical encoding trials than for Item trials during encoding, and also showed greater activity for Category trials than for Item trials during probe. Interestingly, only the left precuneus, a region thought to be a hub in the FP-CEN ( Niendam, Laird, & Ray, 2012 ;  Spreng, Sepulcre, Turner, Stevens, & Schacter, 2013 ) also showed greater activity for the Label condition than the Item condition at probe. The right anterior insula, a key node in the salience network ( Seeley et al., 2007 ), and a region of the thalamus known to be connected with the prefrontal cortex ( Behrens et al., 2003 ), showed greater activity for the categorical-encoding trials than the Item trials during encoding, but showed no differences between conditions at probe. 
 
 
 3.2.3.2 Component 2 
 Mirroring the predictor weight timecourse, we found that visual cortical regions of Component 2 were sensitive to visual stimulus features, as detailed in  Table A.8 . Regions of the left lingual and superior occipital gyrus showed greater activity during categorical encoding than during item trials at encoding, while the right superior temporal lobe showed the opposite pattern (item > categorical encoding). The primary effect, however, was that regions of the bilateral lingual gyrus, bilateral occipital gyri, and left supramarginal gyrus were more active for Label than for Category and/or Item trials. The univariate results, however, did not reveal similar patterns of activity within the motor regions associated with Component 2. 
 
 
 3.2.3.3 Component 3 
 Overall, many regions within the component 3 mask in the univariate analysis ( Table A.9 ) showed a pattern of higher activity for both Label and Category than Item at encoding, along with greater activity for Category than both Label and Item at probe. Specifically, at encoding, frontoparietal (right precuneus, left cerebellar lobule VI, and middle cingulate) and visual (left calcarine gyrus) regions showed greater activity during categorical-encoding trials than during Item-trials. At probe there was greater activity in FP-CEN regions during Category trials than during Label trials (right superior medial gyrus, posterior cingulate, bilateral cerebellar crus I), or Item trials (bilateral precuneus, left inferior parietal lobe, right angular gyrus, bilateral superior medial gyrus, and posterior cingulate). Overall, the univariate results were similar to the multivariate results for these regions, despite the fact that each analysis approach captures different sources of variance. However, the analysis approaches differed with respect to subcortical regions. Although the basal ganglia was involved in this component overall, its activity did not differ significantly across conditions in the univariate analysis, indicating that these regions likely played an important role across tasks. Similarly, there was widespread cerebellar activity in the component in the multivariate analysis, indicating cerebellar contributions to the functional network, but only small regions of cerebellum were present in the univariate analysis. 
 
 
 3.2.3.4 Components 4 & 5 
 As was the case for visual regions within Components 1 and 2, visual regions associated with Component 4 were sensitive to visual stimulus features, ( Table A.10 ). Interestingly, there were differences in recruitment during encoding between the working memory and categorization conditions despite both conditions sharing the same stimulus types (faces). Activity within regions associated with Component 5 tended to be anticorrelated with task difficulty, mirroring results based on the predictor weight timecourse. Given the tangential nature of this component to our primary hypotheses, we do not provide a table of these results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 Discussion 
 We compared delayed match-to-sample and delayed match-to-category tasks to investigate how neural systems were recruited for categorization and item-specific processes across encoding, maintenance across a short delay, and match-mismatch decisions. In the match-to-sample task, optimal behavior could be subserved by a strategy wherein participants considered only the intrinsic visual features of the stimuli. The categorization task, however, required that participants make judgments based on latent categorical features (the category labels). We found that categorization and item specific memory recruited five neural networks (identified as CPCA components). Two of the components are of particular note: Component 1, which recruited key nodes of the salience network involved in immediate stimulus processing, and Component 3, which recruited fronto-parietal-striatal regions linked to executive function. 
 The first CPCA component had three important characteristics. First, it included regions associated with frontoparietal networks, especially the salience network (i.e., bilateral inferior frontal and anterior insula, and dorsal anterior cingulate/ SMA;  Chiong et al., 2013 ;  Ham, Leff, de Boissezon, Joffe, & Sharp, 2013 ;  Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ) along with visual processing regions. Second, it displayed hemodynamic response peaks occurring rapidly after stimulus onset. Third, activity in this component was significantly higher for both conditions that required face processing (Item and Category) than the Label conditions. These characteristics support the interpretation that this component was associated with the detection of behaviourally-salient events and the rapid allocation of cognitive resources to support task demands. The salience network has been previously associated with the coordination of large-scale brain networks to support advantageous behavioral responding ( Eckert, Menon, & Walczak, 2009 ;  Ham et al., 2013 ;  Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ). For instance, damage to the salience network has been linked to default mode network dysfunction ( Bonnelle et al., 2012 ), and functional connectivity analyses have provided evidence that the salience network mediates the anti-correlated relationship between the frontoparietal network and the default mode network ( Goulden et al., 2014 ;  Menon, 2011 ;  Palaniyappan et al., 2013 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ). 
 Like Component 1, Component 3 was primarily associated with regions of the frontoparietal network ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  Choi et al., 2012 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ), but unlike Component 1, these regions were primarily associated with the central executive network rather than the salience network ( Goulden et al., 2014 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ). The bimodal predictor-weight timecourse associated with Component 3 was similar to that of Component 1, but the peaks occurred later in time following each stimulus, consistent with a greater role in more time-demanding processes such as those involved in decision making, rather than rapid attentional orienting as in Component 1. Interestingly, univariate analyses indicated that subregions within this network tended to show greater activity when categorization was required than when it was not. 
 Many of the regions involved in Component 3 have been associated with categorization in previous studies. Notably Component 3 recruited frontal lobe regions known to play an important role in rule and category learning tasks in both monkeys ( Antzoulatos & Miller, 2011 ;  Freedman, Riesenhuber, Poggio, & Miller, 2001 ;  Meyers et al., 2008 ;  Wallis & Miller, 2003 ) and humans ( Seger & Cincotta, 2006 ). Additionally, there was broad activity extending medially to laterally across the intraparietal sulcus region, which is thought to include the human homolog of LIP, shown to be category sensitive in monkey ( Fitzgerald, Freedman, & Assad, 2011 ;  Freedman & Assad, 2006 ,  2009 ). This region is also implicated in perceptual decision making more broadly, and is thought to subserve processes of accumulation of information from perceptual regions that can serve as input to regions involved in response selection ( Ploran et al., 2007 ;  Roitman & Shadlen, 2002 ;  Shadlen & Newsome, 2001 ). Although univariate analyses indicated that subregions within this network were preferentially activated during conditions requiring categorization, the multivariate analyses indicated that this network was similarly recruited across tasks. 
 Component 3 was also the only component associated with widespread activity in the basal ganglia, specifically in the body of the caudate, a region associated with visual categorization in several previous studies ( Lopez-Paniagua & Seger, 2011 ;  Nomura et al., 2007 ;  Seger & Cincotta, 2005 ,  2006 ;  Seger, Peterson, Cincotta, Lopez-Paniagua, & Anderson, 2010 ). Univariate analyses, however, did not indicate that there were significant differences in basal ganglia activity between tasks; suggesting that this region may play a similar role across these tasks. An unexpected finding was that widespread regions of the cerebellum were also included in Component 3. Although these regions of the cerebellum are associated with frontal cognitive control system ( Buckner et al., 2011 ), and are known to contribute to higher-order cognitive processes ( Balsters, Whelan, Robertson, & Ramnani, 2012 ), the cerebellum is not commonly a focus of categorization and decision making research. 
 Component 5 closely resembled the DMN, and showed suppressed activity during the more cognitively demanding Category trials relative to the Item trials. This finding is in accordance with the known anti-correlated relationship between the default mode and frontoparietal networks (e.g.,  Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Sridharan et al., 2008 ). Component 2 resembled the sensorimotor intrinsic connectivity network and showed a single peak corresponding to the behavioral response. However, this network additionally recruited regions within the salience and dorsal attention intrinsic connectivity networks. Many of these regions have been previously associated with abstract motor representation and motor preparation in functional tasks ( Noppeney, Josephs, Kiebel, Friston, & Price, 2005 ;  Rowe, Hughes, & Nimmo-Smith, 2010 ), and may therefore have activity patterns that correlated with the sensorimotor network during our task. 
 Component 4 was limited to regions within the visual intrinsic connectivity network, and as in resting state fcMRI, displayed a pattern of strong local connectivity ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). Our multivariate analyses, however, suggested that these regions also interacted with different CPCA components. The bilateral lingual gyrus and cuneus, for instance, interacted with somatomotor regions in Component 2, while posterior occipital regions were associated with Component 4, and regions extending from the lateral occipital lobe down through the fusiform gyri interacted with Component 1. Univariate analyses provided evidence that visual regions were driven by stimulus type, but were insensitive to categorization demands; fusiform regions showed greater activity when a face was presented, while medial occipital regions showed greater activity when the category label (a single letter) was presented. 
 In this paper we report, for the first time, functional networks involved in the performance of a delayed matching task that were recruited during categorization and during the processing of specific items. Most importantly, we found two different frontoparietal networks, one of which (Component #1) acted on a faster time course, was sensitive to differences between conditions, and included regions of the salience network in conjunction with regions involved in higher level visual processing. The second, (Component #3) operated on a slower time course, and involved lateral parietal and lateral frontal regions, as well as the basal ganglia, all regions previously individually associated with categorization and decision-making. 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 This research was supported in part by NIH Grant R01 MH079182 to CAS, and by NSF REU to Edward DeLosh. We would like to thank Matthew Rhodes and Danielle Sitzman for providing the face stimuli used in this study. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Antzoulatos 
 EG 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Differences between neural activity in prefrontal cortex and striatum during learning of novel abstract categories 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 71 
 2 
 243 
 249 
 21791284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 Ennis 
 JM 
 
 
 Spiering 
 BJ 
 
 
 A neurobiological theory of automaticity in perceptual categorization 
 Psychological Review 
 2007 
 114 
 3 
 632 
 656 
 17638499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balsters 
 JH 
 
 
 Whelan 
 CD 
 
 
 Robertson 
 IH 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Cerebellum and cognition: Evidence for the encoding of higher order rules 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2012 
 6 
 1433 
 1443 
 22617850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barde 
 LHF 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Models of functional organization of the lateral prefrontal cortex in verbal working memory: Evidence in favor of the process model 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 7 
 1054 
 1063 
 12419128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Wheeler-Kingshott 
 CM 
 
 
 Boulby 
 P 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Non-invasive mapping of connections between human thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2003 
 6 
 7 
 750 
 757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonnelle 
 V 
 
 
 Ham 
 TE 
 
 
 Leech 
 R 
 
 
 Kinnunen 
 KM 
 
 
 Mehta 
 M 
 
 
 Greenwood 
 RJ 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Salience network integrity predicts default mode network function after traumatic brain injury 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2012 
 109 
 12 
 4690 
 4695 
 22393019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 A 
 
 
 Diaz 
 JC 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2011 
 106 
 5 
 2322 
 2345 
 21795627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Opportunities and limitations of intrinsic functional connectivity MRI 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2013 
 16 
 7 
 832 
 837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buschman 
 T 
 
 
 Denovellis 
 E 
 
 
 Diogo 
 C 
 
 
 Synchronous oscillatory neural ensembles for rules in the prefrontal cortex 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 Retrieved from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627312008823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chadick 
 JZ 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Differential coupling of visual cortex with default or frontal-parietal network based on goals 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 7 
 830 
 832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 AC 
 
 
 Oathes 
 DJ 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Bradley 
 T 
 
 
 Zhou 
 Z-W 
 
 
 Williams 
 LM 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Causal interactions between fronto-parietal central executive and default-mode networks in humans 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2013 
 110 
 49 
 19944 
 19949 
 24248372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiong 
 W 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kayser 
 AS 
 
 
 Grossman 
 SN 
 
 
 Poorzand 
 P 
 
 
 Rankin 
 KP 
 
 
 The salience network causally influences default mode network activity during moral reasoning 
 Brain : A Journal of Neurology 
 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choi 
 EY 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of the human striatum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2012 
 108 
 8 
 2242 
 2263 
 22832566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chumbley 
 JR 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 False discovery rate revisited: FDR and topological inference using Gaussian random fields 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 44 
 1 
 62 
 70 
 18603449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Multi-task connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive task control 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crossley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Madsen 
 NR 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 Procedural learning of unstructured categories 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 2012 
 1202 
 1209 
 22965328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dang 
 L 
 
 
 Donde 
 A 
 
 
 Madison 
 C 
 
 
 Striatal dopamine influences the default mode network to affect shifting between object features 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2012 
 24 
 9 
 1960 
 1970 
 22640392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daniel 
 R 
 
 
 Wagner 
 G 
 
 
 Koch 
 K 
 
 
 Reichenbach 
 JR 
 
 
 Sauer 
 H 
 
 
 Schlösser 
 RGM 
 
 
 Assessing the neural basis of uncertainty in perceptual category learning through varying levels of distortion 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 7 
 1781 
 1793 
 20617884 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 N 
 
 
 Fair 
 D 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 R 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2007 
 104 
 26 
 11073 
 11078 
 17576922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 N 
 
 
 Visscher 
 K 
 
 
 Palmer 
 E 
 
 
 A core system for the implementation of task sets 
 Neuron 
 2006 
 50 
 5 
 799 
 812 
 16731517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Druzgal 
 TJ 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Dissecting contributions of prefrontal cortex and fusiform face area to face working memory 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 6 
 771 
 784 
 14511531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dumontheil 
 I 
 
 
 Thompson 
 R 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Assembly and use of new task rules in fronto-parietal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 1 
 168 
 182 
 20146600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: Mental programs for intelligent behaviour 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2010 
 14 
 4 
 172 
 179 
 20171926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 M 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Walczak 
 A 
 
 
 At the heart of the ventral attention system: The right anterior insula 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009 
 30 
 8 
 2530 
 2541 
 19072895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 JK 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Assad 
 JA 
 
 
 Generalized associative representations in parietal cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 8 
 1075 
 1079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 BU 
 
 
 Dutilh 
 G 
 
 
 Brown 
 S 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 Wagenmakers 
 E-J 
 
 
 Striatum and pre-SMA facilitate decision-making under time pressure 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2008 
 105 
 45 
 17538 
 17542 
 18981414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Assad 
 Ja 
 
 
 A proposed common neural mechanism for categorization and perceptual decisions 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 2 
 143 
 146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Assad 
 JA 
 
 
 Experience-dependent representation of visual categories in parietal cortex 
 Nature 
 2006 
 443 
 7107 
 85 
 88 
 16936716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Assad 
 JA 
 
 
 Distinct encoding of spatial and nonspatial visual information in parietal cortex 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 17 
 5671 
 5680 
 19403833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of visual categorization: insights from neurophysiology 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2008 
 32 
 2 
 311 
 329 
 17950874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Riesenhuber 
 M 
 
 
 Poggio 
 T 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Categorical representation of visual stimuli in the primate prefrontal cortex 
 Science 
 2001 
 291 
 5502 
 312 
 316 
 11209083 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Riesenhuber 
 M 
 
 
 Poggio 
 T 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 A comparison of primate prefrontal and inferior temporal cortices during visual categorization 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2003 
 23 
 12 
 5235 
 5246 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12832548 
 12832548 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Cooney 
 J 
 
 
 Rutman 
 A 
 
 
 Seibert 
 T 
 
 
 Clapp 
 W 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Functional interactions between prefrontal and visual association cortex contribute to top-down modulation of visual processing 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 Suppl 1 
 i125 
 i135 
 17725995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Functional connectivity during working memory maintenance 
 Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2004 
 4 
 4 
 580 
 599 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15849899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gazzaley, & Nobre 
 A 
 
 
 Top-down modulation: Bridging selective attention and working memory 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2012 
 16 
 2 
 129 
 135 
 22209601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goulden 
 N 
 
 
 Khusnulina 
 A 
 
 
 Davis 
 NJ 
 
 
 Bracewell 
 RM 
 
 
 Bokde 
 AL 
 
 
 McNulty 
 JP 
 
 
 Mullins 
 PG 
 
 
 The salience network is responsible for switching between the default mode network and the central executive network: Replication from DCM 
 NeuroImage 
 2014 
 99C 
 180 
 190 
 24862074 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ham 
 T 
 
 
 Leff 
 A 
 
 
 de Boissezon 
 X 
 
 
 Joffe 
 A 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 Cognitive control and the salience network: An investigation of error processing and effective connectivity 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2013 
 33 
 16 
 7091 
 7098 
 23595766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Little 
 DM 
 
 
 Shin 
 SS 
 
 
 Sisco 
 SM 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI of category learning: differences in classification and feedback networks 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2006 
 60 
 3 
 244 
 252 
 16426719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lopez-Paniagua 
 D 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Interactions within and between corticostriatal loops during component processes of category learning 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 10 
 3068 
 3083 
 21391766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Bookstein 
 FL 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Spatial pattern analysis of functional brain images using partial least squares 
 NeuroImage 
 1996 
 3 
 143 
 157 
 9345485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medford 
 N 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Conjoint activity of anterior insular and anterior cingulate cortex: Awareness and response 
 Brain Structure & Function 
 2010 
 214 
 5–6 
 535 
 549 
 20512367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: A unifying triple network model 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 10 
 483 
 506 
 21908230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Uddin 
 L 
 
 
 Saliency, switching, attention and control: A network model of insula function 
 Brain Structure and Function 
 2010 
 214 
 655 
 667 
 20512370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metzak 
 P 
 
 
 Feredoes 
 E 
 
 
 Takane 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Weinstein 
 S 
 
 
 Cairo 
 T 
 
 
 Woodward 
 TS 
 
 
 Constrained principal component analysis reveals functionally connected load-dependent networks involved in multiple stages of working memory 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2011 
 32 
 6 
 856 
 871 
 20572208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metzak 
 P 
 
 
 Riley 
 JD 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Whitman 
 JC 
 
 
 Ngan 
 ETC 
 
 
 Woodward 
 TS 
 
 
 Decreased efficiency of task-positive and task-negative networks during working memory in schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2012 
 38 
 4 
 803 
 813 
 21224491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyers 
 EM 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Kreiman 
 G 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Poggio 
 T 
 
 
 Dynamic population coding of category information in inferior temporal and prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2008 
 100 
 3 
 1407 
 1419 
 18562555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2001 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muhammad 
 R 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 A comparison of abstract rules in the prefrontal cortex, premotor cortex, inferior temporal cortex, and striatum 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2006 
 18 
 6 
 974 
 989 
 16839304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niendam 
 T 
 
 
 Laird 
 A 
 
 
 Ray 
 K 
 
 
 Meta-analytic evidence for a superordinate cognitive control network subserving diverse executive functions Tara 
 Cognitive, Affective 
 2012 
 12 
 2 
 241 
 268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nomura 
 EM 
 
 
 Maddox 
 WT 
 
 
 Filoteo 
 JV 
 
 
 Ing 
 aD 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Parrish 
 TB 
 
 
 Reber 
 PJ 
 
 
 Neural correlates of rule-based and information-integration visual category learning 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 1 
 37 
 43 
 16436685 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 S 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Action selectivity in parietal and temporal cortex 
 Brain Research. Cognitive Brain Research 
 2005 
 25 
 3 
 641 
 649 
 16242924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palaniyappan 
 L 
 
 
 Simmonite 
 M 
 
 
 White 
 TP 
 
 
 Liddle 
 EB 
 
 
 Liddle 
 PF 
 
 
 Neural primacy of the salience processing system in schizophrenia 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 79 
 4 
 814 
 228 
 23972602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Gutierrez 
 E 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 P 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 L 
 
 
 Neural correlates of visual working memory: FMRI amplitude predicts task performance 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 35 
 5 
 975 
 987 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12372290 
 12372290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ploran 
 EJ 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Evidence accumulation and the moment of recognition: Dissociating perceptual recognition processes using fMRI 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 44 
 11912 
 11924 
 17978031 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Using event-related fMRI to assess delay-period activity during performance of spatial and nonspatial working memory tasks 
 Brain Research. Brain Research Protocols 
 2000 
 5 
 1 
 57 
 66 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10719266 
 10719266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rishel 
 CA 
 
 
 Huang 
 G 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Independent category and spatial encoding in parietal cortex 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 77 
 5 
 969 
 979 
 23473325 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a cognitive task 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 23 
 2 
 752 
 763 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Dynamic adjustments in prefrontal, hippocampal, and inferior temporal interactions with increasing visual working memory load 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 7 
 1618 
 1629 
 17999985 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roitman 
 JD 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 Response of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area during a combined visual discrimination reaction time task 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2002 
 22 
 21 
 9475 
 9489 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12417672 
 12417672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Hughes 
 L 
 
 
 Nimmo-Smith 
 I 
 
 
 Action selection: A race model for selected and non-selected actions distinguishes the contribution of premotor and prefrontal areas 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 51 
 2 
 888 
 896 
 20188184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sala 
 JB 
 
 
 Rämä 
 P 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Functional topography of a distributed neural system for spatial and nonspatial information maintenance in working memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 3 
 341 
 356 
 Retrieved from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12457759 
 12457759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2007 
 27 
 9 
 2349 
 2356 
 17329432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 How do the basal ganglia contribute categorization? Their role in generalization, response selection, and learning via feedback 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2008 
 32 
 2 
 265 
 278 
 17919725 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Cincotta 
 CM 
 
 
 The roles of the caudate nucleus in human classification learning 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2005 
 25 
 11 
 2941 
 2951 
 15772354 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Cincotta 
 CM 
 
 
 Dynamics of frontal, striatal, and hippocampal systems during rule learning 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2006 
 1546 
 1555 
 16373455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Dennison 
 CS 
 
 
 Lopez-Paniagua 
 D 
 
 
 Peterson 
 EJ 
 
 
 Roark 
 AA 
 
 
 Dissociating hippocampal and basal ganglia contributions to category learning using stimulus novelty and subjective judgments 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 55 
 1739 
 1753 
 21255655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Category learning in the brain 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2010 
 33 
 203 
 219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Peterson 
 EJ 
 
 
 Categorization=decision making+generalization 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2013 
 1 
 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seger 
 CA 
 
 
 Peterson 
 EJ 
 
 
 Cincotta 
 CM 
 
 
 Lopez-Paniagua 
 D 
 
 
 Anderson 
 CW 
 
 
 Dissociating the contributions of independent corticostriatal systems to visual categorization learning through the use of reinforcement learning modeling and Granger causality modeling 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 50 
 2 
 644 
 656 
 19969091 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 M 
 
 
 Newsome 
 W 
 
 
 Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the Rhesus monkey 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2001 
 1916 
 1936 
 Retrieved from  http://jn.physiology.org/content/86/4/1916.short 
 11600651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Turner 
 GR 
 
 
 Stevens 
 WD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Intrinsic architecture underlying the relations among the default, dorsal attention, and frontoparietal control networks of the human brain 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2013 
 25 
 1 
 74 
 86 
 22905821 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sridharan 
 D 
 
 
 Levitin 
 DJ 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 A critical role for the right frontoinsular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2008 
 105 
 34 
 12569 
 12574 
 18723676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swaminathan 
 SK 
 
 
 Freedman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Preferential encoding of visual categories in parietal cortex compared with prefrontal cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2012 
 15 
 2 
 315 
 320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vanhaudenhuyse 
 A 
 
 
 Demertzi 
 A 
 
 
 Two distinct neuronal networks mediate the awareness of environment and of self 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 1 
 9 
 Retrieved from  http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/jocn.2010.21488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waldschmidt 
 JG 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 Cortical and striatal contributions to automaticity in information-integration categorization 
 2011 
 56 
 3 
 1791 
 1802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wallis 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 E 
 
 
 From rule to response: Neuronal processes in the premotor and prefrontal cortex 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2003 
 90 
 3 
 1790 
 1806 
 12736235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wenzlaff 
 H 
 
 
 Bauer 
 M 
 
 
 Maess 
 B 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Neural characterization of the speed-accuracy tradeoff in a perceptual decision-making task 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 4 
 1254 
 1266 
 21273410 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woodward 
 TS 
 
 
 Feredoes 
 E 
 
 
 Metzak 
 P 
 
 
 Takane 
 Y 
 
 
 Manoach 
 DS 
 
 
 Epoch-specific functional networks involved in working memory 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 65 
 529 
 539 
 23041527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Hollinshead 
 M 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2011 
 106 
 3 
 1125 
 1165 
 21653723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 G 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 A trial-based experimental design for fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 6 
 2 
 122 
 138 
 9299386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 During each trial, participants first saw a cue (Item condition: “Match the Specific Face”; Category and Label conditions: “Match the Category”) for 1.5 sec., they then saw the first stimulus (1.5 sec). After a brief delay (9 sec) they saw a second stimulus (3 sec). In the Category and Item conditions, the second stimulus was a face. In the Label condition, the second stimulus was the category label (“A” or “B”). After three seconds, a match mismatch cue was presented, and participants had to indicate whether the second stimulus matched the first. Trials were separated by a jittered ITI (1.5–9 sec). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Whole brain univariate analyses: activity differing between conditions within individual trial epochs (Encoding and Probe). TOP FIGURE: Encoding epoch. Red: Categorical Encoding (Category and Label trials) greater than Item; Blue: Item greater than Categorization Encoding. BOTTOM FIGURES: Probe epoch. TOP: Green: Label greater than Item; Blue: Item greater than Label. MIDDLE: Green: Label greater than Category; Red: Category greater than Label. BOTTOM: Red: Category greater than Item. Blue: Item greater than Category. Regions of activity are overlaid on the average normalized anatomical image across subjects. For each contrast, we generated maps at an uncorrected threshold of  p  < 0.001 and corrected for multiple comparisons using the topological false-discovery rate ( q  < .05;  Chumbley & Friston, 2009 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Component 1. Note the recruitment of regions involved in the salience network (inferior frontal/anterior insula and anterior cingulate) along with visual processing regions (fusiform gyrus and occipital lobe). A) The top 5% of component loadings overlaid on the MNI template provided by MRIcron (3d renderings, top) and the average structural image (slices, bottom). B) Predictor weight timecourse across peristimulus time. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Vertical lines indicate onsets of visual stimuli. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Component 2. Note the recruitment of sensorimotor and premotor regions. A) The top 5% of component loadings overlaid on the MNI template provided by MRIcron (3d renderings, top) and an averaged structural image (slices, bottom). B) Predictor weight timecourse. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Vertical lines indicate onsets of visual stimuli. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Component 3. Note the recruitment of FP-CEN regions including the lateral prefrontal cortex and intraparietal sulcus, along with the cerebellum and caudate. A) The top 5% of component loadings overlaid on the MNI template provided by MRIcron (3d renderings, top) and an averaged structural image (slices, bottom). B) Predictor weight timecourse. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Vertical lines indicate onsets of visual stimuli. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Component 4. Note the recruitment of visual processing regions. A) The top 5% of component loadings overlaid on the MNI template provided by MRIcron (3d renderings, top) and an averaged structural image (slices, bottom).. B) Predictor weight timecourse. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Vertical lines indicate onsets of visual stimuli. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Component 5. Note the recruitment of default mode network regions. A) The predictor weight timecourse. B) The top 5% of component loadings overlaid on the MNI template provided by MRIcron (3d rendering, left) and an averaged structural image (slices on the right). We changed the color map to cool colors to emphasize that Component 5 was anticorrelated with cognitive demands. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.1 
 
 Univariate results for the encoding, delay and probe epochs. As Category and Label trials were methodologically identical during encoding and delay, they were combined into a single Categorical-Encoding condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Categorical Encoding >item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1185 
 9480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 −90 
 −4 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 −76 
 8 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 731 
 5848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 −64 
 40 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −64 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 357 
 2856 
 −4 
 −28 
 28 
 Middle Cingulate 
 23 
 SA 
 
 
 
 152 
 1216 
 12 
 6 
 14 
 Right Caudate Nucleus 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 106 
 848 
 −6 
 −18 
 10 
 Left Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 99 
 792 
 −12 
 −80 
 −22 
 Left Cerebelar Lobule VI (hem) 
 18 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 79 
 632 
 4 
 28 
 42 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 75 
 600 
 30 
 22 
 −4 
 Right Inferior Frontal / Anterior Insula 
 47 
 SA 
 
 
    Item> Categorical Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 451 
 3608 
 −42 
 −66 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 284 
 2272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 −8 
 −30 
 Left Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 20 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 
 −24 
 −2 
 −22 
 Left Amygdala 
 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −36 
 −2 
 −20 
 Superior Temporal Pole 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −22 
 −12 
 −18 
 Left Hippocampus 
 35 
 
 
 
 
 177 
 1416 
 −4 
 52 
 −16 
 Left Rectal Gyrus 
 11 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 124 
 992 
 22 
 −10 
 −14 
 Right Hippocampus 
 
 
 
 
 
 111 
 888 
 44 
 −62 
 −6 
 Right Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 36 
 VS/DA 
 
 
 
 91 
 728 
 −42 
 28 
 −16 
 Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 38 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 87 
 696 
 −44 
 −46 
 −14 
 Left Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 DA 
 
 
    Conjunction (Item> Implicit Baseline & Categorical Encoding Trials > Implicit Baseline) 
 
 
 
 
 
 100 
 800 
 40 
 −73 
 −29 
 Right Cerebellar Crus I 
 
 FP-CEN/DMN 
 
 
 
 Delay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Conjunction (Item>Categorical Encoding & Item > Implicit Baseline) 
 
 
 
 
 
 131 
 1048 
 56 
 −18 
 10 
 Right Superior Temporal 
 
 SM 
 
 
 
 52 
 416 
 −6 
 −18 
 44 
 Middle Cingulate 
 
 SM/VA 
 
 
 
 Probe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Item > Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1325 
 10600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −82 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −74 
 −10 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −46 
 −16 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 DA 
 
 
 
 937 
 7496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −84 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
    Label > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 191 
 1528 
 16 
 −76 
 24 
 Right Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 135 
 1080 
 −50 
 −50 
 6 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus/ Lateral Occipital 
 21 
 VA 
 
 
 
 103 
 824 
 −14 
 −88 
 24 
 Left Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 84 
 672 
 −4 
 −68 
 46 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
   Label > Category 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 513 
 4104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 −88 
 18 
 Right Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 −78 
 24 
 Right Cuneus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 325 
 2600 
 −56 
 −56 
 10 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 VA 
 
 
 
 298 
 2384 
 −12 
 −90 
 24 
 Left Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 156 
 1248 
 52 
 −32 
 16 
 Right Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 41 
 SM 
 
 
 
 120 
 960 
 −38 
 −18 
 −8 
 Left Insula (Id1) 
 20 
 VA 
 
 
 
 112 
 896 
 −54 
 −2 
 −10 
 Left Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 102 
 816 
 10 
 −70 
 −6 
 Right Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 81 
 648 
 0 
 −24 
 60 
 Left Paracentral Lobule 
 6 
 SM 
 
 
 
 80 
 640 
 68 
 −30 
 30 
 Right SupraMarginal Gyrus 
 2 
 VA 
 
 
 
 77 
 616 
 −6 
 −70 
 −2 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 71 
 568 
 −32 
 0 
 12 
 Left Insula 
 48 
 VA 
 
 
 
 67 
 536 
 −62 
 −24 
 16 
 Left SupraMarginal Gyrus 
 42 
 VA 
 
 
 
 63 
 504 
 60 
 −58 
 20 
 Right Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 62 
 496 
 −32 
 −38 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 
   Category > Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1629 
 13032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −88 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −74 
 −10 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −52 
 −16 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 −92 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 1114 
 8912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −82 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 211 
 1688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 28 
 46 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 8 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 30 
 30 
 Right Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 32 
 SA 
 
 
 
 148 
 1184 
 0 
 −44 
 20 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 136 
 1088 
 −8 
 −74 
 −38 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VIIb (Hem) 
 
 DA 
 
 
 
 97 
 776 
 −6 
 −32 
 28 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 97 
 776 
 −2 
 −34 
 −6 
 Superior Colliculus 
 
 
 
 
 
   Item > Category 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 122 
 976 
 −58 
 −2 
 −18 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DMN 
 
 
 
   Category > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 863 
 6904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 −72 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −70 
 44 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 758 
 6064 
 −34 
 −56 
 46 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 555 
 4440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 28 
 42 
 Left Superior Medial Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 14 
 46 
 Left preSMA 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 312 
 2496 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −30 
 6 
 60 
 Left Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 −48 
 6 
 44 
 Left Precentral Gyrus 
 44 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 252 
 2016 
 34 
 −60 
 48 
 Right Angular Gyrus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 91 
 728 
 −4 
 −38 
 24 
 Left Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 26 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 76 
 608 
 −44 
 30 
 32 
 Left Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 FP 
 
 
 
 71 
 568 
 −36 
 18 
 −2 
 Left Inferior Frontal / Anterior Insula 
 47 
 SA 
 
 
 
 59 
 472 
 −8 
 −74 
 −26 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VI (Hem) 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
   Conjunction(Category> Implicit, Label > Implicit, & Item> Implicit) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 121 
 968 
 −1 
 2 
 50 
 Bilateral preSMA 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 39 
 312 
 −16 
 −14 
 15 
 Left Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 208 
 19 
 −13 
 16 
 Right Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience; DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.2 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 1 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 3755 
 30040 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 −90 
 0 
 Right Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −56 
 −20 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 40 
 −78 
 −12 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 −60 
 46 
 Right Angular Gyrus 
 7 
 DA/FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 30 
 −52 
 46 
 Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 DA/FP-CEN 
 
 
 2916 
 23328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −32 
 −90 
 −6 
 Left Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −82 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −40 
 −72 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −56 
 −20 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 1021 
 8168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −28 
 −70 
 26 
 Left Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS/DA 
 
 
 
 
 −28 
 −62 
 48 
 Left Superior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 −30 
 −48 
 42 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 40 
 DA 
 
 
 627 
 5016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 10 
 50 
 Left preSMA / Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 16 
 46 
 Right preSMA / Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 525 
 4200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 12 
 30 
 Right Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Opercularis)) 
 44 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 6 
 34 
 RightPrecentral Gyrus 
 44 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 32 
 18 
 Right Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 45 
 SA 
 
 
 113 
 904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 −64 
 42 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 110 
 880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 4 
 34 
 Left Precentral Gyrus 
 44 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 12 
 26 
 Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 44 
 SA 
 
 
 95 
 760 
 32 
 24 
 −4 
 Right Anterior Insula 
 47 
 SA 
 
 
 89 
 712 
 −10 
 −72 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 71 
 568 
 −6 
 −76 
 −24 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VI 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 68 
 544 
 10 
 −14 
 8 
 Right Thalamus 
 
 SA 
 
 
 63 
 504 
 −2 
 −30 
 26 
 Middle/Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 60 
 480 
 −10 
 −16 
 8 
 Left Thalamus 
 
 SA 
 
 
 49 
 392 
 −30 
 24 
 −2 
 Left Anterior Insula 
 47 
 SA 
 
 
 35 
 280 
 −48 
 0 
 50 
 Left Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 DA/SM 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.3 
 
 Table A.3. Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 2 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 3170 
 25360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −56 
 −22 
 40 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 3 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 −58 
 −20 
 18 
 Left Postcentral Gyrus 
 48 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −40 
 58 
 Left Postcentral Gyrus 
 2 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 −62 
 −36 
 24 
 Left SupraMarginal Gyrus 
 48 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 −36 
 22 
 Left Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 48 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 −42 
 −12 
 52 
 Left Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 SM 
 
 
 2679 
 21432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
 −18 
 46 
 Right Postcentral Gyrus 
 1 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 −20 
 18 
 Right Rolandic Operculum 
 48 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 −26 
 58 
 Right Postcentral Gyrus 
 1 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 64 
 −40 
 22 
 Right Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 22 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 64 
 −24 
 24 
 Right SupraMarginal Gyrus 
 48 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 −26 
 62 
 Right Precentral Gyrus 
 4 
 SM 
 
 
 1243 
 9944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 −4 
 52 
 Right preSMA 
 6 
 SM 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 6 
 40 
 Left Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 24 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 −28 
 44 
 Right Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 
 SA 
 
 
 1085 
 8680 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 −72 
 −2 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −68 
 −2 
 Right Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −20 
 −60 
 −14 
 Left Cerebellum Lobule VI 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 −60 
 −12 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 406 
 3248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −50 
 −2 
 0 
 Left Insula 
 48 
 VA/SM 
 
 
 
 
 −44 
 −4 
 10 
 Left Insula 
 48 
 VA/SM 
 
 
 
 
 −56 
 8 
 20 
 Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 44 
 SA 
 
 
 306 
 2448 
 −8 
 −94 
 14 
 Left Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 277 
 2216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 2 
 6 
 Right Insula 
 48 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 58 
 10 
 8 
 Right Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 44 
 SA 
 
 
 243 
 1944 
 14 
 −90 
 20 
 Right Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 54 
 432 
 20 
 −4 
 68 
 Right Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 6 
 VA/SM 
 
 
 45 
 360 
 50 
 −66 
 8 
 Right Lateral Occipital Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 36 
 288 
 −12 
 −26 
 40 
 Left Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 
 SA 
 
 
 32 
 256 
 −52 
 −74 
 8 
 Left Lateral Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 18 
 144 
 12 
 −18 
 6 
 Right Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; SA=Salience. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.4 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 3 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 5040 
 40320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 −72 
 46 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −66 
 58 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 DA 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −58 
 38 
 Left Angular Gyrus 
 40 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 −32 
 −72 
 42 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 −64 
 48 
 Right Angular Gyrus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 −44 
 −58 
 48 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 39 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 40 
 −56 
 42 
 Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 40 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −34 
 24 
 Bilateral Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 2774 
 22192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 −88 
 −26 
 Right Cerebellum Crus I 
 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −82 
 −22 
 Left Cerebellum Lobule VI 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 −8 
 −88 
 −26 
 Left Cerebellum Crus I 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 −72 
 −30 
 Right Cerebellum Crus I 
 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 −94 
 −10 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −40 
 −78 
 −30 
 Left Cerebellum Crus I 
 
 DMN 
 
 
 1061 
 8488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −8 
 10 
 Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 4 
 22 
 Right Caudate Nucleus 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 −10 
 −6 
 12 
 Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −18 
 −14 
 24 
 Left Caudate Nucleus 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 174 
 1392 
 46 
 38 
 28 
 Right Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 165 
 1320 
 −38 
 58 
 2 
 Left Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 158 
 1264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 34 
 38 
 Bilateral Superior Medial Gyrus 
 32 
 FP-CEN/DMN 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 24 
 48 
 Bilateral preSMA 
 6 
 FP-SA 
 
 
 77 
 616 
 −12 
 −92 
 −2 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 71 
 568 
 −50 
 18 
 34 
 Left Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 32 
 256 
 34 
 62 
 10 
 Right Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS= Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience; = DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A 5 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 4 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 9600 
 76800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −80 
 8 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −40 
 −88 
 −2 
 Left Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −80 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 −94 
 −2 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −84 
 26 
 Left Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 −64 
 8 
 Right Lingual Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −12 
 −62 
 4 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −36 
 −88 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −28 
 −68 
 −18 
 Left Cerebellum 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 −80 
 42 
 Right Cuneus 
 7 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −82 
 42 
 Left Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 −68 
 −20 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.6 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 5 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 4231 
 33848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 54 
 2 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 10 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 52 
 −12 
 Left Mid Orbital Gyrus 
 11 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 62 
 6 
 Left Superior Medial Gyrus 
 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 52 
 16 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 32 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −8 
 42 
 −8 
 Left Mid Orbital Gyrus 
 11 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −12 
 66 
 22 
 Left Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 DMN 
 
 
 1770 
 14160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −56 
 18 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −52 
 8 
 Right Precuneus 
 17 
 DMN 
 
 
 1301 
 10408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −50 
 −68 
 24 
 Left Angular Gyrus 
 39 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −62 
 −50 
 4 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DMN 
 
 
 523 
 4184 
 50 
 −10 
 −16 
 Right Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 20 
 DMN 
 
 
 514 
 4112 
 52 
 −56 
 18 
 Right Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DA/DMN 
 
 
 424 
 3392 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −58 
 −2 
 −18 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −54 
 −14 
 −14 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 20 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 
 −64 
 −18 
 −8 
 Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 DMN 
 
 
 258 
 2064 
 26 
 −20 
 −18 
 Hipp (SUB) 
 20 
 
 
 
 186 
 1488 
 −42 
 22 
 −20 
 Left Temporal Pole) 
 38 
 DMN 
 
 
 134 
 1072 
 −24 
 −22 
 −18 
 Hipp (SUB) 
 30 
 
 
 
 36 
 288 
 −20 
 −86 
 −10 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; DA=Dorsal Attention; DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.7 
 
 Cluster volumes and MNI peak coordinates regions within Component 1 that showed significant differences between conditions, based on the full-brain univariate statistics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Categorical Encoding > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 103 
 824 
 12 
 −64 
 40 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 55 
 440 
 −4 
 −28 
 28 
 Bilateral Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 54 
 432 
 32 
 23 
 −4 
 Right Anterior Insula 
 47 
 SA 
 
 
 
 51 
 408 
 4 
 28 
 42 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 35 
 280 
 −10 
 −78 
 −24 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VI 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 35 
 280 
 −4 
 −70 
 46 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 32 
 256 
 −6 
 −18 
 10 
 Left Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
    Item > Categorical Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 275 
 2200 
 −42 
 −66 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 50 
 400 
 44 
 −62 
 −6 
 Right Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 VS 
 
 
 
 24 
 192 
 −42 
 −46 
 −16 
 Left Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 37 
 DA 
 
 
 
 Probe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Item > Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1271 
 10168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −82 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −74 
 −10 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −46 
 −16 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 DA/VS 
 
 
 
 851 
 6808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −84 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
    Label > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 
 88 
 −6 
 −68 
 46 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
    Category > Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1471 
 11768 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −88 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −52 
 −16 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 37 
 VS/DA 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 −92 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −50 
 −28 
 Right Cerebellar Lobule VI (Hem) 
 37 
 SA 
 
 
 
 999 
 7992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −82 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −40 
 −58 
 −24 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VI 
 37 
 SA 
 
 
 
 96 
 768 
 2 
 28 
 46 
 Bilateral Superior Medial Gyrus 
 8 
 SA 
 
 
 
 24 
 192 
 −4 
 −32 
 28 
 Bilateral Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
    Category > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 412 
 3296 
 −34 
 −56 
 46 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 309 
 2472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 28 
 42 
 BIlateral Superior Medial Gyrus 
 32 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 14 
 46 
 Left preSMA 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 6 
 58 
 Left preSMA 
 6 
 SA 
 
 
 
 190 
 1520 
 34 
 −60 
 48 
 Right Angular Gyrus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 103 
 824 
 8 
 −70 
 44 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 75 
 600 
 −6 
 −72 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 30 
 240 
 −2 
 −36 
 24 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience; DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A 8 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak coordinates for the rotated top 5% of Component 4 loadings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 9600 
 76800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −80 
 8 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −40 
 −88 
 −2 
 Left Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −80 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 −94 
 −2 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 0 
 −84 
 26 
 Left Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 −64 
 8 
 Right Lingual Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −12 
 −62 
 4 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −36 
 −88 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −28 
 −68 
 −18 
 Left Cerebellum 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 −80 
 42 
 Right Cuneus 
 7 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −82 
 42 
 Left Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 −68 
 −20 
 Right Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.9 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak MNI coordinates regions within Component 3 that showed significant differences between conditions, based on the full-brain univariate statistics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI Peak Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Categorical Encoding > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 599 
 4792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 −64 
 40 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 −4 
 −64 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 161 
 1288 
 −4 
 −28 
 28 
 Left Middle Cingulate/Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 23 
 SA 
 
 
 
 65 
 520 
 −12 
 −80 
 −22 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VI (Hem) 
 18 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 47 
 376 
 4 
 −88 
 −4 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 16 
 128 
 −8 
 −88 
 −6 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 14 
 112 
 −6 
 −8 
 8 
 Left Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 Probe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Label > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 67 
 536 
 −4 
 −68 
 46 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 Category> Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40 
 320 
 2 
 26 
 46 
 Right Superior Medial Gyrus 
 
 SA 
 
 
 
 33 
 264 
 −4 
 −34 
 28 
 Bilateral Posterior Cingulate 
 23 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 33 
 264 
 36 
 −62 
 −28 
 Right Cerebellar Lobule VIIa Crus I 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 30 
 240 
 2 
 −42 
 22 
 Bilateral Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 26 
 DMN 
 
 
 
 24 
 192 
 −8 
 −80 
 −30 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VIIa Crus I 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
   Category > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 743 
 5944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −6 
 −72 
 44 
 Left Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 −70 
 44 
 Right Precuneus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 556 
 4448 
 −34 
 −56 
 46 
 Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 168 
 1344 
 34 
 −60 
 46 
 Right Angular Gyrus 
 7 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 85 
 680 
 0 
 28 
 42 
 Bilateral Superior Medial Gyrus 
 32 
 SA 
 
 
 
 68 
 544 
 −4 
 −38 
 24 
 Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 26 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 14 
 112 
 −8 
 −84 
 −34 
 Left Cerebellar Lobule VIIa Crus II (Hem) 
 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 11 
 88 
 −50 
 22 
 34 
 Left Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 45 
 FP-CEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience; DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.10 
 
 Cluster volumes and peak MNI coordinates regions within Component 4 that showed significant differences between conditions, based on the full-brain univariate statistics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MNI Peak Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voxels 
 mm^3 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Region 
 BA 
 Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Categorical Encoding > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1040 
 8320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −2 
 −90 
 −4 
 Left Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 −76 
 8 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 16 
 −76 
 10 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −14 
 −62 
 2 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
 
 20 
 160 
 −12 
 −74 
 −10 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
    Item > Categorical Encoding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 138 
 1104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −42 
 −66 
 −12 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −46 
 −74 
 −8 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 Probe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Item>Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 764 
 6112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −38 
 −84 
 −14 
 Left Fusiform Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −14 
 −96 
 −12 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 436 
 3488 
 42 
 −82 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
    Label > Item 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
 448 
 −14 
 −88 
 24 
 Left Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 22 
 176 
 12 
 −86 
 16 
 Right Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
    Category > Label 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 861 
 6888 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 −26 
 −94 
 −4 
 Left Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 −24 
 −82 
 −16 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 591 
 4728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 −88 
 −2 
 Right Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 −96 
 −4 
 Right Calcarine Gyrus 
 17 
 VS 
 
 
    Label > Category 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 125 
 1000 
 −12 
 −90 
 26 
 Left Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 165 
 1320 
 6 
 −86 
 18 
 Right Cuneus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 82 
 656 
 10 
 −70 
 −6 
 Right Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 59 
 472 
 −6 
 −70 
 −2 
 Left Lingual Gyrus 
 18 
 VS 
 
 
 
 
 
 VS=Visual; SM=Somatomotor; DA=Dorsal Attention; FP-CEN=Central Executive; SA=Salience; DMN=Default Mode Network. Cluster volumes smaller than 10 voxels have been omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 - 
 Using fMRI, we compared delayed match-to-sample and delayed match-to-category tasks 
 
 
 - 
 We identified five intrinsic networks active during the tasks 
 
 
 - 
 The frontoparietal central-executive network played a key role in categorization 
 
 
 - 
 The frontoparietal salience network was sensitive to rapid visual feature processing in both tasks 
 
 
 - 
 Visual, motor, and default mode networks were activated similarly for both tasks 
 
 
 
 
