
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 25637772 
 4378864 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.01.039 
 NIHMS662285 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Multiple modes of clearing one’s mind of current thoughts: Overlapping and distinct neural systems 
 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 Marie T. 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 Mackiewicz Seghete 
 Kristen L. 
 
 # 
 
 
 
 Depue 
 Brendan E. 
 
 % 
 
 
 
 Burgess 
 Gregory C. 
 
 ^ 
 
 
 * Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 
 # Department of Psychiatry, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon 
 % Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 
 ^ Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
 
 Correspondence: Marie T. Banich, Ph.D.  Marie.Banich@Colorado.edu , 303-492-6655 (phone), 303-492-7177 (fax) 
 
 
 10 
 2 
 2015 
 
 
 28 
 1 
 2015 
 
 
 3 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 3 
 2016 
 
 69 
 105 
 117 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 This study used the power of neuroimaging to identify the neural systems that remove information from working memory, a thorny issue to examine because it is difficult to confirm that individuals have actually modified their thoughts. To overcome this problem, brain activation as measured via fMRI was assessed when individuals had to clear their mind of all thought (global clear), clear their mind of a particular thought (targeted clear), or replace the current thought (replace), relative to maintaining an item in working memory. The pattern of activity in posterior sensory regions across these conditions confirmed compliance with task demands. A hierarchy of brain regions involved in cognitive control, including parietal, dorsolateral prefrontal and frontopolar regions, were engaged to varying degrees depending on the manner in which information was removed from working memory. In addition, individuals with greater difficulty in controlling internal thoughts exhibited greater activity in prefrontal brain regions associated with cognitive control, as well as in left lateral prefrontal areas including Broca’s area, which is associated with inner speech. 
 
 
 Cognitive control 
 working memory 
 inhibition 
 fMRI 
 prefrontal cortex 
 individual differences 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 How we select and control the information actively held in our current thoughts is central to understanding our mental inner life. We often make conscious decisions about what to keep in mind, such as rehearsing the telephone number for the local pizza parlor. Working memory (WM), which is of limited duration and capacity, maintains such information on line and serves to keep focus on the information critical to the current train of thought or task goals. But at some point the information held in working memory is no longer useful and must be removed. This study focuses on the cognitive control mechanisms that allow us to do so. This issue has received relatively scant attention because it is very difficult to address, as discussed below. 
 There are a variety of ways by which a now irrelevant item might be removed from working memory. One is to replace it with something else. For example, one might stop thinking about the telephone number of the local pizza parlor and replace it with thinking about the pizza toppings to be ordered (e.g.,  Tomlinson et al., 2009 ). Another way to remove information is to specifically target the current thought as one to be cleared, avoided, or removed from the focus of attention (e.g.,  Souza et al., 2014 ). For example, when dieting and in the grocery store, one might try to specifically  not think  about chocolate cake. A final means is to clear one’s mind of all thought, much as is emphasized in mindfulness meditation ( Teasdale, Segal, & Williams, 1995 ). We will refer to these modes of removing information from working memory as replacement, targeted clearing and global clearing, respectively. 
 Understanding the neural mechanisms supporting these potentially different modes of removing current thought has important implications. Difficulty in clearing or inhibiting the contents of working memory is observed in many different types of psychopathology. For instance, in depression ( Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991 ), obsessive-compulsive disorder ( Tolin et al., 2002 ), and posttraumatic stress disorder ( Ehlers & Steil, 1995 ), individuals can have an inability to clear depressive thoughts, obsessions, or traumatic memories, respectively. 
 One major obstacle to investigating this issue is that it is difficult, if not close to impossible, to know what an individual is thinking, and hence whether a current thought has indeed been removed or cleared. However, neuroimaging provides a way around this problem, offering a unique opportunity to shed light on this vexing question. More specifically, if a thought is cleared or inhibited, neural activity in regions supporting that thought should be decreased relative to when the thought is maintained or replaced by some other thought. 
 Previous research in our laboratory has demonstrated the utility of using neuroimaging to confirm that individuals are indeed inhibiting or suppressing thoughts and to identify the neural substrates that support such control operations ( Depue et al., 2007 ). In our prior study, we examined the ability to inhibit the retrieval of information from long-term memory using the Think/No-Think paradigm ( Anderson & Green, 2001 ;  Anderson et al., 2004 ), which is considered a memory analog of the motoric Go/No-Go task (e.g.,  de Zubicaray et al., 2000 ;  Garavan et al., 1999 ). In our version of the Think/No-Think paradigm, individuals learned cue-target pairs to a high degree of accuracy, with the cue being a face and the target being a negatively-valenced emotional picture (e.g., car crash). During the experimental phase, individuals were shown a cue. For some cues they were asked to “think” about the associated target, while for others they were instructed “don’t think” about the associated target. The neuroimaging data confirmed that individuals complied with task demands. When asked to not think about a given item, activity decreased (relative to a fixation baseline) in brain regions that would support memory retrieval of those negative visual images – the ventral visual processing stream, the hippocampus, and amygdala. In contrast, when thinking about a given item, activity in all of these regions was substantially above baseline. Moreover, prefrontal brain regions involved in cognitive control (BA 10, BA9/46, BA44/45) exhibited greater activation when inhibiting retrieval of a memory than when retrieving a memory. 
 Using a new paradigm we take a similar approach in the current study but focus on removing the current information from working memory rather than on inhibiting retrieval of information from long-term memory. In this paradigm, individuals see or hear an item for four seconds. For the subsequent four seconds, participants are instructed to engage in one of three methods for removing the current information from working memory - via replacement (i.e., think of an alternative item), a targeted clearing (i.e., suppress the specific item in WM) or a global clearing (i.e., clear your mind of all thought). As a control condition, trials in which the current item is maintained are also included (see  Figure 1 ). 
 One of the issues in such a paradigm is verifying that individuals have complied with task demands (e.g., clearing an item from WM) in the absence of some overt response. To tackle this issue, we relied on activity in posterior brain regions as an index of whether an item was indeed being held in working memory or not. When information remains in working memory, either because the prior item was maintained or because of replacement with an alternative, one might expect activity in posterior brain regions supporting such a memory representation (e.g., ventral visual processing stream for visual stimuli and temporal cortex for auditory stimuli) (e.g.,  Johnson et al., 2007 ;  Lewis-Peacock & Postle, 2008 ). A caveat, which is discussed in more detail in the discussion, is that while univariate methods reveal elevated levels of brain activity for regions purportedly involved in maintaining information in working memory, recent work using multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) suggests that when an item is no longer in the focus of attention in working memory, it is not in fact being maintained across a delay (e.g.,  Lewis-Peacock & Postle, 2012 ). Given these findings, one must be cautious in interpreting brain activation, as assessed by univariate methods as being isomorphic with maintenance in working memory. Hence, based solely on univariate data, as used in the present study, we can more safely predict that activity in posterior brain areas should  not  be significantly above baseline for either the Targeted or the Global Clear conditions if indeed individuals are  not  maintaining an item in working memory. In contrast, we would expect that activity would be significantly above baseline in these posterior regions for both the Maintain and the Replace conditions. This increased activity, however, cannot differentiate whether or not a specific item remains within the focus of attention. To further assess whether participants on the whole, were complying with task demands, we varied the modality of stimulus presentation - visual or auditory - allowing for specific  a priori  hypotheses regarding the patterns of brain activity that would indicate compliance with task demands. 
 Contrasts across these four conditions can help to isolate the neural substrates that support specific operations for removing information from working memory, indicating which mechanisms are common across conditions and which are unique. As shown in the first row of  Table 1 , replacing the contents of WM or clearing it (either in a targeted manner or globally) requires the current item to be removed from working memory, which is not the case when an item must be maintained in WM. We predict that shifting focus away from the current item in working memory is likely to activate parietal regions that are engaged in shifts of attention between items in working memory (e.g.,  Tamber-Rosenau et al., 2011 ;  Nee & Brown, 2013 ;  Nee et al., 2013 ). These regions may be more medial as compared to those more lateral areas that have been suggested to aid in maintaining information in working memory (e.g.,  McNab & Klingberg, 2008 ). As shown in the second row, clearing the contents of WM (either in a targeted manner or globally) requires the present information in WM to be emptied. Based on previous research showing that inhibition of memory processes requires cognitive control ( Anderson et al. 2004 ;  Depue et al., 2007 ), we predict greater activity in portions of the fronto-parietal executive network for the two conditions requiring information to be clear from WM compared to either maintaining or replacing its contents. As shown in the third row, only a global clearing of WM requires that  all  thought be cleared. In the motor domain, neural control mechanisms for global stopping, which is the cessation of all motor responding, are partially distinct from those required to stop a specific motor response ( Aron & Verbruggen, 2008 ;  Majid et al., 2012 ). Analogously, we predict that while some regions required for each of these distinct ways in which information is cleared from working memory will overlap, at least some will also be distinct. 
 In addition, as shown in rows 3 to 6 of  Table 1 , each of these conditions can also be conceptualized as uniquely indexing a particular operation on information in working memory. As such, this design also allows us to address a contentious issue – specifically how individual representations are inhibited in memory. Some researchers have argued that one can suppress thinking about a specific item by replacing it with another thought or even action ( Tomlinson et al., 2009 ). This perspective would predict that no brain regions should be uniquely activated by a targeted clear of the contents of WM other than those observed when information in WM is replaced, as a targeted clearing would simply occur via replacement with another item. On the other hand, if specific mechanisms exist to directly inhibit specific representations in working memory, they should be uniquely active in a targeted clear of WM. 
 In conjunction with the previous analyses, we examined whether brain regions involved in cognitive control (e.g., mid-DLPFC) that are co-activated across conditions (e.g., during both a targeted and global clearing of WM) exhibit differential patterns of connectivity for each of the conditions that activated them. These analyses were motivated by research suggesting that cognitive control regions can exert their influence by modulating activity in distinct brain regions depending on task demands (e.g.,  Zanto et al., 2010 ). As such, we wished to explore whether such a mechanism is also used to aid in the removal of information from working memory. 
 A final goal of the current study was to examine whether the degree of difficulty an individual has in controlling his or her internal thoughts covaries with the neural mechanisms engaged for removing information from working memory. To do so, we administered self-report questionnaires measuring such difficulty: the White Bear Suppression inventory ( Wegner & Zanakos, 1994 ), the Ruminative Response Scale ( Nolen-Hoeksema & Morrow, 1991 ), and the Penn State Worry Questionnaire ( Meyer et al., 1990 ). We predicted that greater difficulty in controlling internal thought would be associated not only with a poorer ability to reduce activation in regions supporting the memory representations to be removed but also altered activation in cognitive control regions required to remove such thoughts. 
 
 
 MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
 Participants 
 19 healthy individuals (9 women, 10 men; age M=21.58, SD=2.91) served as participants. All were right-handed and reported no history of brain injury or neurological disease, psychiatric disorder, or MR contraindication. Three male and 1 female participant were dropped from subsequent analyses, two due to technical difficulties and two due to excessive movement during data acquisition, resulting in a final sample of 15 participants (8 women, 7 men; age M=21.07, SD=2.80). All participants gave informed, written consent and were compensated monetarily. The study was approved by the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board at the University of Colorado. 
 
 
 Questionnaires regarding Control of Thought 
 To examine individual differences in the difficulty of controlling internal thought, three self-report questionnaires were administered. As all measures were highly correlated (  r  >.50), each scale was Z-scored and then averaged to provide a covariate that was then entered into the GLM for fMRI analyses (see below). 
 
 
 White Bear Suppression Inventory ( Wegner & Zanakos, 1994 ) – This 15 item inventory measures the presence of intrusive thoughts and the degree to which individuals attempt to suppress thoughts. 
 
 
 Ruminative Response Scale ( Nolen-Hoeksema & Morrow, 1991 ) – This 22 item questionnaire assesses the degree to which people tend to ruminate when they are feeling down, sad, or depressed. 
 
 
 Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ:  Meyer et al., 1990 ) – This 16-item questionnaire measures excessive and uncontrollable worry. 
 
 
 
 
 fMRI Paradigm 
 Prior to entering the MRI scanner, participants were shown a series of pictures and listened to a series of melodies. There were a total of 16 familiar, emotionally neutral pictures, half black and white (e.g., Dalmatian, penguin) and half color (e.g., peacock, Statue of Liberty). Additionally, there were 16 familiar, neutral melodies with words (e.g., “Happy Birthday,” “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star”). Participants learned a word for each stimulus (e.g., picture of a peacock paired with the word “peacock”), and were tested on these paired associations until they correctly recognized all 32 word-stimulus pairs. This procedure ensured that individuals knew which item to “switch” to for trials in the Replace condition (see below). 
 Participants were told that in the scanning session, they would see a picture or hear a melody (accompanied by a black screen). Afterwards a prompt would indicate which of four operations was to be performed on that item. In the Maintain condition, they were to maintain the image of the picture or the melody in their mind (e.g., seeing a picture of a peacock, and then keeping that image in mind). In the Replace condition, they were to replace the current image or melody with the item associated with the word presented on the screen (e.g., after viewing a picture of a peacock and seeing the word “penguin,” bring the image of the penguin to mind). In the Targeted Clear, they were to suppress just the image or melody they had recently seen or heard, whereas in the Global Clear condition, they were to clear their mind of everything. These two conditions were further delineated to participants through instructions: In the Targeted Clear condition, you are to suppress the particular image or melody “like you would suppress a cough”, whereas in the Global Clear condition you are clearing your mind of “not only that image or melody, but everything”. Participants were also informed that in between trials they would see white fixation crosses for variable lengths of time and to fixate on them until the next trial. 
 The procedure during scanning was as follows (see  Figure 1 ). After fixation, a picture or melody was presented for four seconds, followed by a black screen with two words indicating the instructions for the next four seconds. For the Replace condition, the word “Switch” and a word describing a specific stimulus were presented. For example, after viewing a picture of a peacock, “Switch Penguin” indicated that the picture of the penguin learned earlier should be brought to mind. For the Maintain, Targeted Clear and Global Clear conditions, two identical words were presented (e.g., “Maintain Maintain”; “Suppress Suppress”; “Clear Clear,” respectively). 
 Each stimulus was presented once per condition, for a total of 128 experimental trials. There were 64 fixation trials (a white cross centered on a black screen), ranging in duration from 2 to 16 seconds, logarithmically and randomly distributed. Trial and fixation order was optimized using OptSeq2 ( Dale, 1999 ). There were 20 seconds of fixation baseline at the beginning of the scan. Stimuli were programmed using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc). Visual stimuli were presented via stereoscopic goggles and auditory stimuli were presented via headphones. 
 Stimuli were administered in one functional run comprised of 686 volumes, lasting approximately 23 minutes. Seven fixation volumes were dropped from the beginning of the run to ensure steady-state magnetization, resulting in a total of 679 volumes. An air pillow was inflated around each participant’s head in order to minimize movement. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Acquisition 
 Functional images were acquired with a GE (Waukesha, Wisconsin) Signa 3T MRI scanner with a T2*-weighted gradient-echo, echo-planar imaging (TR = 2000 msec, TE = 32 msec, flip angle = 77°, 29 Axial slices, thickness = 4 mm, gap = 0 mm, 64 × 64 in-plane resolution, in-plane FOV = 22 cm). A high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical scan was collected for each participant to localize functional activity. 
 
 
 Image Preprocessing 
 Image preprocessing was conducted with the FMRIB Software Library (FSL;  http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/ ). Images were motion corrected with MCFLIRT, and brain tissue was extracted with BET to remove all non-brain tissue from the images. Prior to statistical analysis, images were spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (FWHM = 8 mm), mean-based intensity normalized, high-pass temporal filtered with a cut-off period of 125 seconds to remove low-frequency noise, and intensity-normalized to allow valid analyses across participants. 
 
 
 Statistical Analyses 
 
 General Linear Models 
 Statistical analyses were conducted with FMRIB’s improved linear model. Analyses on the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) time series were performed separately for each individual participant using event-related analyses, convolved using a double-gamma hemodynamic response function. For comparisons across individuals, parameter and variance estimates for each participant were registered to Montreal Neurological Institute standard stereotaxic space (MNI152) with the two-stage registration procedure implemented in FMRIB’s Linear Image Registration Tool. The FMRIB’s Local Analysis of Mixed Effects (FLAME) was used to model the mixed-effects variance for each contrast of interest, taking into account both fixed effects and random effects. 
 Separate General Linear Models (GLMs) were run to examine compliance with instructions and study hypotheses. In the GLM we modeled the 4-second stimulus (i.e., picture/melody) period as a nuisance regressor separately from the 4-second manipulation period, which was the focus of our analyses. As each stimulus was followed exactly once by each condition, we expected that the effect of stimulus on the manipulation period would be minimal due to this counterbalancing. Nonetheless, to ensure that activation occurring during the manipulation period was not reflecting activation in the prior stimulus presentation period, we ran a different set of models using a single EV to characterize the entire 8-second trial period (i.e., presentation of the stimulus item plus mental manipulation), so that we had just four EVs (maintain, replace, selective clear, global clear). Consistent with our assumption that modeling the stimulus period as a nuisance regressor did not unduly influence our results, the results with the 8-second EVs were highly similar (i.e., the same main clusters and extent were revealed in both analyses). Hence, we present the data from the model in which the stimulus period is modeled separately from the manipulation period. 
 To test for compliance with task demands, these GLMs were run separately for visual and auditory stimuli, as distinct regions were expected to show the effect of interest. These analyses employed a two-step process. First FEAT was used to identify clusters that exhibited significantly greater activation for the contrast of Maintain and Replace > Targeted Clear and Global Clear. Correction for multiple comparisons was conducted via Monte Carlo simulations using AlphaSim within Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI;  Cox, 1996 ). Clusters were considered significant, corrected for a whole-brain error rate of  p  < 0.05, if they exceeded a voxel-wise threshold of  p  < 0.0025 (Z=3.02) and consisted of at least 73 contiguous voxels. 
 For each of these clusters, featquery was used to extract the mean activity of a 5-voxel sphere (10 mm diameter) around the cluster’s peak for each condition individually relative to baseline. If participants are complying with task demands, then activity for each of the Maintain and Replace conditions individually should be significantly above baseline (p<.05) because an item is being held in working memory, but should not reach a statistically significant level of activity relative to baseline (p>.05) for either of the two Clear conditions individually. 
 The second set of GLMs averaged over the auditory and visual conditions to test specific contrasts. To identify regions of interest, a cluster-wise whole-brain threshold of p<.05 (single-voxel threshold of  p  < 0.0025 with at least 73 contiguous voxels) was used for each contrast. Again, a two-step process was applied to ensure that clusters (averaged across a 5 voxel (10 mm) sphere at their peak) showed significant activation (p<.05) relative to fixation baseline for the conditions of interest and non-significant activation for the conditions to which they were contrasted (p>.05). Only clusters meeting this two-step criterion are reported in  Table 2 . 
 While  Table 1  presented a logical hierarchy characterizing the four conditions on each of three operations (i.e., removing the current item from working memory, emptying the contents of working memory and clearing working memory of all thought), one might consider an alternative conceptualization for the Replace condition. More specifically, the Replace condition might involve two phases - a clearing of working memory followed by the maintenance of a new item. In such a case, the hemodynamic response on these trials might look like the Clear conditions initially and then later look like that of the Maintain condition. 
 To address this possibility, we examined the time course of activity in the major clusters identified as described above, focusing specifically on those clusters in brain regions involved in cognitive control. More specifically, we examined the time course of activity during an 8-second time period covering both the item presentation and mental manipulation. We used the 8-second EV for this analysis because it also allowed us to verify that there were no significant differences across conditions during the 4 seconds in which the stimulus item was presented. To determine the time course, we identified the peak of a cognitive control region for a particular contrast of interest (e.g., Global Clear > all others, x=8, y=4, z=42), and created an ROI, which was a 10 mm diameter sphere (5 voxel width) around that peak, projected back into each subject’s native space. FSLmeants was used to extract the average percentage signal change for each condition (i.e., Global Clear, Targeted Clear, Replace, Maintain) for each participant for the 12 seconds following the trial onset. These percentage signal change values were then averaged across participants for each TR. To preview, these plots (presented in  Figure 4 ) are inconsistent with the notion that the Replace condition is an amalgam of an early clear response followed by a later maintain response. 
 
 
 Functional connectivity analyses 
 We used the clusters that met our two-step criterion described above as seed ROIs for whole brain connectivity analyses. First, after motion correction, slice timing correction, and high pass filtering, an initial analysis was run using FEAT to covary a set of nuisance regressors (i.e., ventricles, white matter, and whole brain signal) from each participant’s time course. Second, the average time course was extracted separately for each seed ROI using fslmeants and explanatory variable (EV) filtering (i.e., average time course multiplied by EV) was applied to extract individual time courses for experiment conditions - Maintain, Replace, Targeted Clear, Global Clear. Third, these conditional time courses were used as predictors in a group-level GLM to identify brain regions in a whole-brain search that covaried across participants with activation of a given seed ROI. 
 We classified regions as showing task-related connectivity when two conditions were met: 1) the relationship with the seed ROI across participants differed between task conditions, and 2) the region exhibited a pattern of activity for one of those conditions that differed significantly from the fixation condition. This latter criterion was included to ensure that patterns of functional connectivity reflect changes that occur as a result of task demands. A cluster-wise whole-brain threshold of p<.05 (single-voxel threshold of  p  < 0.005 with at least 103 contiguous voxels) was used to correct for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 Individual Differences 
 The composite Z-score from the three self-report questionnaires (White Bear Suppression Inventory, Ruminative Response Scale, and Penn State Worry Questionnaire) was entered as a covariate into FEAT for the six main contrasts of interest (refer back to  Table 1 ). A cluster-wise whole-brain threshold of p<.05 (single-voxel threshold of  p  < 0.005 with at least 103 contiguous voxels) was used to identify those regions that yielded a significant relationship with the composite score (see  Table 3 ). For contrasts that yielded significant associations with the self-reported questionnaires, we created a 10 mm diameter sphere (5 voxel width) centered at the peak of significant clusters. These spheres were then projected back into subject-specific space. Featquery was used to obtain an average percentage signal change for each peak for each participant. This information was used to generate the scatterplots in  Figure 6  indicating the relationship across individuals between the composite Z-score measure from the self-report questionnaires and percentage signal change as extracted from peaks of interest for the contrast of Targeted Clear + Global Clear > Maintain and Replace. 
 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Group Analyses 
 
 Compliance with Task Demands (Maintain & Replace > Targeted Clear and Global Clear in Sensory Processing Regions) 
 As outlined above, these analyses used a two-step criterion to determine whether individuals as a group complied with task demands. First, significantly greater activity should be observed in regions supporting a memory representation when individuals must keep a representation in mind (Replace & Maintain) as compared to when they must clear their memory (Targeted Clear & Global Clear). Furthermore, activation for each of the former two conditions should be significantly above a fixation baseline, while each of the latter two should not. For the visual modality, two regions bilaterally in the ventral visual stream met this two-step criterion (see  Figure 2a ). For auditory stimuli, the left middle temporal gyrus (BA 21) showed activity that approached significance for the Maintain and Replace conditions, and below baseline activity for both Clear conditions, although only that of the Global Clear reached significance (see  Table 2  &  Figure 2b ). 
 
 
 Operations on Items in Working Memory 
 In these and all subsequent analyses data are reported for contrasts collapsed across modalities, as they did not differ significantly. 
 
 Removing the Current Item from Working Memory (Replace & Targeted Clear & Global Clear > Maintain) 
 
 Activation 
 All conditions except the Maintain condition yielded significant activation for a large area of BA 7 bilaterally, portions of BA 6, as well as the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus. (See  Table 2  and  Figure 3A ). Moreover, all three of these conditions exhibited higher activation as compared to the Maintain condition across the entire time course. 
 
 
 Connectivity 
 There was no evidence that this region of BA 7 or BA 6 exhibited differential connectivity across the three conditions that activated it - Replace, Targeted Clear & Global Clear. 
 
 
 
 Emptying Working Memory > Working Memory Occupied (Targeted Clear & Global Clear > Maintain & Replace) 
 
 Activation 
 This contrast was designed to reveal those brain regions responsible for emptying the contents of working memory, either by specifically inhibiting the current item or clearing all information from working memory. Regions that exhibited greater activation for this contrast are those that have been previously identified as being involved in cognitive control (see  Table 2  and  Figure 3B ), including an anterior portion of BA 9 bilaterally, the cuneus bilaterally that extended both dorsally and ventrally in the left hemisphere, and the SMA. Activation was also noted in the globus pallidus bilaterally. It should be noted that activation in this condition, while including portions of area 18, was much more dorsal than that observed for the reverse contrast of Maintain + Replace > Targeted Clear + Global Clear. While the time course of activation for the SMA/ACC showed a clear differentiation between the two Clear conditions compared to the Maintain and Replace condition, a more graded response was observed for the DLPFC bilaterally (see  Figure 4B ). 
 
 
 Connectivity 
 Differential connectivity for the two Clear conditions was observed for each of the left and right precuneus peaks. In all cases, connectivity for the Global Clear condition was similar to fixation, with that of the Targeted Clear condition being distinct. More specifically, the more superior portion of the left precuneus (x= −12, y= −80, z=20) showed a significant positive correlation for the Global Clear but not the Targeted Clear condition with a portion of BA 18 (14, −80, −14), and a significant negative correlation for the Targeted Clear condition but not the Global Clear condition with a portion of lateral occipital cortex (LOC) (x=50, y=−4, z=−26). Both of these regions of visual cortex exhibited more activation for Maintain and Replace conditions than either of the Clear conditions.. For the right precuneus (x= 6, y= −80, z= 34 all conditions (including fixation) had a significant negative correlation with the left inferior frontal cortex (BA 44: x= −48, y=18, z=8), an effect not observed for the Targeted Clear condition. While the underlying mechanism that drives these specific patterns of connectivity may not be certain, the overall pattern nonetheless suggests that the cuneus and precuneus are important loci of control in clearing information from working memory and play distinct roles for a targeted versus global clearing of such information. 
 
 
 
 Clearing All Thought (Global Clear > Maintain & Replace & Targeted Clear) 
 
 Activation 
 Clearing all thought from working memory activates a network of regions that varies drastically from the other conditions. Most notable among the components of this network is a region of the cingulate proper above the mid-body of the corpus callosum that spans into the SMA, an extensive portion of the right insula, portions of the right supramarginal gyrus and frontopolar cortex (BA10) (see  Figure 3C ). The cingulate/SMA activity is in the opposite hemisphere and more ventral than that observed in the Targeted Clear condition (see  Table 2 ). Moreover, the time course of activation for the Global Clear condition in this region is clearly distinct from that of the other three conditions (See  Figure 4B ). 
 The reverse contrast (Maintain & Replace & Targeted Clear > Global Clear; see  Table 2 ), yielded activation above baseline activity for all conditions but the Global Clear in a large extent of left lateral frontal cortex, extending from the superior to inferior frontal gyri along a posterior to anterior gradient (see  Figure 5D ). Activity in the right fusiform gyrus was also significant for all conditions but the Global Clear condition. 
 
 
 Connectivity 
 The right middle frontal gyrus (BA 10) yielded a significant positive correlation with activity in the right mid-insula (BA 13) (x= 34, y= −6, z=10) for the Global Clear condition, but none of the others, consistent with the concept that unique processes are implemented in the Global Clear condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Activation Unique to a Given Condition 
 In these analyses we determined which brain regions were uniquely activated for a specific condition as compared to all others (See  Table 2 ). As discussed in the methods section, determination of unique activation occurred via a two-step process in which a) brain regions that exhibited significant activation above baseline for the condition of interest (e.g., Maintain) were identified, and b) only those that  did not  exhibit significant activation above baseline for each of the remaining conditions (e.g., Replace, Targeted Clear, Global Clear) were considered further. 
 
 Maintain Specific – Holding onto the Current Item 
 Portions of BA 40 (supramarginal gyrus) showed more activity for the Maintain condition than all others (See  Figure 5E ). The reverse contrast - regions that showed more activity for all conditions compared to the Maintain condition - was discussed above. 
 
 
 Replace Specific – Updating with a New Item 
 A number of regions in both the inferior and superior portions of the ventral processing stream were activated for the Replace condition but not the others (See  Figure 5A–C ). Of note, activation extended into the parahippocampal gyrus, which has been shown previously to become active when information must be retrieved again from memory in the face of other information having just been in working memory ( Sakai et al., 2002 ). Although one cannot make definitive conclusions based on a null result, it is worth noting that no frontal region is activated more for Replace than other conditions (see  Figure 5 ). With regard to the reverse contrast, there was no region that showed less activity for Replace than all the other conditions. 
 
 
 Targeted Clear – Clearing a Specific Item 
 The targeted clearing of a specific representation uniquely engaged regions of left anterior BA 9 (see  Figure 5C ). With regard to the reverse contrast, there was no region that showed less activity for Targeted Clear than all the other conditions. 
 
 
 Global Clear – Clearing All Thought 
 The findings for this condition are discussed above in the section entitled “Clearing All Thought (Global Clear > Maintain & Replace & Targeted Clear)”. To reiterate, activation was observed in a region of the cingulate proper above the mid-body of the corpus callosum that spans into the SMA, an extensive portion of the right insula, portions of the right supramarginal gyrus and frontopolar cortex (BA10). 
 
 
 
 Individual Differences 
 This set of analyses examined whether individual differences in the difficulty of controlling internal thought, as indexed by the composite scores from the questionnaires (White Bear Suppress Inventory, Ruminative Response Scale, and Penn State Worry Questionnaire), covaried with activation across the different contrasts relevant to our task. Two general trends emerged (see  Table 3 ). First, greater difficulty in controlling internal thought was associated with increased activity in brain regions supporting internal thought. Notably, these regions were not significantly activated for the group as a whole, suggesting that activation is contingent on individual differences. The regions so activated included left ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (BA 44), which is associated with inner speech, portions of the fusiform gyrus that would support internal images, and portions of the middle temporal gyrus associated with semantic processing (e.g.,  Whitney et al., 2011 ). 
 Second, greater difficulty in controlling internal thought was associated with increased activity in cognitive control regions. These included the medial prefrontal cortex (BA 6/32), which was activated by conditions requiring the removal of information in working memory (e.g., all conditions but the Maintain condition), as well as the right pregenual region of the ACC, a region associated with monitoring one’s actions (e.g.,  Rollnik et al. 2004 ). A scatterplot of the relationship between the percentage signal change in these two main regions along with individual scores on the composite measure of difficulty in controlling internal thought is shown in  Figure 6 . 
 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 The present study used the power of neuroimaging to attempt to identify the neural systems that serve to remove information from working memory. One vexing problem in addressing this issue has been the difficulty in verifying that individuals are indeed removing information from working memory. In the current study, the pattern of activity in regions of posterior cortex that support a memory representation was used to demonstrate that, as a group, individuals complied with task demands. Moreover, they did so differentially depending on the manner by which information was removed - by replacing it with some other thought, by specifically inhibiting it or by removing it through a global clearing of all thought. 
 
 Distinct Neural Systems for Distinct Means of Removing Information from Working Memory 
 Our results indicated that somewhat distinct neural systems are involved in each of the separate methods of removing information from working memory. Of importance, the separate neural systems engaged by the Replace condition as compared to the Targeted Clear condition shed light on a debate surrounding how information may be controlled in memory. By some accounts, information that appears to be “inhibited” behaviorally results not from control over that specific item, but rather from interference generated by a new and distinct item, such as thinking about something else, or even engaging in a motoric action ( Tomlinson et al., 2009 ). Were that the case, the brain regions activated by the Targeted Clear condition should have been isomorphic with those of the Replace condition. According to this proposal a Targeted Clear would be implemented by simply replacing the current thought with some other thought, rather than by trying to exert control over the specific item to be cleared. However, the results of the current study provide strong evidence against such a proposition, as distinct patterns of activity and functional connectivity over both posterior and prefrontal cortex distinguished these two conditions. 
 First, posterior brain regions involved in supporting a mental representation were uniquely activated in the Replace condition but not in other conditions, including the Targeted Clear condition (see  Table 2  &  Figure 5B ). Whereas the Replace condition engaged a large region of ventral visual cortex extending into parahippocampal gyrus, suggesting an active representation of information, activity in this same region for the Targeted Clear condition was not significantly above baseline. Conversely, the Targeted Clear condition uniquely engaged additional neural systems above and beyond those of all other conditions, including the Replace condition (see  Figure 5 ), in a region of frontopolar cortex. As this frontopolar region is just anterior to the DLPFC area activated by both Clear conditions, it may represent a more extensive activation of the neural system required to clear the contents of working memory. Finally, because of our two-step criteriion for determining regions in our contrasts of interest, greater activation in the SMA and the middle frontal gyrus bilaterally indicates a clear differentiation between the neural systems involved in the Replace and Targeted Clear conditions. 
 Similarly, there are well-defined distinctions in activation between the Targeted Clear condition and the Global Clear condition. In fact, the Global Clear condition showed what is perhaps the most unique pattern of activation across all the conditions. Unlike the other conditions, it did not engage a large portion of lateral prefrontal cortex involved in executive functioning, most notably BA 46 (see  Figure 5D ). Hence, the brain imaging data provide support for the idea that no specific working memory representation is being selected or manipulated in the Global Clear condition. 
 The Global Clear condition also was distinguished from the Targeted Clear condition by activity in the medial prefrontal cortex. Both Clear conditions engaged the SMA, which has been associated with the inhibition or cessation of movement (e.g.,  Dinomais et al. 2009 ;  Milham & Banich, 2005 ;  Toxopeus et al. 2007 ), and may be associated with the “cessation” of retaining an item in WM or within the focus of attention. In contrast, the Global Clear condition yielded activation more ventrally in the vicinity of and below the cingulate gyrus. This region of the ACC is one that has been recently implicated in evaluating the effectiveness of a response ( Jahn et al., 2014 ). It may become activated when additional evaluation is required to ensure that all information has indeed been removed from WM. 
 Finally, although both Clear conditions activated a region of the cuneus involved in executive control and with strong connectivity to DLPFC, as evidenced by studies both in monkeys and humans ( Margulies et al., 2009 ), the pattern of connectivity with visual processing regions was distinct for the Targeted Clear versus Global Clear condition. 
 In summary, our data provide clear evidence that there are a variety of ways in which current information can be removed from working memory, and that each of these operations engages somewhat dissociable brain systems. 
 
 A Hierarchy of Common Neural Systems for Removing Information from Working Memory 
 Despite the differential engagement of distinct brain regions for different methods of removing information from working memory, common mechanisms are also engaged. Our results suggest that these common mechanisms are organized in a hierarchy. 
 At the most basic level, all methods of removing information from working memory activated the cuneus, the thalamus, and a portion of lateral BA 6. At its simplest, replacing an item in working memory does not appear to require the mid-DLPFC regions that are generally considered to be involved in executive functions over working memory (e.g.,  Bunge et al., 2001 ;  Sandrini et al., 2008 ). Rather, the largest area of activation was in BA 7 (cuneus and precuneus). Patients with damage to this region have difficulty in manipulating information being held in working memory, but not on working memory tasks requiring only rehearsal and retrieval ( Koenigs et al., 2009 ). Moreover, patients with damage to this region exhibit deficits on memory tasks requiring attentional strategies ( Berryhill et al., 2011 ). Neuroimaging implicates this region in shifting attention in general, whether between spatial locations or between items held in working memory ( Tamber-Rosenau et al., 2011 ). Hence, the medial parietal activation in the current study may be associated with a shift of attention away from the currently held item in working memory to something different. 
 At the next level, clearing information from working memory, whether through a Targeted Clear or a Global Clear, engages anterior and superior regions of prefrontal cortex (e.g., BA9). This region has been implicated in goal-directed behavior, such as task switching ( Cutini et al. 2008 ), the creation of goals ( Majdandzi! et al., 2007 ) and task sets (e.g.,  Bengtsson et al., 2009 ;  Stelzel et al., 2008 ), as well as shifts in attention ( Tamber-Rosenau et al. 2011 ). From this perspective, the critical operation required by the Targeted Clear and Global Clear conditions that distinguish them from the Maintain and Replace conditions may be the requirement to shift from paying attention to something in working memory to having nothing in WM or having a new abstract goal (e.g., clearing your thoughts). Also activated was a broad region of medial frontal cortex, extending from the SMA into the cingulate (BA 6). This portion of the SMA has been implicated in imposition of a task set (e.g.,  Crone et al., 2006 ;  Doesenbach et al., 2008 ). Hence, its activity in the Clear conditions may occur because individuals are monitoring or evaluating whether they are indeed “responding” appropriately by clearing the current item out of working memory or removing it from the focus of attention. Finally, both Clear conditions, but not the Maintain and Replace conditions, activated the globus pallidus bilaterally. This portion of the basal ganglia is thought to aid in updating the contents of working memory. More specifically, via its connections to prefrontal cortex, it has been suggested to flexibly control the ability to open a gate that allows for the updating of information to be maintained in working memory ( Hazy et al., 2007 ;  O’Reilly & Frank, 2006 ). Indeed, there is increased activity in the basal ganglia, including the globus pallidus, when higher-order task goals must be updated ( Nee & Brown, 2013 ). Moreover, the greater the activity of the globus pallidus during encoding of higher-level task goals, the less distracting and irrelevant information gains access to working memory ( McNab & Klingberg, 2008 ). For both Clear conditions, the updating would involve switching from maintaining a specific representation in working memory to having nothing being maintained. In sum, large portions of the frontal-parietal executive system were activated when individuals needed to clear the contents of working memory. 
 Also of interest are regions not activated by the two Clear conditions.  A priori  one might have thought that the Targeted Clear and Global Clear conditions (and perhaps the Replace condition as well) would require inhibition of the current item in working memory. Yet no activation was observed in regions typically associated with inhibitory control, such as the right inferior frontal gyrus (e.g.,  Goghari & MacDonald, 2009 ;  Jahfari et al. 2011 ). As such, these findings are consistent with theoretical models ( O’Reilly & Frank, 2006 ) arguing that “inhibition” can occur by simply opening a gate that allows one item to be displaced by something else (for a longer discussion of different models of inhibitory control see  Munakata et al., 2011 ). 
 At the highest level, the Global Clear condition, as discussed above, engaged additional regions not observed for any other condition - a more frontopolar region (BA10), portions of the ACC, the insula and the inferior parietal lobe (BA 40). Frontopolar regions help attain the abstract goal or idea (e.g.,  Christoff et al., 2009 ), while ACC activity may indicate the need to suppress any plans or future thoughts about items in memory. The location of activity in the insula is in a region associated with interoception ( Craig, 2011 ). As such, this activation may reflect individuals turning attention inwards focusing on bodily states as a way not to engage in thought ( Hölzel et al., 2007 ), very much akin to what has been reported with meditation ( Baer, 2003 ). Consistent with this speculation, activation in the inferior parietal lobe likely indicates attention to bottom-up information (e.g.,  Cabeza et al., 2008 ), which in this case could be bodily states. 
 
 
 
 Individual Differences 
 Our study also demonstrated that engagement of the cortical networks recruited when one must remove the contents of working memory is influenced by the degree to which individuals have difficulty controlling internal thought. The larger the degree of self-reported difficulty in controlling internal thought, the greater the activation in BA 6. Whether this activity reflects that individuals have task un-related thoughts that need to be controlled or whether these individuals require more effort to control task-related information in working memory is not clear. Greater difficulty in controlling internal thought was also associated with greater activity in the pregenual region of the cingulate cortex. This relationship suggests that the more an individual has difficulty controlling internal thoughts, the more this region is engaged in monitoring processes either because such thoughts are not being controlled in line with task demands or because one must work hard to ensure that those thoughts are indeed being correctly controlled. 
 These findings corroborated the validity of the self-rated measures of difficulty in controlling internal thought. The higher the rating of difficulty in controlling internal thought, the greater the activation in a variety of brain regions that would appear to support such thoughts, such as BA 44, semantic processing regions of the temporal lobe and visual cortex. Notably the area of left inferior frontal cortex that shows a relationship with difficulty in controlling internal thought is near the region commonly referred to as Broca’s area (which would aid in generating internal thought) and is independent from regions both more dorsal and lateral that have been identified in a meta-analysis in preventing irrelevant memories from intruding into working memory ( Nee et al., 2013 ). Given the sensitivity of our brain-imaging paradigm to index individual differences in controlling internal thought, we believe it may be especially helpful for use with psychiatric populations who may have difficulty controlling thought. We are currently investigating this possibility. 
 
 
 Limitations and Caveats 
 One of the major limitations of the current study is that it relies on reverse inference with regards to cognitive states on the basis of brain data. As has been clearly articulated by  Poldrack (2006 ,  2011 ) reverse inference can be problematic. In particular, it is difficult to know whether distinctions in patterns of activation across conditions truly represent distinct cognitive processes, or whether conditions vary in complexity or demand (see also Kristoff and Owen, 2006). In such cases, greater activation for a given condition could simply reflect greater usage of some more general process, such as attention, effort, or time on task (e.g.,  Grinband et al., 2011 ). Given that we have not utilized a method that can speak more directly to the representation that underlies brain activation, such as multivariate pattern analysis (see reviews by  Tong & Pratte, 2012 ;  Serences & Saproo, 2012 ), our results must be considered in that light. 
 Nonetheless, there are a number of aspects of the results suggesting that indeed the neural systems underlying the processes we outline in  Table 1  are distinct. Most suggestive is that patterns of brain activation across the six different contrasts of interest showed important dissociations in terms regional distribution. First, we found patterns of activation specific to only one of the four conditions (see  Figure 4 ). The specificity of these different regional patterns of activation across conditions is inconsistent with the idea that the activation in these regions is just reflecting some general process (e.g., attention) that is invoked to varying degrees across conditions. If that were the case, then one would have anticipated varying degrees of activation within the same brain regions across conditions. Rather, we see clear spatial dissociations in activation across conditions. For example the Global Clear condition uniquely activates the right insula and the Targeted Clear condition uniquely activates the superior frontal gyrus, according to the strict two-step criterion that we employed (i.e., activation must be significantly above zero for the conditions of interest (e.g., Global Clear) and insignificant for all other conditions). 
 Second, for some regions that exhibited co-activation across conditions (e.g., left precuneus for the Targeted Clear and Global Clear conditions), there was evidence from the connectivity analysis that this activation was not reflecting the same process. Rather, for some regions that co-activated across conditions, the  pattern  of co-activation of this region with other brain regions was distinct across conditions. 
 While we cannot say exactly what type of process is being invoked by these brain regions because of the problem of reverse inference, nonetheless, we are able to say that there appear to be distinctions between the neural systems involved in removing information from working memory. On the whole, the evidence we provide is strongest for suggesting a distinction between mechanisms involved in a Targeted Clear as compared to a Global Clear. What our results cannot address is the nature of the representations that are being removed or manipulated in working memory. Answering such a question will rely on brain decoding methods, using multivariate pattern analysis or similar approaches, which we are currently pursuing. 
 It should also be noted that while we speak of the “maintenance” in and “removal” of information from WM, at least some recent research has suggested that information may not be “maintained” in an active state during delay periods but rather be placed outside the focus of attention. According to this evidence, levels of activation of the BOLD signal, at least as assessed via the GLM, may be an insensitive and non-specific measure of memory maintenance (e.g.,  Lewis-Peacock and Postle, 2012 ; LeRocque et al., 2013; for review see  Postle, in press ). While these evolving viewpoints regarding the maintenance of information in working memory are very intriguing, they are unlikely to make the current pattern of results uninterpretable. The logic of our experiment does not rest solely on the idea that information must be maintained in an active state as classically described by Goldman-Rakic, amongst others (e.g.,  Funahashi et al., 1993 ), in our Maintain and Replace conditions, but not our Global Clear and Targeted Clear conditions. Even if information were maintained in some state as opposed to placed within the focus of attention, the important contrast for our purposes is that the information is not maintained, maintained to a lesser degree, or pushed out of the focus of attention for the Clear conditions. Unlike MVPA approaches that are designed to examine the representations or  contents  of working memory, our initial investigation is designed to focus more on the neural systems that must be engaged to perform  operations  on those representations. Our subsequent work, which is in progress, is designed to examine more carefully what types of representations are held (or not held) during these various operations. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The current study identified cognitive control mechanisms that are involved in removing the current contents of working memory. Not surprisingly, these operations engaged the fronto-parietal network, which has been implicated in executive control. Notable, however, is the finding of a hierarchy of control mechanisms engaged depending on the manner in which an item is removed. Replacing one item with another mainly engaged parietal regions and BA 6. Clearing the contents of working memory, whether specifically or generally, required involvement of more anterior regions of BA9, bordering on BA10. Clearing the contents of working memory engaged additional portions of lateral and prefrontal cortex involved in cognitive control, along with a concomitant shift towards activation in the insula and inferior parietal regions, consistent with a turn of focus towards the body and oneself as a way to avoid thinking about items in working memory. 
 Activation of these mechanisms was also shown to vary with individual differences in difficulty in controlling internal thought. More specifically, greater difficulty in such control was associated with increased activation of BA 6, consistent with the notion that this region plays an important role in controlling removal of the contents of working memory. As such, the current study not only informs neural models of executive control over working memory but also lays the groundwork for understanding how these various functions may be influenced by variation in both neurologically-normal and clinical populations. 
 
 
 
 
 The authors wish to thank the members of NIMH Interdisciplinary Behavioral Science Center on the Determinants of Executive Function and Dysfunction (DEFD) Center at the University of Colorado - Boulder for their comments and suggestions regarding this research. This NIMH center, as well as the research described in this paper, was supported by NIMH Grant P50 MH079485 (M. Banich, P.I.). Additionally, we would like to thank Luka Ruzic and Kathy Pearson for their help with the brain imaging analyses. Finally, we would like to thank two anonymous reviewers for thoughtful comments on a prior version of the manuscript. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MC 
 
 
 Green 
 C 
 
 
 2001 
 Suppressing unwanted memories by executive control 
 Nature 
 410 
 366 
 369 
 11268212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MC 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Kuhl 
 B 
 
 
 Cooper 
 J 
 
 
 Robertson 
 E 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 SW 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural systems underlying the suppression of unwanted memories 
 Science 
 303 
 232 
 235 
 14716015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 Verbruggen 
 F 
 
 
 2008 
 Stop the presses: dissociating a selective from a global mechanism for stopping 
 Psychol Sci 
 19 
 1146 
 1153 
 19076487 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baer 
 RA 
 
 
 2003 
 Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: a conceptual and empirical review 
 Clin Psychol Sci-Pr 
 10 
 125 
 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baldo 
 JV 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 2006 
 The role of inferior parietal and inferior frontal cortex in working memory 
 Neuropsychology 
 20 
 529 
 538 
 16938015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2009 
 Executive function: the search for an integrated account 
 Curr Dir in Psychol Sci 
 18 
 89 
 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bengtsson 
 SL 
 
 
 Haynes 
 JD 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2009 
 The representation of abstract task rules in the human prefrontal cortex 
 Cereb cortex 
 19 
 1929 
 1936 
 19047573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berryhill 
 ME 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 2011 
 At the intersection of attention and memory: the mechanistic role of the posterior parietal lobe in working memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 49 
 1306 
 15 
 21345344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Prefrontal regions involved in keeping information in and out of mind 
 Brain 
 124 
 2074 
 2086 
 11571223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ciarmelli 
 E 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 The parietal cortex and episodic memory: an attentional account 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 613 
 625 
 18641668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2006 
 Improving reverse neuroimaging inference: cognitive domain versus cognitive complexity 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 352 
 353 
 16843038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Keramatian 
 K 
 
 
 Gordon 
 AM 
 
 
 Smith 
 R 
 
 
 Mädler 
 B 
 
 
 2009 
 Prefrontal organization of cognitive control according to levels of abstraction 
 Brain Research 
 1286 
 94 
 105 
 19505444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craig 
 ADB 
 
 
 2011 
 Significance of the insula for the evolution of human awareness of feelings from the body 
 Ann NY Acad Sci 
 1225 
 72 
 82 
 21534994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Donohue 
 SE 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural evidence for dissociable components of task-switching 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 475 
 486 
 16000652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cutini 
 S 
 
 
 Scatturin 
 P 
 
 
 Menon 
 E 
 
 
 Bisiacchi 
 PS 
 
 
 Gamberini 
 L 
 
 
 Zorzi 
 M 
 
 
 Dell’Acqua 
 R 
 
 
 2008 
 Selective activation of the superior frontal gyrus in task-switching: an event-related fNIRS study 
 Neuroimage 
 42 
 945 
 55 
 18586525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 8 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Depue 
 BE 
 
 
 Curran 
 T 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2007 
 Prefrontal regions orchestrate suppression of emotional memories via a two-phase process 
 Science 
 317 
 215 
 219 
 17626877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 GI 
 
 
 Andrew 
 C 
 
 
 Zelaya 
 FO 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Dumanoir 
 C 
 
 
 2000 
 Motor response suppression and the prepotent tendency to respond: a parametric fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 38 
 1280 
 1291 
 10865104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dinomais 
 M 
 
 
 Minassian 
 AT 
 
 
 Tuilier 
 T 
 
 
 Delion 
 M 
 
 
 Wilke 
 M 
 
 
 N’Guyen 
 S 
 
 
 Richard 
 I 
 
 
 Aubé 
 C 
 
 
 Menei 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional MRI comparison of passive and active movement: possible inhibitory role of supplementary motor area 
 Neuroreport 
 20 
 1351 
 1355 
 19734813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Wegner 
 KL 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 RAT 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2008 
 Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans 
 PNAS 
 104 
 11073 
 11078 
 17576922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ehlers 
 A 
 
 
 Steil 
 R 
 
 
 1995 
 Maintenance of intrusive memories in posttraumatic stress disorder: a cognitive approach 
 Behav Cog Psychoth 
 23 
 217 
 249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funahashi 
 S 
 
 
 Chafee 
 MV 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1993 
 Prefrontal neuronal activity in rhesus monkeys performing a delayed anti-saccade task 
 Nature 
 365 
 753 
 756 
 8413653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garavan 
 H 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 1999 
 Right hemispheric dominance of inhibitory control: an event-related functional MRI study 
 P Natl Acad Sci USA 
 96 
 8301 
 8306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grinband 
 J 
 
 
 Savitskaya 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Teichert 
 T 
 
 
 Ferrera 
 VP 
 
 
 Hirsch 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 The dorsal medial frontal cortex is sensitive to time on task, not response conflict or error likelihood 
 Neuro Image 
 57 
 303 
 311 
 21168515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goghari 
 VM 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 AW 
 
 
 2009 
 The neural basis of cognitive control: response selection and inhibition 
 Brain Cognition 
 71 
 72 
 83 
 19427089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hazy 
 TE 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 O’reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 2007 
 Towards an executive without a homunculus: computational models of the prefrontal cortex/basal ganglia system 
 Philos T Roy Soc B 
 362 
 1601 
 1613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hölzel 
 BK 
 
 
 Ott 
 U 
 
 
 Hempel 
 H 
 
 
 Hackl 
 A 
 
 
 Wolf 
 K 
 
 
 Stark 
 R 
 
 
 Vaitl 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 Differential engagement of anterior cingulated and adjacent medial frontal cortex in adept meditators and non-meditators 
 Neurosci Lett 
 421 
 16 
 21 
 17548160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jahfari 
 S 
 
 
 Lourens Waldorp 
 L 
 
 
 van den Wildenberg 
 WPM 
 
 
 Scholte 
 HS 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 BU 
 
 
 2011 
 Effective connectivity reveals important roles for both the hyperdirect (fronto-subthalamic) and the indirect (fronto-striatal-pallidal) fronto-basal ganglia pathways during response inhibition 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 6891 
 6899 
 21543619 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jahn 
 A 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Alexander 
 WH 
 
 
 Brown 
 JW 
 
 
 2014 
 Distinct regions of anterior cingulate cortex signal prediction and outcome evaluation 
 Neuro Image 
 95 
 80 
 89 
 24667454 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MR 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 KJ 
 
 
 Raye 
 CL 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 2007 
 A brief thought can modulate activity in extrastriate visual areas: top-down effects of refreshing just-seen visual stimuli 
 Neuroimage 
 37 
 290 
 299 
 17574442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koenigs 
 M 
 
 
 Barbey 
 AK 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Superior parietal cortex is critical for the manipulation of information in working memory 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 14980 
 14986 
 19940193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaRocque 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Drysdale 
 A 
 
 
 Oberauer 
 K 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2013 
 Decoding attended information in short-term memory: An EEG study 
 J of Cognitive Neurosci 
 25 
 127 
 142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2008 
 Temporary activation of long-term memory supports working memory 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 8765 
 8771 
 18753378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2012 
 Decoding the internal focus of attention 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 470 
 478 
 22108440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Majid 
 DS 
 
 
 Cai 
 W 
 
 
 George 
 JS 
 
 
 Verbruggen 
 F 
 
 
 Aron 
 AR 
 
 
 2012 
 Transcranial magnetic stimulation reveals dissociable mechanisms for global versus selective corticomotor suppression underlying the stopping of action 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 1004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Majdandzić 
 J 
 
 
 Grol 
 MJ 
 
 
 van Schie 
 HT 
 
 
 Verhagen 
 L 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 Bekkering 
 H 
 
 
 2007 
 The role of immediate and final goals in action planning: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 37 
 589 
 598 
 17587600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys 
 PNAS 
 106 
 20069 
 20074 
 19903877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McNab 
 F 
 
 
 Klingberg 
 T 
 
 
 2008 
 Prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia control access to working memory 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 11 
 1 
 103 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 TJ 
 
 
 Miller 
 ML 
 
 
 Metzger 
 RL 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 TD 
 
 
 1990 
 Development and validation of the penn state worry questionnaire 
 Behav Res and Ther 
 28 
 487 
 495 
 2076086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 2005 
 Anterior cingulate cortex: an fMRI analysis of conflict specificity and functional differentiation 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 25 
 328 
 335 
 15834861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Munakata 
 Y 
 
 
 Herd 
 SA 
 
 
 Chatham 
 CH 
 
 
 Depue 
 BE 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 2011 
 A unified framework for inhibitory control 
 TICS 
 15 
 453 
 459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Brown 
 JW 
 
 
 2013 
 Dissociable frontal-striatal and frontal-parietal networks involved in updating hierarchical contexts in working memory 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 23 
 9 
 2146 
 2158 
 22798339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Brown 
 JW 
 
 
 Askren 
 MK 
 
 
 Berman 
 MG 
 
 
 Demiralp 
 E 
 
 
 Krawitz 
 A 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 A meta-analysis of executive components of working memory 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY: 1991) 
 23 
 2 
 264 
 282 
 10.1093/cercor/bhs007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 1991 
 Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of depressive episodes 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 100 
 569 
 582 
 1757671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Morrow 
 J 
 
 
 1991 
 A prospective study of depression and posttraumatic stress symptoms after a natural disaster: the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake 
 J Per Soc Psych 
 61 
 115 
 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Making working memory work: a computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia 
 Neural Comput 
 18 
 283 
 328 
 16378516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Lateral prefrontal cortex: architectonic and functional organization 
 Philos T R Soc Lon B 
 360 
 781 
 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2006 
 Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 59 
 63 
 16406760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2011 
 Inferring mental states from neuroimaging data: from reverse inference to large-scale decoding 
 Neuron 
 72 
 692 
 697 
 22153367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 in press 
 Activation and information in working memory research 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 Barense 
 M 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook on the Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rollnik 
 JD 
 
 
 Schröder 
 C 
 
 
 Rodríguez-Fornells 
 A 
 
 
 Kurzbuch 
 AR 
 
 
 Däuper 
 J 
 
 
 Möller 
 J 
 
 
 Münte 
 TF 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional lesions and human action monitoring: combining repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and event-related brain potentials 
 Clinical Neurophysiol 
 115 
 145 
 153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakai 
 K 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2002 
 Parahippocampal reactivation signal at retrieval after interruption of rehearsal 
 J Neurosci 
 22 
 6315 
 6320 
 12151507 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandrini 
 M 
 
 
 Rossini 
 P 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 2008 
 Lateralized contribution of prefrontal cortex in controlling task-irrelevant information during verbal and spatial working memory tasks: rTMS evidence 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 2056 
 2063 
 18336847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Serences 
 JT 
 
 
 Saproo 
 S 
 
 
 2012 
 Computational advances towards linking BOLD and behavior 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 435 
 446 
 21840553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Souza 
 AS 
 
 
 Rerko 
 L 
 
 
 Oberauer 
 K 
 
 
 2014 
 Unloading and reloading working memory: attending to one item frees capacity 
 J Exp Psychol Human 
 40 
 1237 
 1256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stelzel 
 C 
 
 
 Kraft 
 A 
 
 
 Brandt 
 SA 
 
 
 Schubert 
 T 
 
 
 2008 
 Dissociable neural effects of task order control and task set maintenance during dual-task processing 
 J Cognitive Neurosci 
 20 
 613 
 628 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamber-Rosenau 
 BJ 
 
 
 Esterman 
 M 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2011 
 Cortical mechanims of cognitive control for shifting attention in vision and working memory 
 J Cognitive Neurosci 
 23 
 2905 
 2919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Teasdale 
 JD 
 
 
 Segal 
 Z 
 
 
 Williams 
 JMG 
 
 
 1995 
 How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training help? 
 Behav Res Ther 
 33 
 25 
 39 
 7872934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tolin 
 DF 
 
 
 Abramowitz 
 JS 
 
 
 Przeworski 
 A 
 
 
 Foa 
 EB 
 
 
 2002 
 Thought suppression in obsessive–compulsive disorder 
 Behaviour Research and Therapy 
 40 
 1255 
 1274 
 12384322 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomlinson 
 TD 
 
 
 Huber 
 DE 
 
 
 Rieth 
 CA 
 
 
 Davelaar 
 EJ 
 
 
 2009 
 An interference account of cue-independent forgetting in the no-think paradigm 
 PNAS 
 106 
 15588 
 15593 
 19717438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tong 
 F 
 
 
 Pratte 
 MS 
 
 
 2012 
 Decoding patterns of human brain activity 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 63 
 483 
 509 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toxopeus 
 CM 
 
 
 de Vries 
 PM 
 
 
 de Jong 
 BM 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 George 
 MS 
 
 
 Bohning 
 DE 
 
 
 Walker 
 J 
 
 
 Klaus 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Cerebral activation patterns related to initiation and inhibition of hand movement 
 Neuroreport 
 18 
 1557 
 1560 
 17885601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wegner 
 DM 
 
 
 Zanakos 
 S 
 
 
 1994 
 Chronic thought suppression 
 J Per 
 62 
 615 
 640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitney 
 C 
 
 
 Kirk 
 M 
 
 
 O’Sullivan 
 J 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 The neural organization of semantic control: TMS evidence for a distributed network in left inferior frontal and posterior middle temporal gyrus 
 Cereb Cortex 
 21 
 1066 
 1075 
 20851853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zanto 
 TP 
 
 
 Rubens 
 MT 
 
 
 Bollinger 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 Top-down modulation of visual feature processing: the role of the inferior frontal function 
 Neuroimage 
 53 
 736 
 745 
 20600999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 The experimental paradigm 
 Individuals either heard or saw an item for 4 seconds and then immediately afterwards were asked to perform a mental manipulation on that item (Maintain, Replace, Targeted Clear, or Global Clear) for the next 4 seconds. Fixation trials were distributed logarithmically between these 8-second epochs to provide a baseline for comparison. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Activity in sensory regions confirming individuals’ compliance with task demands 
 A) Activity in the ventral visual processing stream during visual trials only. B) Activity in temporal cortex during auditory trials only. In both cases the bar graphs represent the percentage signal change for each condition individually for the peak of activation relative to a fixation baseline (refer back to  Table 2 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Regions involved in cognitive control over items in working memory 
 A) Those involved in removing the current contents of working memory. B) Those involved when information in working memory must be cleared. C) Those involved in a Global Clearing of working memory. In all cases regions labeled are those, which on average, show activation above baseline for the condition(s) of interest and non-significant activity for the contrasted conditions. ACC=anterior cingulate cortex, DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, Fronpol=frontopolar, ins=insula, par=parietal, Precen=precentral, SMA=supplementary motor area 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 The time course of activity in regions involved in cognitive control over items in working memory. Shown here is the percentage signal change for regions of interests (refer back to  Figure 3 ). A) Those involved in removing the current contents of working memory. B) Those involved when information in working memory must be cleared. C) Those involved in a Global Cearing of working memory. In all cases regions labeled are those, which on average, show activation above baseline for the condition(s) of interest and non-significant activity for the contrasted conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 A–C) The extent of regions showing significantly greater activity for one condition than the others 
 If the region passed a more stringent requirement that activity must be significantly above fixation baseline for a given condition (p<.05) and not for each of the others, it is labeled in the figure. D–E) The extent of regions showing significantly less activity for a given condition compared to all others. If the region, passed the more stringent requirement that activity must not reach significance for a given condition but be significantly above baseline for each of the other conditions (p<.05), it is labeled in the figure. A) The Global Clear condition uniquely activates a region of the ACC extending up into the supplementary motor area (SMA). B) Much of the ventral visual processing stream, including the lateral occipital (LO) area as well as the parahippocampus (para) are uniquely activated bilaterally by the Replace condition. C) The Targeted Clear condition uniquely activates anterior DLPFC (aDLPFC) bilaterally. D) Whereas all other conditions activated regions of lateral DLPFC from inferior frontal cortex (IFC) to premotor cortex, the Global Clear condition did not. E) All other conditions but the Maintain condition significantly activated the cuneus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Two brain regions that show activity related to individual differences in the tendency towards difficulty in controlling internal thought 
 The y-axis indicates percentage signal change for the contrast of conditions in which information should be removed from working memory (Targeted Clear & Global Clear) as compared to when it need not (Maintain & Replace). Individuals whose composite score (on the x-axis) indicated greater difficulty in controlling internal thought showed greater activation both in cognitive control regions (SMA/ACC) plotted in blue, as well as in regions related to inner speech (left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex: LVLPFC), shown in maroon. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Contrasts of major interest in the current study and unique operations indexed by each condition. 
 The contrasts in Rows 1–3 can be conceptualized as a hierarchy of control operations, from more general to more specific, that are involved in removing the current item from working memory. First row: The Replace and both Clear conditions require the current item to be removed, whereas the Maintain condition does not. Second Row: Emptying the contents of working memory is required for each of the two Clear conditions, but not the Maintain and Replace conditions. Third Row: The Global Clear condition uniquely indexes the clearing of all information from working memory, whereas the other conditions do not. The contrasts in Row 3–6 isolate those processes that are uniquely indexed by each of the given condition compared to the other three. 
 
 
 
 
 Operation 
 Maintain 
 Replace 
 Targeted Clear 
 Global Clear 
 
 
 
 
 Removing the current item from working memory 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 
 
 Emptying the contents of working memory 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 
 
 Clearing working memory of all thought 
 No 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 
 
 Retaining the current item 
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 No 
 
 
 Updating with a new item 
 No 
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 
 
 Clearing a targeted item 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 No 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Areas of significant brain activation for the contrasts of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 Max Z 
 No. of voxels 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Compliance with Task Demands: Maintain & Replace > Targeted Clear & Global Clear 
 
 
 
 
 Visual Regions 
 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus(R) 
 37 
 4.71 
 1830 
 56 
 −52 
 −18 
 
 
 Occipital/Temporal Junction (R) 
 
 4.33 
 537 
 30 
 −60 
 26 
 
 
 
 Auditory Regions 
 
 
 
 Middle_Temporal_Gyrus(L) 
 21 
 4.37 
 498 
 −66 
 −32 
 −6 
 
 
 
 Removing Information from Working Memory: Replace & Targeted Clear & Global Clear > Maintain 
 
 
 
 Cuneus/Precuneus (L) 
 7 
 4.85 
 2776 
 −4 
 −72 
 36 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 6 
 3.97 
 132 
 −34 
 −8 
 48 
 
 
 Thalamus (L) 
 
 3.04 
 
 −12 
 −22 
 10 
 
 
 Thalamus (R) 
 
 3.18 
 
 10 
 −14 
 4 
 
 
 
 Emptying the Contents of Working Memory: Targeted Clear & Global Clear > Maintain & Replace 
 
 
 
 SMA/ACC(R) 
 6 
 4.52 
 872 
 16 
 8 
 64 
 
 
 Cuneus(L) 
 18 
 4.52 
 788 
 −12 
 −80 
 20 
 
 
 Middle_Frontal_Gyrus(R) 
 9 
 4.16 
 640 
 28 
 42 
 18 
 
 
 Middle_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 9 
 4.18 
 201 
 −30 
 36 
 24 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (R) 
 6 
 3.74 
 184 
 26 
 −4 
 50 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 
 3.46 
 128 
 −12 
 −72 
 −20 
 
 
 Cuneus (R) 
 18 
 3.77 
 79 
 6 
 −80 
 34 
 
 
 Globus Pallidus (L) 
 
 3.16 
 
 −18 
 −4 
 −6 
 
 
 Globus Pallidus (R) 
 
 3.22 
 
 18 
 0 
 −4 
 
 
 
 Clearing Working Memory of All Thought: Global Clear > All Others 
 
 
 
 SMA/Cingulate_Gyrus(R) 
 24 
 4.93 
 1325 
 8 
 4 
 42 
 
 
 Insula(R) 
 13 
 4.35 
 580 
 40 
 4 
 8 
 
 
 Supramarginal gyrus/Inferior_Parietal_Lobule(R) 
 40 
 4.56 
 553 
 66 
 −40 
 28 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (R) 
 10 
 4.81 
 470 
 32 
 44 
 20 
 
 
 
 Not Clearing Working Memory of All Thought: All Others > Clear 
 
 
 
 Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 4.71 
 878 
 −38 
 −76 
 36 
 
 
 Inferior_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 47 
 3.85 
 772 
 −50 
 20 
 −16 
 
 
 Fusiform/Inferior_Temporal_Gyrus(R) 
 20 
 3.79 
 296 
 60 
 −34 
 −16 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus (L) 
 6 
 3.70 
 271 
 −48 
 4 
 36 
 
 
 Superior_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 8 
 3.63 
 249 
 −10 
 36 
 46 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus (L) 
 46 
 3.45 
 168 
 −44 
 20 
 22 
 
 
 Inferior_Frontal_Gyrus(R) 
 47 
 4.19 
 167 
 34 
 32 
 −14 
 
 
 
 Retaining the Current Item in Working Memory: Maintain > All Others 
 
 
 
 Inferior_Parietal_Lobule(R) 
 40 
 3.49 
 75 
 56 
 −44 
 48 
 
 
 
 Updating a New Item: Replace > Others 
 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus (L) 
 37 
 5.04 
 4153 
 −46 
 −60 
 −22 
 
 
 Inferior Occipital Gyrus 
 18 
 4.98 
 3108 
 42 
 −84 
 −8 
 
 
 Superior Lateral Occipital Cortex (L) 
 
 4.34 
 1297 
 −34 
 −74 
 24 
 
 
 Lingual Gyrus (R) 
 19 
 4.52 
 835 
 10 
 −60 
 0 
 
 
 Superior Lateral Occipital Cortex (R) 
 
 4.42 
 775 
 38 
 −68 
 26 
 
 
 
 Clearing a Targeted Item: Targeted Clear > Others 
 
 
 
 Superior_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 9 
 3.76 
 417 
 −22 
 48 
 26 
 
 
 Cuneus (L) 
 18 
 3.56 
 100 
 −4 
 −70 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA refers to the Brodmann area in which the peak resides. Max Z is the maximum Z value of the cluster. No. of voxels is the number of voxels that comprise the cluster, followed by the MNI coordinates of the cluster’s peak. All regions except subcortical regions met a voxelwise threshold of Z=3.02,  p <.0025, with a clusterwise correction of  p <.05, 73 voxel extent. In addition, all clusters met a more stringent requirement of significant activity (Z=1.96, p<.05) relative to fixation for the condition(s) of interest, as well as non-significant activity (p>.05) for the comparison condition(s). For example, the regions listed for the contrast of Maintain & Replace > Targeted Clear & Global Clear met a voxelwise threshold of Z=3.02,  p <.0025, with a clusterwise correction of  p <.05, 75 voxels. In addition, activity was significantly above fixation for each of the Maintain and Replace conditions, which was not the case for each of the other conditions (i.e., Targeted Clear, Global Clear). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regions that show a significant relationship with individual differences in difficulty in controlling internal thought. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 Max Z 
 No. of vox 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Targeted Clear & Global Clear > Maintain & Replace 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precentral_Gyrus(L) + 
 44 
 3.56 
 301 
 −50 
 8 
 8 
 
 
 
 Medial_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 
 
 32 
 
 
 3.58 
 
 
 181 
 
 
 −18 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus(L) 
 
 
 19 
 
 
 3.68 
 
 
 177 
 
 
 −30 
 
 
 −78 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 All Others > Maintain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inferior_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 44 
 3.68 
 1021 
 −54 
 6 
 14 
 
 
 
 Medial_Frontal_Gyrus(L) 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 3.28 
 
 
 289 
 
 
 −18 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 Targeted Clear > All Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle_Temporal_Gyrus(L) 
 39 
 3.66 
 271 
 −58 
 −64 
 12 
 
 
 
 Others > Global Clear 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial_Frontal_Gyrus(R) 
 9 
 3.16 
 165 
 16 
 42 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA refers to the Brodmann area in which the peak resides. Max Z is the maximum Z value of the cluster. No. of voxels is the number of voxels that comprise the cluster, followed by the MNI coordinates of the cluster’s peak. All regions except subcortical regions met a voxelwise threshold of Z=3.02, p<.0025, with a clusterwise correction of p<.05, 73 voxels. Regions shown in bold are also activated for the basic contrasts (e.g., without a covariate). In all cases, greater activity for the contrast is associated with a greater degree of difficulty in controlling internal thought. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 The task was to maintain, replace, selectively clear or globally clear working memory (WM) 
 
 
 Compliance with task demands was confirmed via activity level of posterior cortex 
 
 
 Changing the contents of WM activated parietal regions 
 
 
 Clearing the contents of WM activated prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 Such activity was enhanced in individuals who have trouble controlling thoughts 
 
 
 
 
