
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8918110 
 2607 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 Eur. J. Neurosci. 
 
 The European journal of neuroscience 
 
 0953-816X 
 1460-9568 
 
 
 25892332 
 4465201 
 10.1111/ejn.12897 
 NIHMS674637 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Differentiating neural systems mediating the acquisition versus expression of goal-directed and habitual behavioral control 
 
 
 
 
 Liljeholm 
 Mimi 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Dunne 
 Simon 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 John P. 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 1 Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 
 2 Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, 92697 
 3 Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences and Computation and Neural Systems Program, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 
 
 Corresponding author: Mimi Liljeholm, Department of Cognitive Sciences, 2312 Social & Behavioral Science Gateway Building, University of California, Irvine, California 92697, Phone: 949-824-8444, Fax: 949-824-2307,  m.liljeholm@uci.edu 
 
 
 27 
 5 
 2015 
 
 
 18 
 4 
 2015 
 
 
 5 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 5 
 2016 
 
 41 
 10 
 1358 
 1371 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Considerable behavioral data indicates that operant actions can become habitual, as evidenced by insensitivity to changes in the action-outcome contingency and in subjective outcome values. Notably, although several studies have investigated the neural substrates of habits, none has clearly differentiated the areas of the human brain that support habit formation from those that implement habitual control. We scanned participants with fMRI as they learned and performed an operant task in which the conditional structure of the environment encouraged either goal-directed encoding of the consequences of actions, or a habit-like mapping of actions to antecedent cues. Participants were also scanned during a subsequent assessment of insensitivity to outcome devaluation. We identified dissociable roles of the cerebellum and ventral striatum, across learning and test performance, in behavioral insensitivity to outcome devaluation. We also show that the inferior parietal lobule – an area previously implicated in several aspects of goal-directed action selection, including the attribution of intent and awareness of agency – predicts sensitivity to outcome devaluation. Finally, we reveal a potential functional homology between the human subgenual cortex and rodent infralimbic cortex in the implementation of habitual control. In summary, our findings suggest a broad systems division, at the cortical and subcortical levels, between brain areas mediating the encoding and expression of action-outcome and stimulus-response associations. 
 
 
 
 
 Habit formation 
 stimulus-response 
 action-outcome 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Habitual action selection is defined by insensitivity to changes in the causal efficacy with which actions produce rewards and to the current subjective value of those rewards ( Balleine and Dickinson, 1998 ). Neuroscientific research on humans and rodents has demonstrated that brain areas mediating habitual performance are dissociable from those supporting more deliberate, goal-directed, action selection ( Balleine and Dickinson, 1998 ;  Yin et al., 2004 ,  2005 ;  Valentin et al., 2007 ;  Tricomi et al., 2009 ). Intriguingly, work in rodents also suggests that distinct neural substrates make specialized contributions to the development versus deployment of habits ( Killcross and Coutureau, 2003 ). In contrast, in humans there has been no clear differentiation between brain areas that support habit formation and those that implement habitual control. Although a couple of neuroimaging studies have demonstrated increases in neural activity concomitant with the development of habits in a posterior area of the lateral striatum ( Tricomi et al., 2009 ;  Wunderlich et al., 2012 ), the use of overtraining to induce habitual responding in these studies confounds well-trained performance with habitual control. In the current study, in order to discriminate between neural substrates supporting the acquisition versus expression of habits, we scanned human participants with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as they performed a novel instrumental task (see Task in Methods), designed to rapidly induce habitual responding without the potentially confounding process of overtraining. 
 Pharmacological disruptions and electrophysiological recordings of the rodent brain have strongly implicated the dorsolateral striatum (DLS) in the acquisition of habits: Pre-training lesions of the DLS abolish habit formation ( Yin et al., 2004 ), and distinct changes in neuronal activity patterns ( Jog et al., 1999 ), including substantial decreases in firing rates ( Carelli et al., 1997 ;  Tang et al., 2007 ), have been demonstrated in this area across the development of habitual responding. In contrast, the infralimbic region of the prefrontal cortex has been suggested to support an executive control system that facilitates the expression of habits: Post-training muscimol induced inactivation of the infralimbic cortex disrupts habitual performance ( Coutureau and Killcross, 2003 ;  Haddon and Killcross, 2011 ), and changes in neuronal ensemble activity patterns in this area occur very late in training and closely track the behavioral manifestation of habitual control ( Smith and Graybiel, 2013 ). Further evidence for the involvement of the infralimbic cortex in the expression of habits comes from studies in which optogenetic perturbation of this area disrupts well-ingrained habitual behavior ( Smith et al., 2012 ). Based on these findings in rodents, we hypothesized that human homologues of the DLS and infralimbic cortex would be involved in the formation and expression of habits respectively, such that behavioral insensitivity to outcome devaluation would correlate with neural activity during learning in the dorsal putamen ( Carelli and West, 1991 ;  Draganski et al., 2008 ), but with activity during actual test performance in the subgenual cortex.( Ongur and Price, 2000 ;  Ongur et al., 2003 ). 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty volunteers (mean age =21.4 ± 2.63, range=19-28; 11 males) participated in the experiment. Due to technical problems (loss of power to the stimulus computer), one of the subjects was excluded, yielding a total of 19 participants. All participants were normal and healthy, and were recruited locally from the city of Dublin, Ireland. The study was approved by the Trinity College Dublin School of Psychology research ethics committee, and all participants gave informed consent. The study conformed to the guidelines set out in the 2013 WMA Declaration of Helsinki. 
 
 
 Task 
 Goal-directed actions, defined by their sensitivity to changes in both action-outcome contingency and outcome value, have been proposed to depend on an internal model of the world that explicitly relates alternative actions to future environmental states ( Doya et al., 2002 ;  Daw et al., 2005 ). Consistent with this theoretical framework, data from rodent studies suggests that reliance on a goal-directed versus habitual strategy might depend on the ease with which alternative actions can be associated with distinct outcomes: goal-directed performance appears to dominate, in spite of overtraining, when alternative actions yield distinct sensory-specific outcomes (e.g., grain versus sucrose pellets) ( Colwill and Rescorla, 1985 ;  Holland, 2004 ), as well as when the rate of outcome delivery depends on the rate of responding, rather than on a particular time interval passing between successive reinforced responses (i.e., ratio versus interval schedules of reinforcement) ( Dickinson, 1983 ). The current task is structured on these potential bases of behavioral control, in that external contingencies either facilitate or impede a reliable mapping of alternative actions to distinct sensory-specific outcome states. 
 Participants were required to maintain the balance of a system of fluid-filled beakers (see  Fig. 1A  for details). As long as all beakers had sufficient fluid, system balance was maintained and randomly occurring balance checks yielded monetary reward. However, on each trial, one of the beakers would be emptied causing “system imbalance”, with balance checks resulting in monetary loss until the participant re-filled the beaker by performing a particular instrumental action. The emptying of a beaker was always accompanied by the onset of one of four abstract cues. In the  Stimulus-Response (S-R)  condition, the identity of the presented cue determined which instrumental action would re-fill the emptied beaker, regardless of  which  of the beakers had lost its fluid. Consequently, across trials, each rewarded action was paired with a specific antecedent cue, but was decorrelated from the re-filling of any particular beaker. Conversely, in a  Response-Outcome (R-O)  condition, each instrumental action re-filled a particular beaker, regardless of which abstract cue was presented, such that identification of the relevant subgoal (e.g., re-filling beaker 1), combined with knowledge about specific action-outcome contingencies (i.e., action 1 re-fills beaker 1), indicated which action would restore system balance. To ensure that discriminatory neural activity was not due to differences in the visual processing of abstract cues versus beakers, a matching task was interleaved with the instrumental task (see  Fig. 1B ). 
 The persistent execution of an action after its outcome has been devalued is a defining feature of habitual performance ( Adams and Dickinson, 1981 ;  Adams, 1982 ). In the current study, following acquisition of the instrumental task, we devalued one of the four beakers by degrading its relationship to monetary gain, such that system balance was maintained, and continued to yield points, even when the liquid in this beaker dropped below threshold. Because there was a small cost for regulating the system, attempts to re-fill this beaker now resulted in a net loss (see  Fig. 1A  and Experimental Procedure for details). Based on the notion that failure to associate alternative actions with distinct outcome states obstructs goal-directed encoding, we predicted that the S-R condition would bolster habit formation during acquisition and bias participants towards habitual action selection, defined as responding to re-fill the devalued beaker, in subsequent tests performance. Note that, in both conditions, distinct features of the stimulus environment can enter into stimulus-response associations; whereas in the S-R condition, each rewarded action is reliably preceded by a particular arbitrary cue, rewarded actions in the R-O condition are reliably preceded by the emptying of a particular beaker. However, critically, it is only in the R-O condition that alternative actions can be associated with distinct outcome states. Consequently, we expected performance in this condition to be goal-directed. 
 
 
 Experimental Procedure 
 We scanned participants as they acquired and performed the instrumental task, as well as during a subsequent devaluation test phase. Each subject participated in both the R-O and S-R condition; with conditions being ran in separate, immediately consecutive, sessions (order counterbalanced across subjects) and with a novel set of four instrumental actions being used in each condition. Each condition included a response pre-training phase, a learning phase, a devaluation phase, and a final test phase as described below. The response-training phase of the first condition was conducted outside the scanner (in a separate testing room), before participants were transferred to the scanner in which they remained throughout all subsequent stages of the experiment. Before being transferred to the scanner, participants were presented with a cover-story describing the beaker system and the task. They were told that they would be in one of two possible conditions – one in which each instrumental action re-filled a particular beaker regardless of which cue was presented, and another in which the identity of the cue determined which of the four actions was required to re-fill an emptied beaker, regardless of the identity of that beaker – and that part of their task was to determine which of the two conditions they were in. The entire experiment lasted for approximately 2 hours, with 1.5 hours being spent in the scanner, and with approximately 60 minutes of active scanning, during the learning phases and devaluation tests in each condition. 
 
 Response pre-training 
 Prior to the instrumental learning phases, participants received pre-training on the four instrumental actions (each a 3-press sequence). During this training, key-press sequences were illustrated by a white dot moving across three gray squares, horizontally aligned at the center of the screen. Initially, participants viewed and then immediately attempted to replicate each sequence, with feedback (i.e., correct/incorrect) given on each trial. After a total of 5 correct replications of each response-sequence, they proceeded to a retrieval phase, in which they had to generate each unique sequence at least 5 times without any prompts, again with feedback given at the completion of each sequence. Participants were allowed to repeat these two phases as many times as they wanted to, knowing that they would have to use the actions to earn monetary reward in a subsequent phase. 
 
 
 Instrumental learning phase 
 The instrumental task was as illustrated in  Figure 1A . Note that, in addition to the increase or decrease in monetary points based on system balance, there was a small cost for regulating the system. This response cost was included to ensure that, during test, participants would not respond simply based on any reinforcement intrinsic to executing the correct response. The response cost message (screen 3 in  Fig. 1A ) also served to inform participants that their action had successfully regulated the system, rather than the system having self-regulated (in which case no response cost was charged) due to failure to perform the correct action within 7 seconds of trial onset. Participants were allowed to perform as many key-presses as they wanted during system imbalance (i.e., during the 7 seconds following trial onset), with the correct sequence of three consecutive key-presses immediately restoring system balance and terminating the trial. There was no constraint on the temporal spacing between key-presses, as long all three presses were performed consecutively within the trial window. 
 Critically, the stimulus materials presented in  Figure 1A  were identical across the two conditions: our manipulation consisted entirely of differences in the contingencies between cues, actions and beaker outcomes. To rule out visual processes involved in selectively attending to the abstract cues versus the beakers as a source of any imaging effects, a matching task was block-interleaved with the instrumental task during instrumental learning (see  Fig. 1B ). Briefly, in matching blocks, the inter-trial intervals and trial onsets were exactly as in the system balance task, except that the words “Matching trial” were displayed center screen: Without this indication, matching trials would be identical to instrumental trials during the relevant trial period, and thus could not have served as controls. Following the appearance of the abstract cue and emptying of the relevant beaker, a white masking screen was displayed, followed by a depiction of either an abstract cue (S-R condition) or a set of beakers (R-O condition), together with a query about whether the currently shown cue/beaker set matched that on the previous screen. In each condition, the instrumental learning phase consisted of 4 blocks of trials, with each block being further divided into one sub-block of 24 instrumental trials, followed by a sub-block of 8 matching trials, and with the order of trials randomized within each sub-block. 
 At the end of the instrumental learning phase, participants were asked whether they felt confident that they had learned how to regulate the system or whether they wanted to receive an additional set of 20 training trials (5 with each action). Five participants (two in the R-O and three in the S-R condition) requested and received additional training. No scanning was conducted during additional training, nor were the added trials included in assessments of accuracy and response times during acquisition. 
 
 
 Devaluation phase 
 Following instrumental learning, participants were instructed that the system had changed such that one of the beakers was no longer relevant for system balance, which would be maintained, and continue to yield points, even when the liquid in this beaker dropped below threshold. They then observed as the system regulated itself (i.e., no actions were performed) across 16 trials (4 with each beaker) in order to discover the identity of the devalued beaker. Participants were told that they would not lose or gain any of the displayed points during this phase. In the imaging experiment, two participants failed to correctly identify the devalued beaker after this devaluation procedure, which was therefore repeated once for these participants. All other participants successfully identified the devalued beaker at the end of the devaluation procedure. 
 
 
 Test phase 
 Having correctly identified the devalued beaker, participants were again given the opportunity to regulate the system for personal monetary reward. During this phase, all text messages indicating gains or losses were covered up, in order to prevent additional learning (i.e., simulating extinction). Participants were instructed that, in spite of these gray strips, they should assume that all was exactly as they had learned before: that is, they would still lose points whenever the system was not balanced, there was still a cost for regulating the system, and the previously identified irrelevant beaker was still irrelevant for system balance. Importantly, because there was a small charge for each instrumental regulation of the system, re-filling the now irrelevant beaker resulted in a net monetary loss. The test phase consisted of a single instrumental block with 44 randomly ordered trials; 11 trials with each beaker, including the devalued  (i.e., irrelevant)  one. We operationally define devaluation insensitivity, our assay of habitual performance, as the proportion of the 11 devalued trials on which participants initiated a response to refill the beaker. Thus, if a participant initiated a response on 2 of those 11 trials, their devaluation insensitivity score would be 0.18. 
 
 
 Pay-off structure 
 Throughout the instrumental task, system balance checks occurred on average every 3 seconds. During the ITI (mean=5sec.), the system was always balanced, with each check yielding a reward of 0.5 points. At each trial onset, the system became imbalanced, with each balance check resulting in a loss of 0.5 points, and would remain so for 7 seconds unless regulated by the participant. Thus, if no action were taken to balance the system, each trial would entail an average loss of 1.17 points. If the system was balanced immediately, no points were lost due to system imbalance, but there was a response cost of 0.1 points (this cost was only applied to correct responses resulting in system regulation). Thus, the average gain of responding to balance the system was 1.07 points. After beaker devaluation, during the test phase, this was still the case for regulatory responses re-filling non-devalued beakers, however, responding to re-fill the devalued beaker now resulted in a net loss of 0.1 points (the response cost). 
 
 
 
 Imaging acquisition and analyses 
 A 3 Tesla scanner (MAGNETOM Trio; Siemens) was used to acquire structural T1-weighted images and T2*-weighted echoplanar images (repetition time = 2.65 s; echo time = 30 ms; flip angle = 90°; 45 transverse slices; matrix = 64 × 64; field of view = 192 mm; thickness = 3 mm; slice gap = 0 mm) with BOLD contrast. To recover signal loss from dropout in the medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC)( O'Doherty et al., 2002 ), each horizontal section was acquired at 30° to the anterior commissure–posterior commissure axis. Image processing and statistical analyses were performed using SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). The first four volumes of images were discarded to avoid T1 equilibrium effects. All remaining volumes were corrected for differences in slice acquisition, realigned to the first volume, spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) echoplanar imaging template, and spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (8 mm, full width at half-maximum). We used high-pass filter with a cutoff of 128 s. 
 As previously noted (see Experimental Procedure), instrumental conditions were ran in separate consecutive sessions, with the acquisition phase of each condition consisting of interleaved instrumental and matching block, and with active scanning occurring only during the acquisition and test phase of each condition (i.e., the scanner was off during response pre-training and devaluation phases), for a total of 4 active scanning periods per subject. For each subject, we constructed an fMRI design matrix that included the acquisition and test phases of both experimental conditions. For each of the two instrumental acquisition phases (i.e., R-O and S-R), stick functions modeled the trial onsets in each block of instrumental learning and in matching blocks. In addition, three regressors, respectively modeling the onsets of error trials, the times of all individual key-presses and the times of all point displays (i.e., gains and losses) were entered as regressors of no interest, together with six regressors accounting for the residual effects of head motion. For each of the two test phases, two stick functions respectively modeled non-devalued and devalued trials: again, for each instrumental condition, additional regressors modeling the onsets of error trials and the times of all key-presses were added together with six regressors accounting for the residual effects of head motion as regressors of no interest. All regressors were convolved with a canonical hemo-dynamic response function. 
 Group-level random-effects statistics were generated by entering contrasts of parameter estimates for the different regressors into between-subjects analyses of variance (ANOVA). Specifically, to delineate neural substrates engaged during early acquisition versus during expression, contrasts of parameter estimates for the first two blocks of instrumental learning, and for the devaluation test phase, were entered for each instrumental condition into a 2×2 (condition by experimental phase) ANOVA. Contrasts of parameter estimates for all learning blocks and for matching blocks were entered into a separate 2× 2(stimulus by task) ANOVA, to compare differences between instrumental conditions during learning to those between matching control conditions. An analogous ANOVA was performed using contrasts of parameter estimates for devaluation test trials and matching trials. Finally, a 4×2 (instrumental by acquisition block) ANOVA assessed training-related changes in neural activity, with contrasts of parameter estimates for each of the four blocks of instrumental learning, for each instrumental condition. Following estimation of the 2 nd  level model, F-tests were specified by adding linear weights to each block of learning (e.g., [-1.5 -0.5 0.5 1.5] for increases across blocks and [1.5 0.5 -0.5 -1.5] for decreases), in each instrumental condition. 
 To assess whether neural discrimination between instrumental conditions correlated with the degree of devaluation insensitivity, a simple t-tests was performed on first level interaction contrasts [SR>RO × Instrumental>Matching] of parameter estimates from the learning phase, with the degree of devaluation insensitivity entered as a covariate. An analogous t-test using interaction contrasts of parameter estimates from the devaluation test phase was also performed, and exclusive functional masks were used to assess the specificity of neural effects, such that all voxels that reached significance at a threshold of p<0.1 when assessing correlates of devaluation insensitivity during the test phase were removed from the effects observed during learning, and vice versa. Exclusive functional masks were also used to assess the directions of simple effects underlying the Instrumental Condition by Experimental Phase interaction. Finally, we used exclusive functional masks to selectively assess training-related increases versus decreases in neural activity, such that, for example, when testing for increases in neural activity across blocks of training in the R-O condition, voxels were removed that reached significance at p<0.1 for the same test in the S-R condition. 
 Small volume corrections (SVC) were performed on several a priori regions of interest using a 10 mm sphere, with center coordinates obtained from highly relevant studies. Specifically, in an analogous study on observational learning ( Liljeholm et al., 2012 ), we found selective recruitment of the extra-striate cortex (±45, -72, 9), the tail of caudate nucleus/thalamus (±21, -30, 9) and lingual gyrus (±12, -69, 0) by the S-R condition during acquisition. Conversely, areas selective recruited by the R-O condition in that same observational learning study, and also identified in our other work on goal-directed performance ( Liljeholm et al., 2011 ), include the inferior parietal lobule (±51, -52, 33) and anterior caudate nucleus (±16, 8, 19). Finally, several human neuroimaging studies have implicated a posterior region of the putamen (±33, -24, 0) in habit formation ( Tricomi et al., 2009 ;  de Wit et al., 2012 ;  Wunderlich et al., 2012 ;  Lee et al., 2014 ), and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (±4, 55, -7) in goal-directed processes ( Hampton et al., 2006 ;  Tanaka et al., 2008 ;  Liljeholm et al., 2011 ). It should be noted that, although specified a priori based on a closely related literature, effects in several of these regions survived whole-brain cluster-size threshold (CST) correction, as well as SVC, in the current study. 
 As noted, the putamen, considered a human homolog of the rodent DLS based on its afferent and efferent projections ( Carelli and West, 1991 ;  Draganski et al., 2008 ), has been implicated in habitual performance in several human imaging studies ( Tricomi et al., 2009 ;  de Wit et al., 2012 ;  Wunderlich et al., 2012 ;  Lee et al., 2014 ). In contrast, the role of infralimbic cortex in instrumental performance has been exclusively demonstrated in rodents ( Killcross and Coutureau, 2003 ;  Haddon and Killcross, 2011 ;  Smith et al., 2012 ;  Smith and Graybiel, 2013 ). Consequently, and based on anatomical and functional evidence for a homology between the rodent infralimbic cortex and the human subgenual cortex ( Ongur and Price, 2000 ;  Ongur et al., 2003 ;  Drevets et al., 2008 ), predictions regarding this area where tested using an anatomical masks of the subgenual cortex (BA25), defined using the Wake Forest University (WFU) Pickatlas ( Maldjian et al., 2003 ). All other effects were reported at p < 0.05, using cluster size thresholding (CST) of SPM t-maps to adjust for multiple comparisons ( Forman et al., 1995 ). AlphaSim, a Monte Carlo simulation (AFNI) was used to determine cluster size and significance. Using an individual voxel probability threshold of p=0.005 indicated that using a minimum cluster size of 111 MNI transformed voxels resulted in an overall significance of p < 0.05. 
 To eliminate non-independence bias for plots of contrast values, a leave-one-subject-out (LOSO ( Esterman et al., 2010 ) approach was used, in which 19 GLMs were run with one subject left out in each, and with each GLM defining the voxel cluster for the left out subject. Using rfxplot ( Glascher, 2009 ), mean contrast values were extracted from spheres (10 mm) centered on these LOSO peaks (identified within ROIs for small volume corrections) and were averaged across subjects to plot overall effect sizes. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral results 
 The results from the test phase indicated that our manipulation did indeed produce differences in devaluation sensitivity: Having correctly identified the devalued beaker, participants initiated a response on a significantly greater proportion of devalued trials in the S-R condition (mean proportion = 0.43, SEM=0.09) than in the R-O (mean proportion = 0.19, SEM=0.09), t(18)=2.3,  p <0.031. Indeed, whereas only 5 of 19 participants initiated a response on any devalued trials in the R-O condition, 15 of 19 participants initiated a response on at least one devalued trial in the S-R condition; χ 2 =10.56, p<0.005. 
 Note that devaluation insensitivity was defined such that a response to obtain the devalued outcome (i.e., to re-fill the devalued beaker) was counted even if the entire three-press sequence was not completed on that trial. Indeed, in the S-R condition, when a participant responded to fill up the devalued beaker, they often did so without completing the entire three-press sequence, consistent with evidence from the rodent literature that the response most proximal to reward remains sensitive to devaluation long after more distal responses have become habitual ( Killcross & Coutureau, 2003 ). In contrast, those few participants that responded on devalued trials in the R-O condition did so on most or all devalued trials and completed all three key-presses whenever initiating a response, suggesting a more deliberate decision to respond. 
 Importantly, during the test phase, whereas in the R-O condition participants could determine both the accuracy and value of a particular action solely by identifying the emptied beaker, in the S-R condition, determining the value and accuracy of a given response required identification of both the abstract cue and the emptied beaker. It is possible therefore, that differences in devaluation performance were due to this additional aspect of the S-R condition. The overall pattern of behavioral results, however, strongly suggests that this was not the case, and generally rules out task difficulty as the source of our effects. First, there were no significant differences between conditions in the percent of incorrect responses, during either acquisition (R-O mean=14%, SEM=3, S-R mean=11%, SEM=2; t(18)=1.1,  p =0.30) or test performance (R-O mean=4%, SEM=1, S-R mean=4%, SEM=2; t(18)=0,  p =1.0). Likewise, response times did not differ between conditions during either acquisition (R-O mean=1482 ms, SEM=62; S-R mean=1393 ms, SEM=78; t(18)=1.95,  p =0.21) or test performance (R-O mean=1258 ms, SEM=54, S-R mean=1361 ms, SEM=68; t(18)=-1.52,  p =0.15). The fact that there were no significant differences between conditions in either accuracy or reaction times during test makes it highly unlikely that differences in devaluation sensitivity reflected differences in task difficulty. Perhaps most pertinently, differences in devaluation insensitivity were not correlated with differences in accuracy (p=0.5) or reaction times (p=0.8), nor did individual differences in accuracy or reaction times predict neural effects in any of the areas identified by our imaging analyses. 
 To assess the influence of counterbalancing order, we performed order-by-condition analyses of variance on response times and accuracy scores during the learning and test phases, as well as on the devaluation insensitivity scores. There was no significant interaction between order and condition for devaluation insensitivity (F(1,17)=0.55, p=0.47), nor for either response times (F(1,17)=0.89, p=0.36) or accuracy scores (F(1,17)=0.07, p=0.79) during the test phase. In contrast, during training, there was an anticipated interaction for both response times (F(1,17)=5.96, p<0.03) and accuracy scores (F(1,17)=23.01, p<0.001), such that response times were longer and the percent incorrect was greater for whatever condition came first: Thus, while the difference in response times between instrumental conditions differed across the two orders (mean difference for R-O first=0.19; mean difference for S-R first=-0.32) there was no difference between instrumental conditions when compared for a given order (i.e., for R-O vs. S-R with both first, p=0.84 and for R-O vs. S-R with both second, p=0.71). A similar pattern was observed for percent incorrect scores (mean difference for R-O first=0.08; mean difference for S-R first=-0.01; significance test for R-O vs. S-R with both first, p=0.26 and for R-O vs. S-R with both second, p=0.90). Consequently, we can rule out counterbalancing order as a source of our behavioral and imaging effects of interest. 
 There were no differences between instrumental conditions in the number of requested repetitions of response pre-training phases (R-O mean=1.98, SEM=0.29; S-R mean=1.75, SEM=0.18; t(18)=0.72,  p =0.48), nor in the total number of key presses executed during instrumental learning (R-O mean=470.63, SEM=32.14; S-R mean=503.74, SEM=31.63; t(18)=-0.85,  p =0.40) or on non-devalued trials during test (R-O mean=121.84, SEM=4.57; S-R mean=125.53, SEM=4.53; t(18)=-1.34,  p =0.57). Finally, there was no difference between instrumental conditions in the total number of points earned during instrumental learning (R-O mean=33.6, SEM=3.61; S-R mean=33.4, SEM=3.33; t(18)=0.071,  p =0.94). This allows us to rule out the number of motor responses as well as total earnings as sources of the difference in devaluation performance. 
 
 
 Neuroimaging results 
 Our primary objective was to investigate whether neural discrimination between the two instrumental conditions differed across acquisition and expression of behavioral control, particularly with respect to BOLD activity predictive of individual differences in devaluation insensitivity (see  Table 2 ). To rule out the possibility that differences between our instrumental conditions were due to differences in the processing of relevant visual features (i.e., of abstract cues in the S-R condition and of the set of beakers in the R-O condition), additional analyses formally contrasted such differences with those emerging between matching control conditions (see Table 3). Unless otherwise noted, all effects reported below survived the subtraction of matching control conditions. All results described below survived correction for multiple comparisons at p<0.05 using either whole-brain cluster size thresholding (CST) or small volume corrections (SVC) based on coordinates from relevant previous studies. Notably, many of the areas specified a priori as targets of SVC, including the lingual gyrus, extra-striate cortex and inferior parietal lobule, also survived correction using whole-brain CST, as indicated in the fourth columns of  Tables 1  and  2 . 
 
 Discrimination between instrumental conditions during acquisition versus performance 
 To delineate neural substrates engaged during early acquisition versus during expression of operant behavior, we entered the imaging data from the first two blocks of instrumental learning together with that from the subsequent test phase, for each instrumental condition, into a 2×2 (condition by experimental phase) analysis of variance (see  Table 2 ). Although processes supporting acquisition should certainly dominate during the first two blocks of instrumental learning, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that some element of expression was also present during this phase. Inclusion of only the very earliest learning trials would not eliminate this possibility, but would introduce dramatically different error levels and severely reduce statistical power. We note, however, that the presence of processes related to expression during the early stages of instrumental learning should reduce, rather than enhance, discrimination between the levels of the “experimental phase” variable. Thus, in areas where we do observe a significant difference in discriminatory activity across the different phases of the experiment, such differences are most likely attributable to the differential effects of acquisition versus expression. 
 
 S-R related activity 
 Activity that was greater in the S-R than the R-O condition ( Fig. 2 ) emerged in the middle and superior occipital cortex, and in the superior parietal lobule (SPL). Interaction tests and (exclusively masked) tests of simple effects revealed that activity in the SPL and superior occipital cortex was significantly greater in the S-R than the R-O condition only during test performance, but not during early acquisition ( Table 2 ). Moreover, during early acquisition, only a small area of the middle occipital cortex, the extra-striate body area (EBA; SVC), survived subtraction of corresponding matching controls (Table 3). In contrast, S-R selective activity throughout the occipital cortex, including the EBA, survived subtraction of matching controls during the test phase. 
 
 
 R-O related activity 
 Activity significantly greater in the R-O condition than the S-R condition ( Fig. 3 ) was observed throughout a fronto-parietal network, including dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), the inferior parietal lobules (IPL), the posterior cingulate and the bilateral insula. Interaction tests and (exclusively masked) tests of simple effects revealed that, in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), discrimination between instrumental conditions occurred during test performance only ( Table 2 ). Analyses assessing differences between conditions relative to matching controls also revealed R-O selective effects in the dorsal anterior caudate (aCN), but did not yield significant effects in the VMFPC (Table 3). 
 
 
 
 Discrimination between conditions across blocks of acquisition 
 To further assess differential activity related to acquisition processes, we tested for differences between conditions in training-dependent changes in neural activity, by adding linear weights to blocks of instrumental learning. An interaction test assessing neural activity that increased in the R-O condition and decreased in the S-R condition yielded significant effects throughout the right putamen and globus pallidus (CST, 33, -7, -5) and in the right IPL (CST, 63, -31, 37). The reverse interaction contrast, assessing neural activity that decreased in the R-O condition and increased in the S-R condition, did not reveal any significant effects. Specific assessments of increases versus decreases revealed  decreases  across training blocks in the S-R condition, but not in the (exclusively masked) R-O condition, throughout the right putamen and globus pallidus ( Fig. 4  top). In contrast, significant  increases  in activity across blocks in the R-O condition, but not in the (exclusively masked) S-R condition, emerged in the right IPL ( Fig. 4  bottom). 
 
 
 Neural correlates of devaluation insensitivity 
 To relate the neuroimaging data to our behavioral effects, we tested whether neural discrimination between instrumental conditions correlated with differences between conditions in the degree of devaluation insensitivity. This was indeed the case: Participants with stronger activation of the tail of caudate/thalamus (tCN/th) and of the cerebellum, extending into the lingual gyrus (LG), in the S-R relative to the R-O condition during the first two blocks of instrumental learning responded on a greater proportion of devalued trials in the S-R condition relative to the R-O condition during the subsequent test phase ( Fig. 5A ). These effects all survived exclusive masking by an identical contrast applied, with a threshold of 0.1, to the imaging data from the test phase, suggesting that, in these areas, discriminatory activity during early acquisition, but  not  during test performance, predicted differences in devaluation insensitivity. 
 Conversely, during the test phase, differences in neural activity between the S-R and R-O conditions in the subgenual cortex (ROI) and ventral striatum (VS) were positively correlated with the difference between conditions in devaluation insensitivity ( Fig. 5B ). That is,  greater  subgenual and VS activity in the S-R relative to the R-O condition predicted greater devaluation insensitivity in the S-R than R-O condition. We also found a negative correlation with test performance in the right IPL (SVC), such that  lesser  IPL activity in the S-R relative to the R-O condition predicted greater devaluation insensitivity in the S-R than R-O condition. Again, the specificity of these results were confirmed using exclusive masking by an identical contrast, at a threshold of 0.1, applied to the imaging data from the training phase. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 In this study we explored the neural substrates of goal-directed and habitual action selection, with a focus on how recruitment of relevant brain areas might differ across acquisition and implementation of behavioral control. We scanned human participants with fMRI as they learned and performed a novel task designed to encourage either goal-directed encoding of the specific outcomes of instrumental responses (R-O condition), or a habitual mapping of responses to antecedent cues (S-R condition). In a subsequent test phase, participants were more likely to respond for a devalued outcome, indicative of habits, in the S-R condition. We found that neural activity in striatal and cortical areas 1) discriminated between our two instrumental conditions, 2), predicted individual differences in devaluation insensitivity and 3) did so differentially across acquisition and test performance. 
 Our results identified several areas in which the degree of neural discrimination between instrumental conditions predicted differences in devaluation insensitivity. Specifically, S-R selective activity in the tail of caudate and cerebellum during learning, but not during test performance, predicted greater devaluation insensitivity in the S-R, relative to the R-O, condition. The cerebellum has been strongly implicated in response automatization ( Doyon et al., 1998 ;  Doyon et al., 2002 ;  Lang and Bastian, 2002 ;  Balsters and Ramnani, 2011 ) – a resistance to dual-task interference postulated to be closely related to, and sometimes treated as synonymous with, habitual performance. Indeed, in the rodent literature, the cerebellum has been directly implicated in habit formation, such that cerebellar lesions abolish devaluation insensitivity in over-trained rats ( Callu et al., 2007 ). However, to our knowledge, no previous study has directly linked the cerebellum to outcome devaluation insensitivity in humans. As with the cerebellum, the tCN has been implicated in skill learning ( Poldrack and Gabrieli, 2001 ;  Yamamoto et al., 2013 ). Moreover, single neuron recordings in the monkey tCN have revealed that, relative to the body and head of caudate, this area is specifically involved in encoding stable, non-flexible, values of visual cues ( Kim and Hikosaka, 2013 ;  Yamamoto et al., 2013 ;  Hikosaka et al., 2014 ;  Kim et al., 2014 ), consistent with its role in devaluation insensitivity demonstrated here and elsewhere ( Valentin et al., 2007 ;  Liljeholm et al., 2012 ). 
 In the subgenual cingulate (BA 25), S-R selective activity during test performance, but not during learning, correlated with behavioral devaluation insensitivity. Based on its cytoarchitectonic subdivisions and connections, this area has been identified as homologous to the rodent infralimbic cortex: The rodent infralimbic and human subgenual areas both project heavily to the shell of the nucleus accumbence, and both are agranular, relatively poorly laminated, areas located ventrally on the medial wall ( Gabbott et al., 1997 ;  Ongur and Price, 2000 ;  Ongur et al., 2003 ). In rodents, the infralimbic cortex has been shown to make specialized contributions to executive control processes facilitating the deployment of habits ( Coutureau and Killcross, 2003 ;  Haddon and Killcross, 2011 ;  Smith et al., 2012 ;  Smith and Graybiel, 2013 ). Consistent with such findings, our results suggest that a putative human homologue of this area does indeed play selective roles in the expression of habits. It should be noted, however, that the rodent infralimbic cortex is primarily known for its involvement in the extinction of Pavlovian responses ( Milad and Quirk, 2002 ;  Rhodes and Killcross, 2004 ;  Rhodes and Killcross, 2007 ;  Santini et al., 2008 ), while the human subgenual cortex has predominantly featured in studies on depression. ( Greicius et al., 2007 ;  Drevets et al., 2008 ;  Johansen-Berg et al., 2008 ;  Matthews et al., 2009 ;  Keedwell et al., 2010 ). Future work is needed to reconcile these apparently divergent functions and their potential homology across species. 
 As with the subgenual cortex, activity in the ventral striatum (VS) during the test phase, but not during acquisition, predicted devaluation insensitivity. The VS has been frequently shown to support both the acquisition and expression of Pavlovian (stimulus-outcome) associations ( Day et al., 2007 ;  Blaiss and Janak, 2009 ), and to mediate the general motivational influence of such associations on instrumental performance; a phenomenon referred to as Pavlovian-instrumental transfer ( Corbit and Balleine, 2011 ). Of particular importance for interpreting the current findings is the fact that, in rodents, PIT appears to selectively influence habitual, rather than goal-directed, responding: the greater the degree of insensitivity to outcome devaluation, the greater the general motivational influence of Pavlovian cues on instrumental performance ( Holland, 2004 ;  Balleine and Ostlund, 2007 ). We interpret the currently observed activity in the VS as reflecting a greater influence of Pavlovian cues on instrumental responding in the S-R than the R-O condition, and conjecture that this selective engagement of Pavlovian processes supported our behavioral effect. 
 Contrary to our predictions, we did not find a correlation between activity in the dorsal putamen during early learning and subsequent devaluation insensitivity. We did, however, find S-R selective decreases in right putamen activity across blocks of training – an effect that is consistent with a substantial literature demonstrating a decreased dependence on the putamen with extended ( Ungerleider et al., 2002 ;  Poldrack et al., 2005 ;  Turner et al., 2005 ;  Ashby et al., 2010 ), as well as intermediate ( Brovelli et al., 2011 ), levels of training. Taken together, these results suggest that the contributions of the putamen to automatic and habitual behavioral control may take place early in acquisition, with long-term storage and mediation of well-trained performance occurring elsewhere ( Orban et al., 2010 ). On the other hand some neuroimaging studies have found increases in putamen activity with extended training ( Floyer-Lea and Matthews, 2004 ;  Tricomi et al., 2009 ;  Wunderlich et al., 2012 ). For instance,  Tricomi et al. (2009) , found an increase in activity with overtraining in a far posterior region of the right putamen, concomitant with the development of habitual performance. One key difference between the Tricomi et al. study and the present one is that the S-R condition in the present study is optimized to generate rapid acquisition and expression of habitual behavior, whereas in the Tricomi et el. study, behavioral expression of habits (and perhaps also acquisition) emerged much more slowly, becoming evident in behavior only after several days of training. Thus, if the involvement of the putamen in S-R learning dissipates after a period of stable habitual performance, Tricomi et al. may not have sampled behavior beyond that stable period, whereas our accelerated habitual learning paradigm allowed us to do so. It is also worth noting, that whereas Tricomi et al. reported effects in a small area in the very far posterior putamen, our effects extend throughout the right putamen and globus pallidus. 
 One feature of the present results is that areas in which discriminatory neural activity was correlated with between-subject variation in devaluation insensitivity did not also show differential main effects in a comparison of S-R and R-O conditions. This may be in part due to the fact that our efforts to differentially encourage stimulus-response and response-outcome learning resulted only in relative differences in devaluation insensitivity, with the majority of participants showing some degree of sensitivity even in the S-R condition. Thus neural processes directly related to the degree of habitual responding might not be discernable in analyses that categorically compare conditions. On the other hand, not all aspects of encoding stimulus-response associations necessarily contribute to the dominance of such associations over performance. For example, the S-R selective decreases in neural activity across blocks of acquisition, found throughout the right putamen and globus pallidus, may reflect a gradual disengagement of processes that provide critical support during early development of stimulus-response associations – such as the maintenance of relevant representations, the encoding of discrepancies between attempted and accurate mappings, or the retrieval of response alternatives – but that are supplanted during subsequent performance by processes mediating behavioral control. 
 We also found selective recruitment by the S-R condition of a lateral middle occipital area that overlaps closely with what has been termed the “extrastriate body area” (EBA) ( Downing et al., 2001 ). As the name implies, this region is known for its responses to images of human body parts, and has also been frequently implicated in action observation as well as execution ( Astafiev et al., 2004 ;  Kuhn et al., 2011 ;  Liljeholm et al., 2012 ). Notably, studies assessing the role of the EBA in action execution have employed visually guided actions, such that an arbitrary visual stimulus indicates either the location towards which a movement should be directed ( Astafiev et al., 2004 ), or which one of alternative actions should be performed ( Kuhn et al., 2011 ). It is possible, therefore, that this area is specifically involved in limb movements that are largely stimulus-driven. In the current study, the S-R condition was designed to encourage a mapping of responses to arbitrary antecedent visual cues, by decorrelating actions from sensory-specific outcome features (and indeed from any visual features that were intrinsically related to the goal of maintaining beaker fluids). Thus, one possible explanation for the selective recruitment of EBA by the S-R condition is that this area mediates the detection and mapping of arbitrary stimuli to behavioral responses. 
 The VMPFC has been implicated in goal-directed performance in numerous human neuroimaging studies, and is a proposed homolog of the rodent prelimbic cortex ( Balleine and O'Doherty, 2010 ), lesions of which disrupt the acquisition, but not the expression, of goal-directed performance ( Ostlund and Balleine, 2005 ). Although we did find selective recruitment of the VMPFC by the R-O condition during learning, this effect did not survive the subtraction of matching control conditions. It is possible, of course, that the process supported by the VMPFC, for example assigning values to subgoals, was elicited by the relevant stimuli in the matching task as well as the instrumental task. Another possibility, given our robust effect of experimental phase in the VMPFC, such that activity was greater during early acquisition than during test in both conditions, is that the goal-directed function supported by the VMPFC was present in both instrumental conditions during early acquisition. Further work is needed to arbitrate between these possibilities. 
 Further dissociating the contributions of medial prefrontal areas, we found that activity in a more dorsal medial prefrontal region was greater in the R-O than the S-R condition during test performance, but not during early acquisition. This region, along with adjacent dorsal anterior cingulate, has been implicated in tasks in which the attainment of goals and rewards requires high levels of cognitive control, such as when monitoring for unfavorable outcomes, and during response conflict and decision uncertainty ( Ridderinkhof et al., 2004b ;  Ridderinkhof et al., 2004a ). The currently observed pattern of activity in this area may reflect a decrease in performance monitoring and outcome evaluation during habitual relative to goal-directed control. 
 In our novel task the stimulus materials were identical across S-R and R-O conditions, but the instrumental contingencies encouraged participants to attend to different visual features (cues vs. beakers). Although we used a simple match-to-sample task to rule out visual processes involved in selectively attending to such features as a source of any imaging effects, there may be aspects of visual attention that are intrinsically related to instrumental responding. For example, we found greater activity in the R-O than the S-R condition in a posterior ventral region of the IPL (pvIPL) during both the learning and test phase; during test, discriminatory activity in this area predicted greater sensitivity to devaluation. The pvIPL has been proposed to function as a “circuit break” that re-directs attention towards behaviorally relevant information that is either exogenously presented ( Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Corbetta et al., 2008 ;  Cabeza et al., 2012 ) or retrieved into working memory ( Cabeza et al., 2012 ). Importantly, substantial evidence also indicates that the pvIPL is deactivated when the new information is not relevant to the current task ( Shulman et al., 2003 ). As can be seen in  Figure 3  (top), activity in the pvIPL appears to be deactivated in both instrumental conditions relevant to the matching control, but markedly more so in the S-R condition: A possible explanation for this pattern of results is that greater suppression was required in the S-R condition because the sensory features of the beaker subgoal, although ultimately irrelevant for response selection, was intimately related to the trial outcome. Indeed, this augmented suppression of sensory-specific outcome features may be a general property of S-R learning, particularly since the retrieval of such features into working memory is considered central to goal-directed encoding ( Balleine and Ostlund, 2007 ). 
 Consistent with evidence from the rodent literature that goal-directed performance persists in tasks in which alternative actions produce distinct rewards ( Colwill and Rescorla, 1985 ;  Holland, 2004 ), we found that human action selection was more goal-directed in a condition in which instrumental actions obtained unique sub-goals. Formally, the degree to which alternative actions yield distinct outcome states can be quantified as the  divergence  of their outcome probability distributions. In a previous study ( Liljeholm et al., 2013 ) we found that activity in the right anterior IPL (the anterior dorsal supramarginal gyrus) increased with increasing outcome divergence. Likewise, in the current study, training-dependent increases in this area were found in the R-O, but not the S-R, condition, potentially reflecting the incremental increase in divergence, as actions became associated with their respective outcome states. The selective recruitment of the IPL by the R-O condition, and the correlation between such discriminatory neural activity and behavioral sensitivity to outcome devaluation, is also consistent with a large body of research implicating this area in various goal-directed processes, including the computation of instrumental contingencies ( Seo et al., 2009 ;  Liljeholm et al., 2011 ), the attribution of intent ( den Ouden et al., 2005 ), awareness of agency ( Farrer et al., 2008 ), and the mediation of executive function ( Friedman and Goldman-Rakic, 1994 ). Further determination of the exact contributions of the IPL to goal-directed action selection, its role in corollary attentional processes, and in representations of outcome divergence, is an important avenue for future work. 
 In summary, our results are novel in several critical ways: To our knowledge, we are the first to dissociate the roles of the tail of caudate and ventral striatum, across learning and test performance, in behavioral insensitivity to outcome devaluation. We are also the first to demonstrate that activity in the inferior parietal lobule, an area that has been previously implicated in several processes closely linked to goal-directed action selection, including the attribution of intent and awareness of agency, predicts sensitivity to outcome devaluation. Finally, we reveal a potential functional homology between the human subgenual and rodent infralimbic cortex in the implementation of habitual control. Taken together, our findings suggest a broad systems division, at the cortical and subcortical levels, between brain areas mediating the acquisition and expression of action-outcome and stimulus-response associations. Notably, a fundamental issue in the search for treatments of behavioral disorders is how to both facilitate the automatization of actions that lead to healthful consequences and abolish well-established deleterious habits. An improved understanding of how distinct neural substrates in the human brain mediate the acquisition versus expression of habitual control, the aim of the present study, is therefore of significant clinical interest. 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by a grant from the Wellcome Trust and by an NIH grant (DA033077-01) to J.P.O. 
 
 
 
 There are no conflicts of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adams 
 CD 
 
 
 1982 
 Variations in the sensitivity of instrumental responding to refinforcer devaluation 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psycholgoy 
 34 
 77 
 98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adams 
 CD 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 1981 
 Instrumental responding following reinforcer devaluation 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psycholgoy 
 33 
 109 
 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 Turner 
 BO 
 
 
 Horvitz 
 JC 
 
 
 2010 
 Cortical and basal ganglia contributions to habit learning and automaticity 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 14 
 208 
 215 
 20207189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Stanley 
 CM 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Extrastriate body area in human occipital cortex responds to the performance of motor actions 
 Nat Neurosci 
 7 
 542 
 548 
 15107859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 1998 
 Goal-directed instrumental action: contingency and incentive learning and their cortical substrates 
 Neuropharmacology 
 37 
 407 
 419 
 9704982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 Ostlund 
 SB 
 
 
 2007 
 Still at the choice-point: action selection and initiation in instrumental conditioning 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1104 
 147 
 171 
 17360797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2010 
 Human and rodent homologies in action control: corticostriatal determinants of goal-directed and habitual action 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 35 
 48 
 69 
 19776734 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balsters 
 JH 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 2011 
 Cerebellar plasticity and the automation of first-order rules 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 2305 
 2312 
 21307266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blaiss 
 CA 
 
 
 Janak 
 PH 
 
 
 2009 
 The nucleus accumbens core and shell are critical for the expression, but not the consolidation, of Pavlovian conditioned approach 
 Behav Brain Res 
 200 
 22 
 32 
 19159648 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brovelli 
 A 
 
 
 Nazarian 
 B 
 
 
 Meunier 
 M 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 2011 
 Differential roles of caudate nucleus and putamen during instrumental learning 
 Neuroimage 
 57 
 1580 
 1590 
 21664278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2012 
 Cognitive contributions of the ventral parietal cortex: an integrative theoretical account 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 16 
 338 
 352 
 22609315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Callu 
 D 
 
 
 Puget 
 S 
 
 
 Faure 
 A 
 
 
 Guegan 
 M 
 
 
 El Massioui 
 N 
 
 
 2007 
 Habit learning dissociation in rats with lesions to the vermis and the interpositus of the cerebellum 
 Neurobiology of disease 
 27 
 228 
 237 
 17560113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carelli 
 RM 
 
 
 West 
 MO 
 
 
 1991 
 Representation of the body by single neurons in the dorsolateral striatum of the awake, unrestrained rat 
 J Comp Neurol 
 309 
 231 
 249 
 1885787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carelli 
 RM 
 
 
 Wolske 
 M 
 
 
 West 
 MO 
 
 
 1997 
 Loss of lever press-related firing of rat striatal forelimb neurons after repeated sessions in a lever pressing task 
 J Neurosci 
 17 
 1804 
 1814 
 9030639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colwill 
 RM 
 
 
 Rescorla 
 RA 
 
 
 1985 
 Instrumental responding remains insensitive to reinfrocer devaluation after extensive training 
 J Exp Psychol Anim Behav Process 
 11 
 520 
 536 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2002 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nature reviews Neuroscience 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2008 
 The reorienting system of the human brain: from environment to theory of mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbit 
 LH 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 2011 
 The general and outcome-specific forms of Pavlovian-instrumental transfer are differentially mediated by the nucleus accumbens core and shell 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 11786 
 11794 
 21849539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coutureau 
 E 
 
 
 Killcross 
 S 
 
 
 2003 
 Inactivation of the infralimbic prefrontal cortex reinstates goal-directed responding in overtrained rats 
 Behav Brain Res 
 146 
 167 
 174 
 14643469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 Uncertainty-based competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control 
 Nat Neurosci 
 8 
 1704 
 1711 
 16286932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Day 
 JJ 
 
 
 Roitman 
 MF 
 
 
 Wightman 
 RM 
 
 
 Carelli 
 RM 
 
 
 2007 
 Associative learning mediates dynamic shifts in dopamine signaling in the nucleus accumbens 
 Nat Neurosci 
 10 
 1020 
 1028 
 17603481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Wit 
 S 
 
 
 Watson 
 P 
 
 
 Harsay 
 HA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 van de Vijver 
 I 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 2012 
 Corticostriatal connectivity underlies individual differences in the balance between habitual and goal-directed action control 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 12066 
 12075 
 22933790 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 HM 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Frith 
 C 
 
 
 SJ 
 B 
 
 
 2005 
 Thinking about intentions 
 Neuroimage 
 28 
 787 
 796 
 15964210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 Nicholas 
 DJ 
 
 
 Adams 
 CD 
 
 
 1983 
 The effect of the instrumental training contingency on susceptibility to reinforcer devaluation 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psycholgoy B 
 35 
 35 
 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Shuman 
 M 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2001 
 A cortical area selective for visual processing of the human body 
 Science 
 293 
 2470 
 2473 
 11577239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doya 
 K 
 
 
 Samejima 
 K 
 
 
 Katagiri 
 K 
 
 
 Kawato 
 M 
 
 
 2002 
 Multiple model-based reinforcement learning 
 Neural Comput 
 14 
 1347 
 1369 
 12020450 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Song 
 AW 
 
 
 Karni 
 A 
 
 
 Lalonde 
 F 
 
 
 Adams 
 MM 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2002 
 Experience-dependent changes in cerebellar contributions to motor sequence learning 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 99 
 1017 
 1022 
 11805340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Laforce 
 R 
 Jr 
 
 
 Bouchard 
 G 
 
 
 Gaudreau 
 D 
 
 
 Roy 
 J 
 
 
 Poirier 
 M 
 
 
 Bedard 
 PJ 
 
 
 Bedard 
 F 
 
 
 Bouchard 
 JP 
 
 
 1998 
 Role of the striatum, cerebellum and frontal lobes in the automatization of a repeated visuomotor sequence of movements 
 Neuropsychologia 
 36 
 625 
 641 
 9723934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Draganski 
 B 
 
 
 Kherif 
 F 
 
 
 Kloppel 
 S 
 
 
 Cook 
 PA 
 
 
 Alexander 
 DC 
 
 
 Parker 
 GJ 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 2008 
 Evidence for segregated and integrative connectivity patterns in the human Basal Ganglia 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 7143 
 7152 
 18614684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Savitz 
 J 
 
 
 Trimble 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 The subgenual anterior cingulate cortex in mood disorders 
 CNS Spectr 
 13 
 663 
 681 
 18704022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esterman 
 M 
 
 
 Tamber-Rosenau 
 BJ 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Avoiding non-independence in fMRI data analysis: leave one subject out 
 Neuroimage 
 50 
 572 
 576 
 20006712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Farrer 
 C 
 
 
 Frey 
 SH 
 
 
 Van Horn 
 JD 
 
 
 Tunik 
 E 
 
 
 Turk 
 D 
 
 
 Inati 
 S 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2008 
 The angular gyrus computes action awareness representations 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 254 
 261 
 17490989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Floyer-Lea 
 A 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Changing brain networks for visuomotor control with increased movement automaticity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 92 
 2405 
 2412 
 15381748 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magn Reson Med 
 33 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friedman 
 HR 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 1994 
 Coactivation of prefrontal cortex and inferior parietal cortex in working memory tasks revealed by 2DG functional mapping in the rhesus monkey 
 J Neurosci 
 14 
 2775 
 2788 
 8182439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabbott 
 PL 
 
 
 Dickie 
 BG 
 
 
 Vaid 
 RR 
 
 
 Headlam 
 AJ 
 
 
 Bacon 
 SJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Local-circuit neurones in the medial prefrontal cortex (areas 25, 32 and 24b) in the rat: morphology and quantitative distribution 
 J Comp Neurol 
 377 
 465 
 499 
 9007187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glascher 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Visualization of group inference data in functional neuroimaging 
 Neuroinformatics 
 7 
 73 
 82 
 19140033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Flores 
 BH 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Solvason 
 HB 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 2007 
 Resting-state functional connectivity in major depression: abnormally increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus 
 Biological psychiatry 
 62 
 429 
 437 
 17210143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haddon 
 JE 
 
 
 Killcross 
 S 
 
 
 2011 
 Inactivation of the infralimbic prefrontal cortex in rats reduces the influence of inappropriate habitual responding in a response-conflict task 
 Neuroscience 
 199 
 205 
 212 
 22015928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampton 
 AN 
 
 
 Bossaerts 
 P 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2006 
 The role of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in abstract state-based inference during decision making in humans 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 8360 
 8367 
 16899731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 Kim 
 HF 
 
 
 Yasuda 
 M 
 
 
 Yamamoto 
 S 
 
 
 2014 
 Basal ganglia circuits for reward value-guided behavior 
 Annual review of neuroscience 
 37 
 289 
 306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holland 
 PC 
 
 
 2004 
 Relations between Pavlovian-instrumental transfer and reinforcer devaluation 
 J Exp Psychol Anim Behav Process 
 30 
 104 
 117 
 15078120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jog 
 MS 
 
 
 Kubota 
 Y 
 
 
 Connolly 
 CI 
 
 
 Hillegaart 
 V 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 Building neural representations of habits 
 Science 
 286 
 1745 
 1749 
 10576743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Gutman 
 DA 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Katz 
 E 
 
 
 Lozano 
 AM 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 2008 
 Anatomical connectivity of the subgenual cingulate region targeted with deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1374 
 1383 
 17928332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keedwell 
 PA 
 
 
 Drapier 
 D 
 
 
 Surguladze 
 S 
 
 
 Giampietro 
 V 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Phillips 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Subgenual cingulate and visual cortex responses to sad faces predict clinical outcome during antidepressant treatment for depression 
 Journal of affective disorders 
 120 
 120 
 125 
 19539998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Killcross 
 S 
 
 
 Coutureau 
 E 
 
 
 2003 
 Coordination of actions and habits in the medial prefrontal cortex of rats 
 Cereb Cortex 
 13 
 400 
 408 
 12631569 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 HF 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 2013 
 Distinct basal ganglia circuits controlling behaviors guided by flexible and stable values 
 Neuron 
 79 
 1001 
 1010 
 23954031 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 HF 
 
 
 Ghazizadeh 
 A 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 2014 
 Separate groups of dopamine neurons innervate caudate head and tail encoding flexible and stable value memories 
 Frontiers in neuroanatomy 
 8 
 120 
 25400553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuhn 
 S 
 
 
 Keizer 
 A 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Hommel 
 B 
 
 
 2011 
 The functional and neural mechanism of action preparation: roles of EBA and FFA in voluntary action control 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 23 
 214 
 220 
 20044885 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 CE 
 
 
 Bastian 
 AJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Cerebellar damage impairs automaticity of a recently practiced movement 
 J Neurophysiol 
 87 
 1336 
 1347 
 11877508 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 SW 
 
 
 Shimojo 
 S 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2014 
 Neural computations underlying arbitration between model-based and model-free learning 
 Neuron 
 81 
 687 
 699 
 24507199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liljeholm 
 M 
 
 
 Molloy 
 CJ 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2012 
 Dissociable brain systems mediate vicarious learning of stimulus-response and action-outcome contingencies 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 9878 
 9886 
 22815503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liljeholm 
 M 
 
 
 Tricomi 
 E 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 2011 
 Neural correlates of instrumental contingency learning: differential effects of action-reward conjunction and disjunction 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 2474 
 2480 
 21325514 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liljeholm 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 S 
 
 
 Zhang 
 J 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2013 
 Neural correlates of the divergence of instrumental probability distributions 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 12519 
 12527 
 23884955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 2003 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 1233 
 1239 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matthews 
 S 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Strigo 
 I 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 P 
 
 
 Yang 
 T 
 
 
 Paulus 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Inhibition-related activity in subgenual cingulate is associated with symptom severity in major depression 
 Psychiatry research 
 172 
 1 
 6 
 19239982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Milad 
 MR 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction 
 Nature 
 420 
 70 
 74 
 12422216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural responses during anticipation of a primary taste reward 
 Neuron 
 33 
 815 
 826 
 11879657 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ongur 
 D 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 2000 
 The organization of networks within the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex of rats, monkeys and humans 
 Cereb Cortex 
 10 
 206 
 219 
 10731217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ongur 
 D 
 
 
 Ferry 
 AT 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 2003 
 Architectonic subdivision of the human orbital and medial prefrontal cortex 
 J Comp Neurol 
 460 
 425 
 449 
 12692859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Orban 
 P 
 
 
 Peigneux 
 P 
 
 
 Lungu 
 O 
 
 
 Albouy 
 G 
 
 
 Breton 
 E 
 
 
 Laberenne 
 F 
 
 
 Benali 
 H 
 
 
 Maquet 
 P 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 2010 
 The multifaceted nature of the relationship between performance and brain activity in motor sequence learning 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 694 
 702 
 19732838 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ostlund 
 SB 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 2005 
 Lesions of medial prefrontal cortex disrupt the acquisition but not the expression of goal-directed learning 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 7763 
 7770 
 16120777 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Characterizing the neural mechanisms of skill learning and repetition priming: evidence from mirror reading 
 Brain : a journal of neurology 
 124 
 67 
 82 
 11133788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 Foerde 
 K 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 Asarnow 
 RF 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 2005 
 The neural correlates of motor skill automaticity 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 5356 
 5364 
 15930384 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhodes 
 SE 
 
 
 Killcross 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 Lesions of rat infralimbic cortex enhance recovery and reinstatement of an appetitive Pavlovian response 
 Learn Mem 
 11 
 611 
 616 
 15466316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhodes 
 SE 
 
 
 Killcross 
 AS 
 
 
 2007 
 Lesions of rat infralimbic cortex enhance renewal of extinguished appetitive Pavlovian responding 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 25 
 2498 
 2503 
 17445245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 van den Wildenberg 
 WP 
 
 
 Segalowitz 
 SJ 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2004a 
 Neurocognitive mechanisms of cognitive control: the role of prefrontal cortex in action selection, response inhibition, performance monitoring, and reward-based learning 
 Brain Cogn 
 56 
 129 
 140 
 15518930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ridderinkhof 
 KR 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 2004b 
 The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control 
 Science 
 306 
 443 
 447 
 15486290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santini 
 E 
 
 
 Quirk 
 GJ 
 
 
 Porter 
 JT 
 
 
 2008 
 Fear conditioning and extinction differentially modify the intrinsic excitability of infralimbic neurons 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 4028 
 4036 
 18400902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seo 
 H 
 
 
 Barraclough 
 DJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 D 
 
 
 2009 
 Lateral intraparietal cortex and reinforcement learning during a mixed-strategy game 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 7278 
 7289 
 19494150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Cowan 
 MC 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Tansy 
 AP 
 
 
 d'Avossa 
 G 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Quantitative analysis of attention and detection signals during visual search 
 J Neurophysiol 
 90 
 3384 
 3397 
 12917383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 KS 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 2013 
 A dual operator view of habitual behavior reflecting cortical and striatal dynamics 
 Neuron 
 79 
 361 
 374 
 23810540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 KS 
 
 
 Virkud 
 A 
 
 
 Deisseroth 
 K 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 2012 
 Reversible online control of habitual behavior by optogenetic perturbation of medial prefrontal cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 109 
 18932 
 18937 
 23112197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 SC 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2008 
 Calculating consequences: brain systems that encode the causal effects of actions 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 6750 
 6755 
 18579749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tang 
 C 
 
 
 Pawlak 
 AP 
 
 
 Prokopenko 
 V 
 
 
 West 
 MO 
 
 
 2007 
 Changes in activity of the striatum during formation of a motor habit 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 25 
 1212 
 1227 
 17331217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tricomi 
 E 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2009 
 A specific role for posterior dorsolateral striatum in human habit learning 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 29 
 2225 
 2232 
 19490086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turner 
 RS 
 
 
 McCairn 
 K 
 
 
 Simmons 
 D 
 
 
 Bar-Gad 
 I 
 
 
 2005 
 Sequential motor behavior and the basal ganglia 
 The basal ganglia VIII (Advances in Behavioral Biology) 
 
 
 Bolam 
 JP 
 
 
 Ingham 
 CA 
 
 
 Magill 
 PJ 
 
 
 563 
 574 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 Doyon 
 J 
 
 
 Karni 
 A 
 
 
 2002 
 Imaging brain plasticity during motor skill learning 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 78 
 553 
 564 
 12559834 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Valentin 
 VV 
 
 
 Dickinson 
 A 
 
 
 O'Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2007 
 Determining the neural substrates of goal-directed learning in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 4019 
 4026 
 17428979 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wunderlich 
 K 
 
 
 Dayan 
 P 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Mapping value based planning and extensively trained choice in the human brain 
 Nat Neurosci 
 15 
 786 
 791 
 22406551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yamamoto 
 S 
 
 
 Kim 
 HF 
 
 
 Hikosaka 
 O 
 
 
 2013 
 Reward value-contingent changes of visual responses in the primate caudate tail associated with a visuomotor skill 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 11227 
 11238 
 23825426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yin 
 HH 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 2004 
 Lesions of dorsolateral striatum preserve outcome expectancy but disrupt habit formation in instrumental learning 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 19 
 181 
 189 
 14750976 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yin 
 HH 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 2005 
 Blockade of NMDA receptors in the dorsomedial striatum prevents action-outcome learning in instrumental conditioning 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 22 
 505 
 512 
 16045503 
 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations 
 
 
 aCN 
 
 anterior caudate nucleus 
 
 
 
 ANOVA 
 
 analysis of variance 
 
 
 
 BA 
 
 Brodmann area 
 
 
 
 BOLD 
 
 blood oxygenation level dependent 
 
 
 
 CRBL 
 
 Cerebellum 
 
 
 
 CST 
 
 cluster-size threshold 
 
 
 
 DLS 
 
 Dorsolateral striatum 
 
 
 
 DMPFC 
 
 Dorsomedial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 EBA 
 
 Extrastriate body area 
 
 
 
 fMRI 
 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 
 
 
 GLM 
 
 general linear model 
 
 
 
 IPL 
 
 inferior parietal lobule 
 
 
 
 ITI 
 
 inter-trial interval 
 
 
 
 LG 
 
 lingual gyrus 
 
 
 
 LOSO 
 
 leave one subject out 
 
 
 
 MNI 
 
 Montreal Neurological Institute 
 
 
 
 mOFC 
 
 medial orbitofrontal 
 
 
 
 ms 
 
 milliseconds 
 
 
 
 PIT 
 
 Pavlovian-instrumental transfer 
 
 
 
 Post-/Pre-central S. 
 
 Post-/Pre-central Sulcus 
 
 
 
 Post. Cing 
 
 Posterior Cingulate 
 
 
 
 pvIPL 
 
 posterior ventral IPL 
 
 
 
 R-O 
 
 response-outcome 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 
 region of interest 
 
 
 
 S-R 
 
 stimulus-response 
 
 
 
 SEM 
 
 standard error of the mean 
 
 
 
 SMA 
 
 supplementary motor area 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 
 superior parietal lobule 
 
 
 
 SPM 
 
 statistical parametric mapping 
 
 
 
 SVC 
 
 small volume correction 
 
 
 
 tCN 
 
 tail of caudate 
 
 
 
 th 
 
 thalamus 
 
 
 
 VLPFC 
 
 Ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 VMPFC 
 
 ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 
 VS 
 
 ventral striatum 
 
 
 
 WMA 
 
 world medical association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Illustrations of instrumental learning and matching control tasks. A. Instrumental Learning: Participants are required to maintain the balance of a system of fluid-filled beakers using a set of four instrumental actions (each a 3-press sequence, see methods). During the inter-trial interval, the liquid in the beakers continually fluctuate but remain high, and “balance checks”, occurring at brief random intervals, yield points for system balance (1). At the trial onset, one of four abstract cues appears, the liquid in one of the beakers drops to its bottom, and balance checks begin to indicate a loss of points due to system imbalance (2). Points are continually lost until the participant successfully re-fills the emptied beaker using one of the four actions. Following completion of the correct action (3), the abstract cue disappears, the beaker is re-filled, a small fee is charged for regulating the system, and balance checks again yield points for system balance. If the correct action is not performed within 7 seconds, the beaker is automatically re-filled, in which case there is no charge for system regulation. B. Matching task: The inter-trial interval (1) and trial onset (2) were as in the instrumental task but were followed, 1500 ms after trial onset, by a blank screen with a 700 ms duration (3). The subsequent, final, screen (4) showed a matching/non-matching stimulus together with a query about the match. In the S-R condition, the final screen always showed one of the abstract cues (top); conversely, in the R-O condition, the stimulus to-be-matched was always a set of beakers (bottom). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Areas selectively involved in the Stimulus-Response condition. Statistical maps show main effects of the S-R > R-O contrast, in the middle occipital cortex (EBA) (top row), and an interaction effect (i.e., [S-R > R-O (performance > acquisition)]) in the superior occipital cortex, extending into the SPL (middle and bottom rows). Bar plots show contrast values estimated at LOSO coordinates for each instrumental condition, during both acquisition and performance, and for matching controls. Error bars = SEM. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Areas selectively involved in the Response-Outcome condition. Statistical maps show main effects of the R-O > S-R contrast in the posterior ventral inferior parietal lobule (top) and insula (middle), as well as an interaction effect (i.e., [R-O > S-R (performance > acquisition)]) in the DMPFC (bottom). Bar plots show contrast values estimated at LOSO coordinates for each instrumental condition, during both acquisition and performance, and for matching controls. Error bars = SEM. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Discrimination between conditions across blocks of acquisition. A. Statistical map showing results from disjunction tests assessing  decreases  across blocks of acquisition in the S-R but  not  the R-O condition with effects emerging in the right putamen/globus pallidus. B. Results from a disjunction test of  increases  across blocks in the R-O but  not  the S-R condition yielded effects in the IPL. Bar plots show contrast values estimated at LOSO coordinates for each instrumental condition in each training block, as well as for matching control conditions. Error bars = SEM. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Correlations between contrast values for the [S-R > R-O (instrumental > control)] contrast and behavioral differences between the S-R and R-O conditions in the proportion of devaluation insensitive responses. Contrast values are extracted from 8 mm spheres centered on the peak voxel in each area. A. Correlation between contrast values from the first two blocks of instrumental learning (x-axis) and differences between instrumental conditions in the proportion of devaluation insensitive responses (y-axis), showing effects in the cerebellum. B. Correlation between contrast values from the test phase (x-axis) and concurrent differences between instrumental conditions in the proportion of devaluation insensitive responses (y-axis), showing a positive correlation in the subgenual cortex (top) and a negative correlation in the right IPL (bottom). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Imaging results from a 2×2 ANOVA contrasting instrumental conditions and training phases. 
 
 
 
 
 Test 
 Area 
 x, y, z 
 T at peak level 
 Correction 
 Cluster size at p<0.005 
 
 
 
 
 
 Main effects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SR > RO 
 Inferior Occipital 
 36, -85, -8 
 6.33 
 CST 
 859 
 
 
 Middle Occipital 
 36, -85, 7 
 6.82 
 
 
 
 
 Superior Occipital 
 27, -67, 28 
 5.16 
 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 18, -61, 52 
 4.22 
 
 
 
 
 RO > SR 
 DMPFC 
 18, 56, 25 
 3.62 
 CST 
 843 
 
 
 VMPFC 
 3, 41, 1 
 3.25 
 CST 
 
 
 
 IPL 
 60, -55, 28 
 3.99 
 CST 
 187 
 
 
 Posterior Cing. 
 -3, -34, 43 
 3.13 
 CST 
 190 
 
 
 Insula 
 39, 14, -41 
 3.89 
 CST 
 157 
 
 
 Acq. > Perf. 
 VMPFC 
 -3, 62, 4 
 6.12 
 CST 
 2181 
 
 
 DMPFC 
 -3, 47, 37 
 5.65 
 
 
 
 
 VS 
 -6, 5, -8 
 4.90 
 
 
 
 
 aCN 
 9, 20, 7 
 3.53 
 
 
 
 
 VLPFC 
 -45, 32, -11 
 5.46 
 CST 
 354 
 
 
 IPL 
 -51, -64, 34 
 4.76 
 CST 
 200 
 
 
 Perf. > Acq. 
 Cerebellum 
 27, -61, -26 
 9.17 
 CST 
 9773 
 
 
 SMA 
 0, 8, 46 
 5.15 
 
 
 
 
 Insula/Putamen 
 -33, 8, 4 
 5.69 
 
 
 
 
 Postcentral S. 
 -42, -37, 58 
 6.33 
 
 
 
 
 Precentral S. 
 -30, -4, 52 
 5.97 
 
 
 
 
 Calcarine 
 24, -58,10 
 4.94 
 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 -15, -64, 49 
 5.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 Interactions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SR > RO (Perf.>Acq.) 
 Occipital 
 33, -79, 19 
 5.10 
 CST 
 859 
 
 
 SPL 
 24, -52, 46 
 3.58 
 
 
 
 
 RO > SR (Perf.>Acq.) 
 DMPFC 
 -9, -41, 40 
 4.26 
 CST 
 168 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 The absence of an entry in the “correction” and “cluster size” columns indicates that the relevant cluster is continuous (at the p<0.005 threshold) with that listed above it. SPL=Superior Parietal Lobule, V/DMPFC=Ventro-/Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex, IPL=Inferior Parietal Lobule, aCN=anterior caudate nucleus, Post. Cing.=Posterior Cingulate, VS=Ventral Striatum, VLPFC=Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex, SMA=Supplementary Motor Area, Post-/Pre-central S.= Post-/Pre-central Sulcus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Imaging results from 2×2 ANOVAs contrasting instrumental and matching tasks, and from tests of neural correlates of devaluation insensitivity 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast 
 Area 
 x, y, z 
 T at peak level 
 *  Correction 
 *  Cluster size at p<0.005 
 
 
 
 
 
 Learning phase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SR > RO (instr > ctrl) 
 EBA 
 39, -79, 10 
 4.09 
 SVC 
 45 
 
 
 RO > SR (instr > ctrl) 
 IPL 
 57, -58, 31 
 4.41 
 CST 
 275 
 
 
 Insula 
 33, 14, 4 
 3.57 
 CST 
 421 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 6, -70, 37 
 4.28 
 CST 
 395 
 
 
 Post. Cing. 
 9, -31, 43 
 3.36 
 
 
 
 
 aCN 
 12, 2, 16 
 3.40 
 SVC 
 18 
 
 
 
 Test phase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SR > RO (instr > ctrl) 
 Occipital 
 30, -79, 19 
 5.30 
 CST 
 1153 
 
 
 SPL 
 24, -62, 49 
 4.47 
 
 
 
 
 RO > SR (instr > ctrl) 
 IPL 
 57, -46, 37 
 3.09 
 SVC 
 18 
 
 
 Insula 
 42, -1, -5 
 4.06 
 CST 
 383 
 
 
 DMPFC 
 -6, 41, 40 
 3.87 
 CST 
 382 
 
 
 
 Matching effects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SR control > RO control 
 Lateral LG 
 24, -91, -8 
 5.20 
 CST 
 198 
 
 
 RO control > SR control 
 Medial LG 
 -9, -76, -8 
 5.15 
 CST 
 1541 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 -9, -91, 19 
 5.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 Correlates of devaluation insensitivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive correlation 
 CRBL/LG 
 -6, -52, -8 
 5.06 
 CST 
 125 
 
 
 tCN/th 
 -12, -28, 10 
 4.19 
 SVC 
 21 
 
 
 Subgenual 
 -15, 23, -14 
 5.24 
 CST 
 224 
 
 
 VS 
 -9, 5, -14 
 8.47 
 
 
 
 
 Negative correlation 
 IPL 
 45, -43, 34 
 4.62 
 SVC 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 The absence of an entry in the “correction” and “cluster size” columns indicates that the relevant cluster is continuous (at the p<0.005 threshold) with that listed above it. EBA=Extrastriate Body Area, IPL=Inferior Parietal Lobule, Post. Cing.=Posterior Cingulate aCN=Anterior caudate nucleus, SPL=Superior Parietal Lobule, DMPFC= Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex, VS=Ventral Striatum, tCN/th=tail of caudate/thalamus, CRBL=Cerebellum, LG=Lingual Gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
