
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0100725 
 3187 
 Cortex 
 Cortex 
 
 Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior 
 
 0010-9452 
 1973-8102 
 
 
 26026619 
 4522380 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.04.021 
 NIHMS689369 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Converging Evidence from fMRI and Aphasia that the Left Temporoparietal Cortex has an Essential Role in Representing Abstract Semantic Knowledge 
 
 
 
 
 Skipper-Kallal 
 L.M. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D. 
 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Olson 
 I.R. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Temple University, Department of Psychology 
 2 Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute 
 3 Drexel University, Department of Psychology 
 
 Address correspondence to either: Daniel Mirman 3141 Chestnut St. Philadelphia, PA 19104 Phone: 215-553-7169 Fax: 215-895-4930  dan@danmirman.org  Ingrid R Olson 1701 N. 13 th  street Philadelphia, PA, 19122 Phone: 215-204-1708 Fax: 215-204-7321  iolson@temple.edu 
 
 
 2 
 6 
 2015 
 
 
 9 
 5 
 2015 
 
 
 8 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 8 
 2016 
 
 69 
 104 
 120 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 While the neural underpinnings of concrete semantic knowledge have been studied extensively, abstract conceptual knowledge remains enigmatic. We present two experiments that provide converging evidence for the involvement of key regions in the temporoparietal cortex (TPC) in abstract semantic representations. First, we carried out a neuroimaging study in which participants thought deeply about abstract and concrete words. A functional connectivity analysis revealed a cortical network, including portions of the TPC, that showed coordinated activity specific to abstract word processing. In a second experiment, we tested participants with lesions involving the left TPC on a spoken-to-written word matching task using abstract and concrete target words presented in arrays of related or unrelated distractors. The results revealed an interaction between concreteness and relatedness: participants with TPC lesions were significantly less accurate for abstract words presented in related arrays than in unrelated arrays, but exhibited no effect of relatedness for concrete words. These results confirm that the TPC plays an important role in abstract concept representation and that it is part of a larger network of functionally cooperative regions needed for abstract word processing. 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Concreteness is a critical organizing factor in semantic memory and recognition of the dichotomy between abstract and concrete concepts has a long history in psychology and philosophy. While concrete concepts have been the focus of much psychological and physiological research, abstract concepts remain enigmatic. 
 An extensive empirical literature supports the dichotomy between abstract and concrete concepts. The “concreteness effect” - concrete concepts are easier to learn, use, recall and recognize – is a robust effect that has been demonstrated across populations and tasks. Typical participants show a general advantage for concrete concepts, processing them faster and more accurately than abstract concepts, in a variety of tasks such as lexical decision and semantic categorization ( Bleasedale, 1987 ;  Day, 1977 ;  de Groot, 1989 ; Howell & Bryden, 2987;  James, 1975 ;  Kroll & Merves, 1986 ;  Rubin, 1980 ;  Whaley, 1978 ). The neurological distinction between abstract and concrete concepts has also been supported by a large EEG literature, which has consistently identified differences in the N400 component when processing abstract and concrete words ( Adorni & Proberbio, 2012 ;  Holcomb, Kounios, Anderson & West, 1999 ;  Kanske & Kotz, 2007 ;  Kounios & Holcomb, 1994 ;  Nittono, Suehiro & Hori, 2002 ;  Renoult, Brodeur & Debruille, 2010 ;  Tolentino & Tokowicz, 2009 ;  Tsai, Yu, Lee, Tzeng, Hung & Wu, 2009 ;  West & Holcomb, 2000 ;  Zhang, Guo, Ding & Wang, 2006 ). 
 However, attempts to localize neural differences between abstract and concrete concepts have been largely unsuccessful. This is partially due to the fact that patients with acquired language deficits almost always exhibit greater impairments with abstract words than with concrete words, and sometimes exhibit exclusively abstract word impairments. This has been repeatedly demonstrated in patients with deep dyslexia when reading abstract and concrete words ( Coltheart, 1980 ) as well as in word repetition tasks ( Katz & Goodglass, 1990 ;  Martin & Saffran, 1992 ). Patients with aphasia and short-term memory deficits also show a strong disadvantage with abstract concepts ( Goodglass, Hyde & Blumstein, 1969 ;  Saffran & Martin, 1990 ). Furthermore, the typical pattern in degenerative neurological diseases that affect semantic memory, such as semantic dementia, involves early loss of the ability to use and recognize abstract concepts ( Hoffman & Lambon Ralph, 2011 ). 
 Much more unusual is the reverse effect – a specific deficit for concrete words leaving abstract words intact (termed  the reversal of the concrete effect ;  Warrington, 1975 ). This deficit has been identified in patients with a range of lesion foci and disorders, including aphasia, semantic dementia, and acquired dyslexia ( Bonner, Vesely, Price, Anderson, Richmond, Farag, Avants & Grossman, 2009 ;  Breedin, Saffran & Coslett, 1994 ;  Cipolotti & Warrington, 1995 ;  Gvion & Friedmann, 2013 ;  Sirigu, Duhamel & Poncet, 1991 ;  Warrington, 1981 ;  Warrington & Shallice, 1984 ;  Yi, Moore & Grossman, 2007 ).  Bonner and colleagues (2009)  found that the peak neurological degeneration associated with this specific concrete-word deficit was found in a portion of the ventral surface of the anterior temporal lobes. It has also been suggested that in some cases, cortical damage in sensory-information integration regions, such as the ventral temporal lobe, produce the unusual deficit for specifically concrete (or visual) concepts, or alternatively that some patients may have had unusual prior expertise with abstract concepts, which allowed certain abstract concepts to be resilient to cortical insult ( Hoffman & Lambon Ralph, 2011 ). However, these hypotheses can only account for a few of the patients who exhibit the reversal of the concreteness effect and the cortical organization of abstract and concrete semantic knowledge remains mysterious. Nevertheless, this double dissociation in ability to process abstract and concrete concepts after brain injury suggests that abstract and concrete concepts rely on somewhat distinct neurological systems. 
 Neuroimaging has been a valuable tool for understanding the organization of semantic memory as a whole ( Binder, Desai, Graves & Conant, 2009 ), but findings on the abstract-concrete distinction are largely inconsistent. For example, some neuroimaging studies have shown stark distinctions in regional activity throughout the brain for concrete and abstract concepts, with almost no overlap ( Binder, Westbury, McKiernan, Possing & Medler, 2005a ; D'Esposito, Detre, Aguirre, Stallcup, Alsop & Farah, 1999;  Wise, Howard, Mummery, Fletcher, Leff, Büchel & Scott, 2000 ). Many others, however, have failed to identify any regional differences, with all activations completely overlapping ( Beauregard, Chertkos, Bub, Murtha, Dixon & Evans, 1997 ;  Fiebach & Friederici, 2003 ;  Friederici, Opitz & von Cramon, 2000 ;  Grossman, Smith, Koenig, Glosser, Devita, Moore & McMillan, 2002 ;  Kiehl, Liddle, Smith, Mendrek, Forster & Hare, 1999 ;  Noppeny & Price, 2004 ;  Sabsevitz, Medler, Seidenberg & Binder, 2005 ;  Skipper & Olson, 2014 ). 
 Two large meta-analyses of the neuroimaging literature on semantic memory reported some similar and some distinct findings.  Binder and colleagues (2009)  found that abstract concepts were associated with activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), superior aspects of the left anterior temporal lobe (ATL), and in the superior temporal sulcus (STS), while concrete concepts were more distributed across both hemispheres, including bilateral angular gyrus (AG), bilateral dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, left posterior cingulate and left inferior temporal lobe in fusiform cortex. A meta-analysis by  Wang and colleagues (2010)  examined 19 neuroimaging studies, only nine of which overlapped with the Binder analysis. In this meta-analysis, only left hemisphere regions were identified. Abstract concepts were again found to activate the left IFG, as well as the entire left temporal pole (TP). Concrete concepts activated the left AG, left posterior inferior temporal cortex, and posterior anterior cingulate. 
 In sum, neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies have failed to identify unequivocal “nodes” of abstract and concrete semantic neural representation. Subtraction analyses are designed to identify just that – “nodes” that respond to or prefer one stimulus while disregarding another. Subtraction analyses are very useful to neuroimaging, and can be used to answer certain specific questions, such as whether certain regions respond to both abstractness and emotional content (for example,  Skipper & Olson, 2014 ). However, subtraction analyses have unfortunately demonstrated little utility in mapping the whole-brain organization for abstract, compared to concrete, concept knowledge. Before concluding that abstract and concrete semantic representations are indistinguishable, it may be useful to take a different approach in order to examine the  organization  of abstract (and concrete) semantic knowledge – one that looks beyond just sites with stimuli-specific preferences. 
 
 1.1 Goals of this study 
 The primary goal of this study is to explore neural networks of sites that coordinate during abstract and concrete conceptual processing using functional MRI. As an alternative to the subtraction approach, in Experiment 1 we used functional connectivity to identify regions that respond in coordination with each other during abstract and concrete processing, regardless of whether each site “preferred” abstract or concrete words. Our motivation is that a network-connectivity approach can offer novel insights into the network organization of abstract semantic memory beyond those provided by abstract-versus-concrete subtraction analyses. In order to explore these networks, we carried out an fMRI study in which participants were instructed to think deeply and answer meaningful questions about abstract and concrete words. 
 The second goal of this study was to validate the fMRI findings in participants with focal lesions overlapping with one of the key abstract semantic “nodes” found in Experiment 1. To that end, we recruited a group of individuals with lesions in a region that was identified as part of the abstract network in our neuroimaging study. These participants were tested on a spoken-to-written word matching task using abstract and concrete words in related and unrelated arrays. By combining neuroimaging and neuropsychological methods we aim to provide converging evidence that will be stronger than either method alone. 
 
 
 
 2. Experiment I 
 
 2.1 Methods 
 
 2.1.1 Participants 
 Twenty young adults were recruited to participate through Temple University (11 female, mean age = 23 years, range: 19-28 years). All participants were neurologically and psychologically healthy, native English speakers, and right handed. Data collected from these participant's MRI sessions have been previously described ( Skipper & Olson, 2014 ), using different analyses and testing a distinct hypothesis. 
 
 
 2.1.2 Stimuli 
 Stimuli consisted of 164 nouns collected from the MRC psycholinguistic database (Wilson, 1988). The words were either abstract (concreteness <350, n=82) or concrete (concreteness > 550, n=82) and also varied along the dimension of imageability, such that abstract words had low imageability scores and concrete words had high imageability scores. A complete list of the verbal stimuli used in this experiment can be found in the  Supplementary Materials . The stimuli also included a set of pronounceable nonwords, matched for length with the real word stimuli (selected from the set used by  Binder et al., 2005a ). 
 Both the abstract and concrete words could be equally divided into emotionally valenced and neutral subsets such that emotional valence and arousal were matched across the abstract and concrete conditions (analyses of this dimension are reported elsewhere:  Skipper and Olson, 2014 ). Stimuli were also matched for word length (number of letters and number of phonemes), word frequency (SUBTLEX:  Brysbaert & New, 2009 ; and Brown Corpus:  Kučera & Francis, 1967 ), familiarity (MRC psycholinguistic database:  Coltheart, 1981 ), orthographic neighborhood size, sum bigram frequency, and number of morphemes (English Lexicon Project:  Balota, Yap, Cortese, Hutchison, Kessler, Loftis, Neely, Nelson, Simpson & Treiman, 2007 ). Age of acquisition was examined post-hoc using the recent Kuperman norms ( Kuperman, Stadthagen-Gonzalez & Brysbaert, 2012 ), and concrete and abstract words did differ: concrete words were learned at a younger age than abstract words, which is typical for abstract and concrete nouns ( Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek & Michnick Golinkoff, 2006 ).  Table 1  shows the mean scores on psycholinguistic variables for each condition. 
 
 
 2.1.3 Task 
 This experiment was carried out in a block design to maximize power. Each block lasted for 12 seconds, followed by a 4-second question screen. Each block began with the presentation of a single word in black sans serif font the center of the screen, which remained on the screen for 3500ms. The participants were instructed to think deeply about the concept that the word represents during this time, but participants were not informed that the words were blocked based on imageability or concreteness. The word was then removed, and a fixation appeared for 500ms, followed by another word, again presented for 3500ms. In total, three words and three fixations appeared consecutively within a single block, totaling to 12 seconds. Following the third and final fixation, a question screen appeared and remained on the screen for 4000ms. The participants’ task was to respond with a “yes” or “no” to the question in reference to the three words in that block. For example, a question may be “Is one a member of a family?” or “Is one found in a store?” The questions were simply intended to encourage participants to engage semantic representations while thinking about the words and were not controlled on any psycholinguistic variables because the question screen was not included in the imaging analyses; only the 12 second block was modeled. However, if the participant answered the question incorrectly, the preceding block was removed from analysis. In total, each participant experienced 40 blocks in the concrete condition, 40 blocks in the abstract condition, and 20 blocks in the nonword condition, in a counterbalanced order. 
 All subjects were given a practice version of the task prior to entering the MRI scanner. The practice task was simply a shorter version of a single run, and utilized words and nonwords not used in the main MRI task. 
 
 
 2.1.4 Imaging Parameters 
 Neuroimaging sessions were conducted at the Temple University Hospital on a 3.0 T Siemens Verio scanner (Erlangen, Germany) using a twelve-channel Siemens head coil. 
 Functional T2*-weighted images sensitive to blood oxygenation level-dependent contrasts were acquired using a gradient-echo echo-planar pulse sequence (repetition time (TR), 2s; echo time (TE), 19 ms; FOV= 240 × 240; voxel size, 3 × 3 × 3 mm; matrix size, 80 × 80; flip angle = 90°) and automatic shimming. This pulse sequence has been optimized for anterior temporal lobe (ATL) coverage and sensitivity based on pilot scans performed for this purpose, details of which are reported in  Ross and Olson (2010) . Participants underwent five functional runs, each consisting of 165 TR, including the introduction and closing slides. Forty slices were collected, and the bottom slice was fitted to cover the inferior aspects of the ATL. Temporal lobe function is of particular interest to this study because it has been proposed that the ATL serves as a hub in the semantic system ( Patterson, Nestor & Rogers, 2007 ), and the design presented here optimizes coverage of the entire temporal lobe, sometimes at the cost of losing portions of the superior parietal lobe. 
 The five functional runs were preceded by a high-resolution structural scan. The scanning procedure began with an approximately 10 min long high-resolution anatomical scan. The anatomical image was used to fit the volume of covered brain tissue acquired in the functional scan. The T1-weighted images were acquired using a three-dimensional magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo pulse sequence (TR, 3 s; TE, 3 ms; FOV=201 × 230 mm; inversion time, 900 ms; voxel size, 1 × 0.9000 × 0.9000 mm; matrix size, 256 × 256 × 256; flip angle=15°, 160 contiguous slices of 0.9 mm thickness). Visual stimuli were shown through a projection system, and participants viewed the screen through mirrors mounted on the headcoil. The stimulus delivery was controlled by E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools Inc., Pittsburgh, PA) on a Windows laptop located in the scanner control room. 
 
 
 2.1.5 Image Preprocessing 
 fMRI data were preprocessed and analyzed using FSL software ( Jenkinson Beckmann, Behrens, Woolrich & Smith, 2012 ). The preprocessing of the functional data included a correction for head motion (trilinear/sinc interpolation), the removal of linear trends and high-pass temporal filtering. The resulting volumetric time course data were then smoothed using a 6mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. 
 For all blocks, a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) was modeled spanning the 12s for each block. Predictors were built by convolving the boxcar waveform for each condition with a double-gamma hemodynamic response function. Standard motion parameters were included as covariates in the regression. Any remaining head motion artifacts were unlikely to be substantial because there were no runs in which subject head motion displacement exceeded an  a priori  cut-off of 1.5 mm. 
 
 
 2.1.6 Analysis of Imaging Data 
 Subtraction analyses were carried out to compare our data to the findings previously reported in the literature. The findings of this subtraction analyses are reported elsewhere ( Skipper and Olson, 2014 , see  Figure 2A  and  Table 4 ) and briefly summarized in the Results section. 
 Task-dependent functional connectivity was then assessed using a psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis. PPI analysis requires the creation of an interaction term, which is simply the multiplication of the psychological variable (for example, a binary variable representing abstract-vs.-concrete concept trials) with the physiological variable (time course in the seed region) ( Friston, Buechel, Fink, Morris, Rolls & Dolan, 1997 ). A whole-brain search identifies all voxels whose variance in activation can be explained by the psychophysiological interaction term. Regions identified as significant by the connectivity analysis are shown to be functionally connected to the seed region (left aIFG) during the task of interest (abstract/concrete word processing). 
 The connectivity analysis was carried out twice, first using abstract concepts as the psychological predictor and the second time using concrete concepts as the psychological predictor. For example, the connectivity analysis for abstract words used  abstract blocks > nonword blocks  as the psychological predictor and  activity in the left aIFG  as the physiological predictor. This analysis allows for the identification of a network supporting abstract knowledge, and then independently identifying a network supporting concrete knowledge in a separate analysis,. 
 All results were examined at a FDR corrected  q <.05. A cluster-based correction was applied, in which the z-threshold (2.3) was used to estimate contiguous clusters. Each cluster's significance level was estimated, using gradient random field theory, and compared with the cluster probability threshold, using standard FSL procedures ( Jenkinson et al, 2012 ). 
 
 
 2.1.7 Seed Region 
 The left aIFG was selected as a seed region because it has been identified as part of a larger region, the overall IFG, that may play a critical role in lexical processes such as tying phonology to semantics ( Badgaiyan, Schacter & Alpert, 2002 ;  Badre & Wagner, 2002 ;  Bodke, Tagamets, Friedman & Horwitz, 2001 ;  Devlin, Matthews & Rushworth, 2003 ;  Friederici, Rüschemeyer, Hahne & Fiebach, 2003 ), regardless of concreteness. The posterior IFG has been implicated in maintenance of phonological codes, phonemic classification, and simple word reading ( Awh, Jonidas, Smith, Schumacher, Koeppe & Katz, 1996 ;  Davachi, Maril & Wagner, 2001 ;  Paulesu, Frith & Frackowiak, 1993 ;  Poldrack, Wagner, Prull, Desmond, Glover & Gabrieli, 1999 ). The aIFG has been shown to be responsive in semantic generation and semantic classification tasks, and to modulate the activity of its posterior counterpart ( Bodke et al., 2001 ). Recently, it has been hypothesized that inferior frontal cortex controls goal directed activation of the rest of the semantic system, based on stimulus and task demands ( Binder & Desai, 2011 ). The IFG is commonly activated when task demands induce deeper semantic processing, typically for both abstract and highly concrete stimuli ( Badgaiyan et al, 2002 ;  Badre & Wagner, 2002 ;  Costafreda, Fu, Lee, Everitt, Brammer & David, 2006 ;  Demb, Desmond, Wagner, Vaidya, Glover & Gabrieli 1995 ;  Gabrieli, Poldrack & Desmond, 1998 ;  Mestres-Missé, Münte & Rodriguez-Fornells 2009 ;  Poldrack et al, 1999 ), and TMS applied to the anterior left IFG leads to slowed RTs for concrete as well as abstract word stimuli ( Devlin et al, 2003 ;  Gough, Nobre & Devlin, 2005 ). These studies support the hypothesis that that the aIFG plays a significant role in processing the semantics of both abstract and concrete words. 
 The aIFG ROI used in this study was drawn so that it was restricted to a region ventral to the inferior frontal sulcus, including the pars triangularus but excluding the pars orbitalis and pars opercularis. The ROI was drawn on a cortical map that was spatially normalized to the MNI template, and consisted of 280 1×1×1 mm voxels. The aIFG ROI was then transformed into the individual subject space for the connectivity analyses, and the final results were transformed into standard MNI space for presentation and group level analyses. The ROI is shown in green in  Figure 1A . 
 
 
 
 2.2 Results 
 
 2.2.1 Behavioral Results 
 Participants’ behavioral performance while in the scanner was analyzed using a one way ANOVA. A main effect of condition was found for accuracy on the question at the end of each block, F(2,36)=10.56,  p <.001, due to higher accuracy in the concrete condition and the abstract condition compared to the nonword condition (both  p's  <.05). Accuracy in the concrete condition was only marginally higher than in the abstract condition,  p =.06. Across subjects, an average of 5.75 abstract blocks and 4.46 concrete blocks were removed from analyses due to inaccurate responses, out of 40 total for each participant. 
 A one-way ANOVA also revealed an effect of concreteness on response time (RT), F(2, 36) = 3.79,  p  <.05, due to faster RTs in the concrete condition compared to both the abstract condition and nonword condition (both p's<.05). There was no significant difference between the RTs for abstract words and nonwords, t(18) = 0.99,  p >.30. Average performance on all three conditions is reported in  Table 2 . 
 
 
 2.2.2. Brief Summary of Subtraction Analyses 
 First, we carried out two subtraction analyses in the whole brain, the results of which are briefly described here. The first analysis contrasted abstract words to nonwords. Regions responding to abstract concepts included the left and right superior temporal sulcus (STS) extending into the temporal pole (TP), left posterior middle temporal gyrus (MTG), just inferior to the angular gyrus (AG). Activation for abstract words in the right hemisphere was found in the most posterior portion of the STS, extending into the AG as well as a small cluster in the anterior MTG. The second analysis contrasted concrete words to nonwords. A great deal of activation for this contrast overlapped with the results from the abstract subtraction. Overlapping activations were found in the left TP and STS, as well as the left posterior MTG, medial OFC and medial occipital cortex, and the right posterior STS/temporoparietal cortex. Areas that responded uniquely to concrete concepts were found in the left inferior surface of the anterior temporal lobe (ATL), posterior cingulate cortex and medial superior frontal cortex. Areas that responded uniquely to abstract concepts were the right STS, right superior TP, and left parahippocampal gyrus. A more detailed description of these subtraction results, and figures depicting these results, can be found in  Skipper and Olson (2014) . 
 
 
 2.2.3 Connectivity During Abstract Word Processing 
 A whole brain connectivity analysis examining regions that were functionally connected to the left aIFG during abstract word processing identified a bilateral network, with the largest peak at the intersection of the posterior superior temporal lobe and parietal lobe. Significantly connected regions included the left posterior STS extending into posterior middle temporal gyrus (MTG). The activation also included the left supramarginal gyrus (SMG) and angular gyrus (AG). We will refer to this region as temporoparietal cortex (TPC). In addition to the left TPC, the small clusters in the abstract network were identified in the bilateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and in the superior portion of the TP. 
 
 
 2.2.4 Connectivity During Concrete Word Processing 
 A second connectivity analysis examined regions that were functionally connected to the left aIFG during concrete word processing, independently from the previous analysis. The concrete network was entirely left lateralized, and largely constrained to the temporal lobe. A significant cluster was found extending over the left STS, with the peak in the anterior STS. A peak was also found in the ventral temporal lobe, in the left inferior temporal gyrus, and a small cluster in the left medial OFC. 
 The abstract and concrete networks overlapped in a small area in the posterior MTG, and near-adjacent activation for the two networks was identified in the STS. However, the concrete network was largely ventral to the abstract network. 
 The results of both functional connectivity analyses are presented in  Figure 1B , and peak activations are reported in MNI space in  Table 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 3. Discussion 
 The results of the subtraction analysis, reported briefly here and in more detail in another publication ( Skipper & Olson,2014 ) aligned closely with the findings of two recent meta-analyses of subtraction-based fMRI experiments using abstract and concrete words ( Binder et al, 2009 ;  Wang et al, 2010 ). In addition to these findings, our connectivity analysis identified a wider network of regions that coordinate together specifically during abstract and concrete words processing. 
 We used functional connectivity analyses to identify two functionally coordinated, independent cortical networks for abstract and concrete word processing. A dorsal/posterior network including a large portion of temporoparietal cortex was found to coordinate with the left aIFG during abstract word processing. A more ventral network extending along the inferior and middle temporal lobe was found to coordinate with the left aIFG during concrete word processing. Interestingly, the left inferior parietal lobe has been found in previous neuroimaging studies to be responsive to concrete, or highly sensory, words ( Binder, et al, 2009 ;  Wang et al, 2010 , and our own subtraction analysis). However, in our connectivity analysis, we found a large region posterior and inferior to those concrete activations was part of an abstract concept network. This posterior temporal region will be described generally as the TPC. 
 Our next aim was to evaluate our finding that the TPC is involved in abstract word processing using converging evidence from individuals with lesions to this area. This is important because the existing neuroimaging literature on the role of the TPC in semantic memory is a confusing mixture of findings. For instance, each of the three possible claims about TPC have been supported by subtraction analyses: that it is involved in processing of highly concrete concepts ( Binder, Medler, Desai, Conant & Liebenthal, 2005b ;  Fliessbach, Weis, Klaver, Elger & Weber, 2006 ;  Wallentin, Østergaard, Lund, Østergaard & Roepstorff, 2005 ), that it is equally involved in processing concrete and abstract concepts ( Binder et al., 2005a ,  Kiehl et al, 1999 ;  Moseley, Carota, Hauk, Morh & Pulvermüller, 2012 ;  Tettamanti, Manenti, Della Rosa, Falini, Perani, Cappa & Moro, 2008 ; subtraction analysis of the present data:  Skipper & Olson, 2014 ), and that portions of the TPC are more responsive to abstract concepts than to concrete concepts ( Noppeney & Price, 2003 ,  2004 ;  Perani, Cappa, Schnur, Tettamanti, Collina Rosa & Fazio, 1999 ;  Pexman, Hargreaves, Edwards, Henry & Goodyear, 2007 ;  Sabsevitz et al., 2005 ). Our functional connectivity results suggest that rather than asking whether TPC is involved in processing concrete or abstract concepts, we should ask what functional role this region might have in processing abstract concepts. 
 The network identified in our analyses of abstract word processing bears a striking resemblance to regions identified in studies of thematic and event-based semantic relationships ( Bedny, Dravida & Saxe, 2013 ;  de Zubicaray, Hansen & McMahon, 2013 ;  Kalénine, Peyrin, Pichat, Segebarth, Bonthoux & Baciu, 2009 ;  Mirman and Graziano, 2012 ;  Schwartz, Kimberg, Walker, Brecher, Faseyitan, Dell, Mirman & Coslett, 2011 ). Thematic relationships have been hypothesized to be especially important for abstract concept knowledge, in a framework dubbed the Qualitatively Different Representations (QDR) theory. QDR theory ( Crutch, 2006 ) proposes that concrete and abstract words are stored and accessed through different types of networks: that concrete words are associated with “semantically-related” or taxonomic networks, and abstract concepts are associated with “semantically-associated”, or thematic, networks. Concepts are thematically related if they perform complementary roles or frequently occur together in a shared scenario or event (for a review, see  Estes, Golonka, & Jones, 2011 ). QDR theory suggests that when accessing an abstract concept, such as  comedy , spreading activation will activate concepts that are thematically associated with the target (e.g.  laughter ). A great deal of neuropsychological evidence has accrued for this theory ( Crutch, Ridha & Warrington, 2006 ;  Crutch, Troche, Reilly & Ridgeway, 2013 ;  Crutch & Warrington, 2010 ) However, these studies tested individuals with very large, non-focal left hemisphere lesions, so they have not linked any specific brain region to either concreteness or to particular kinds of conceptual relationships. Furthermore, several neuropsychological and behavioral studies have failed to support the QDR hypothesis ( Brozdowski, Gordils & Magnuson, 2013 ;  Hamilton & Coslett, 2008 ;  Papagno, Martello & Mattavelli, 2013 ). 
 Based on our connectivity results and previous evidence that TPC is particularly important for thematic semantics and that thematic relations are particularly important for abstract concepts, we hypothesized that the TPC plays a role in accessing and using thematic semantic relationships and that this cognitive function may be crucial to abstract word processing. More specifically, to test this hypothesis, in Experiment 2 we tested individuals with focal lesions in the TPC following stroke on two tasks using abstract and concrete words. The first task was a simple lexical decision task using the same stimuli used in Experiment 1. We predicted that patients with TPC lesions would be more impaired on the abstract words used in the imaging experiment. However, patients with a variety of lesions are impaired with (arguably more difficult) abstract words in lexical decision. In order to strictly test our hypothesis about abstract concepts in the TPC, we tested the patients in a second task in which the same abstract and concrete words were tested in semantically noncompetitive (unrelated) and competitive (related) arrays. We used the task previously employed by  Crutch and Warrington (2005) : participants were asked to perform a spoken-to-written word matching task in which the target words could be either abstract or concrete, and were presented in related and unrelated arrays. Our specific prediction was that participants with focal TPC lesions should show impaired performance on abstract words presented with semantically related distracters. These participants may also exhibit an overall deficit for abstract words, but since abstract concepts are generally more difficult and abstract impairments are typical with any neurological injury affecting language, the critical prediction was that the deficit would be significantly greater for abstract words in related arrays (i.e., a word type by distracter relatedness interaction). This finding would suggest that patients have a semantic deficit with abstract word recognition, beyond the baseline difficulty of abstract words compared to concrete words. 
 
 
 4. Experiment 2 
 
 4.1 Methods 
 
 4.1.1 Participants 
 Ten participants with diagnoses of aphasia following left hemisphere stroke (3 female, mean age = 58.9 years, mean education = 15.8 years, mean time since injury = 48.9 months) were recruited to participate from the Neuro-Cognitive Rehabilitation Research Patient Registry at the Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute ( Schwartz, Brecher, Whyte & Klein, 2005 ). In order to be included in this group, the participant's lesion could not extend past the central sulcus or extend into the inferior temporal lobe.  Figure 1C  shows a lesion overlay map, and depicts the degree to which the lesions overlapped with the abstract network from Experiment 1. 
 Diffusion-tensor imaging data was not collected on these participants. However, the degree to which white matter connectivity to the frontal lobes was affected by the lesion was of particular interest to this study, given the results of the PPI analysis in Experiment 1. In order to estimate whether key white matter tracts were affected, the lesion tracings, warped into standard space, were overlaid onto the John Hopkins University Diffusion Tractography Atlas ( Hua, Zhang, Wakana, Jiang, Li, Reich, Calabresi, Pekar, van Zijl & Mori, 2008 ). We examined the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), of which the arcuate fasciculus is part, at a relatively liberal threshold of 50%, meaning that we included voxels in which at least 50% of the JHU sample had identifiable SLF. Of our ten participants, five had lesions overlapping with SLF. 
 Ten neurologically typical control participants were also recruited, who were individually matched to the participants with lesions on gender, age, education and ethnicity. All control participants scored 26 or higher (mean = 28.4) on the mini-mental status exam ( Folstein, Folstein & McHugh, 1975 ). All participants were right handed. 
 Table 4  presents demographic information for the participants in the lesion group. The participants in the lesion group were impaired on measures of short term memory and phonological processing, such as non-word reading. They were relatively less impaired on an object naming test. The performance of the participants in the lesion group on these tests are shown in  Table 4 , and compared to performance on a normative sample of 20 age-matched control participants. 
 
 
 4.1.2 Lexical Decision Task 
 Each participant was tested on a simple lexical decision task, using the same words and nonwords used in Experiment 1. In each trial, a word appeared in the center of the screen and the participant was asked to indicate whether the display showed a real word or not a real word. Participants were given unlimited time to respond, using the “1” or “2” key on the top of a typical keyboard with their left forefinger and middle finger. The number assigned to the word/nonword response was counterbalanced across participants. Once a response was given, the word disappeared and a fixation appeared for 1000 ms, until the start of the next trial. Words were presented in a random order for each participant. 
 
 
 4.1.3 Spoken-to-Written Word Matching Stimuli 
 Stimuli were the same as those used by  Crutch and Warrington (2005)  in their Experiments 4 and 5. The stimuli were a set of abstract and concrete words, collected into arrays that were all related or unrelated to each other. Crutch and Warrington found an interaction of concreteness with type of relationship (similarity-based vs. thematic/associative). However, we found no interactions with relationship type, so we will not discuss that variable further. Related arrays were made up of four words that were all related to each other in a semantically meaningful way, either taxonomically or through associations. Unrelated arrays were created by shuffling words from related arrays. The full list of stimuli can be found in  Supplementary Materials . This resulted in a 2 × 2 design, with the factors being concreteness (abstract/concrete), and relatedness (unrelated/related). The unrelated arrays were made up of the same exact items as the related arrays in the same concreteness condition. For example, all of the words that served as targets and distracters for abstract-related trials, also served as targets and distracters for the abstract-unrelated condition, but were arranged in such a way that the distracters were not related to the target in the unrelated condition. Furthermore, each array, regardless of condition, was created so that it contained no orthographic or phonological neighbors, meaning that words in each array were different from each other by at least two letters or phonemes. This ensured that any differences found between conditions could not be attributed to difficulty with phonologically or orthographically similar distractors. 
 Each word was recorded in a quiet room by a female native speaker of American English at 44.1 kHz. To make the stimuli more natural, the words were recorded in a carrier phrase “select the word...”. Background noise reduction was carried out using Audacity software ( http://audacity.sourceforge.net/ ), then each word was isolated from the complete recording. The words in each condition were then matched on intensity and did not differ significantly in duration (mean: 823 ms, range: 520 – 1170 ms). 
 
 
 4.1.4 Spoken-to-Written Matching Task 
 Each testing session began with a set of practice items, made up of unique words not used in the main stimulus set. Neurologically intact control participants were given a minimum of 4 practice trials, but based on pilot testing, the lesion group was given a minimum of 15 practice trials. Participants in the lesion group were also informally pressured to perform as quickly as possible during the practice, based on their own ability, but using a prepared script. After the first practice, participants in both groups were given the opportunity to do another set of practice items or to continue on to the main experiment at their own discretion. Once the main experiment began, the experimenter remained in the room but did not communicate with the participant until the testing session ended. 
 In the experiment, each trial began with a fixation screen that remained visible for 1000 ms, followed by an array of written words appearing on the screen. Each of the four words appeared in a different corner of the screen, and the arrangement of the array was randomized for each trial. The array was presented for a 1000 ms preview, after which a pre-recorded spoken word was played through the speakers on the computer at a comfortable volume and participants indicated which word on the screen had been spoken. The array remained on screen during the spoken word presentation and until the participant made a response. Healthy control participants made their selection using a computer mouse and viewed the experiment on a 17-inch computer monitor. To simplify the manual response demands, participants in the lesion group viewed the experiment on a 17-inch touch-sensitive monitor with the same display ratio and resolution (1024 × 768) as the monitor used by the control participants, and made their response by touching the word they wanted to select. A schematic of a single trial is presented in  Figure 2A . 
 The trials were blocked by array, such that participants viewed the same array of four words over four successive trials, but in each trial they were asked to select a different target and the arrangement of the array on the screen was randomized. The blocks were presented in a pseudo-random counterbalanced order. Altogether there were 520 trials (128 per condition, with the exception of abstract conditions, which had 132 trials due to an extra array in the original stimuli set). The trials were split into two blocks (260 trials each) and all were given the opportunity to take a break between blocks. Practice items preceded both halves of the experiment. 
 One possible criticism of this design is that the task was not explicitly semantic, and could hypothetically be carried out using only a phonological-to-orthographic mapping strategy. However, the same words were used in the related and unrelated conditions, so the phonological and orthographic demands were exactly matched and only the semantic processing demands differed. Therefore, although phonological or orthographic deficits could have contributed to overall difficulty with the task, only a semantic deficit affecting abstract words could have produced the specific deficit for abstract words when they were presented with semantically related distractors. 
 The stimuli in the spoken-to-written word matching task were selected because they had previously been validated in similar neuropsychological experiments ( Crutch & Warrington, 2005 ). Using the same words for the related and unrelated arrays provides the optimal test of the effect of relatedness by precisely controlling all other lexical, phonological, and orthographic factors. However, the constraints of the task (creating sets of 4 words that are sufficiently matched on relatedness) make it difficult to match the abstract and concrete words to each other as precisely as they were matched in the lexical decision task. That is, the lexical decision task provides the best test of whether the TPC lesion group exhibited an overall difference between abstract and concrete words whereas the spoken-to-written word matching task provides the best test of our more specific hypothesis that participants with TPC lesions will exhibit impairment when selecting abstract words from semantically related distractors. In statistical terms, this hypothesis predicts a word type (abstract vs. concrete) by relatedness interaction; that is, presenting words in semantically related arrays compared to unrelated arrays will have a bigger effect on recognition accuracy of abstract words than of concrete words. 
 
 
 
 4.2 Results and Discussion 
 
 4.2.1 Lexical Decision Results 
 A two-way repeated measures ANOVA was carried out on the accuracy rates, using participant group (control/lesion) as a between-subjects independent variable, and word type (concrete/abstract) as the within-subjects independent variable. There was a main effect of word type, F(1,18)=13.34,  p <.01, due to higher accuracy in the concrete words (mean=.97) than in abstract words(mean=.95). There was a marginal effect of participant group, F(1,18)=3.83,  p =0.06, due to higher accuracy in the control group (mean=.98) than in the lesion group (mean = .94). However, overall both groups performed very well on the task. There was a significant interaction between participant group and word type, F(1,18)=5.58,  p <.05. This effect was due to marginally worse performance in the lesion group compared to controls on abstract words, t(9)=2.11,  p =.06, but no significant difference in performance between groups on concrete words, both  p >.10. 
 These results are consistent with the fMRI connectivity results, in that our sample of pariticipants with lesions in the identified abstract network performed worse than controls on abstract word recognition, but not concrete word identification. However, patients with language impairments are typically more impaired with abstract words regardless of lesion size or location because abstract words were arguably more difficult than concrete words. For this reason, we also examined the data from the spoken-to-written word matching task, which allowed us to examine how semantic competitors affected performance for patients with TPC lesions, compared to their own performance with the same words in a noncompetitive baseline condition. 
 
 
 4.2.2 Typical Control Group 
 Control participants performed at ceiling on accuracy (> 99% correct in all conditions), so their data were analyzed independently from the lesion group, who made substantially more errors (average accuracy across all conditions = 86%). Mean accuracy and RTs in all conditions for both the typical control group and the lesion group can be found in  Table 5 . 
 We carried out separate two-way repeated measures ANOVAs on accuracy and RT, using concreteness (concrete, abstract) and relatedness of the arrays (related, unrelated) as factors. There were no statistically significant effect in the accuracy data (all  p's  >.10). For RT, there was no effect of concreteness, F(1,9)=3.14,  p >.10 and the interaction between concreteness and relatedness was not significant (F< 1). However, there was a main effect of relatedness, F(1,9)=5.05,  p =0.05, due to slightly faster (22 ms) responses in the unrelated conditions than in the related condition, suggesting interference or competition from related words. 
 
 
 4.2.3 Aphasia Patient Group 
 A two-way repeated measures ANOVA was carried out on the accuracy rates of the participants in the aphasia patient group. There was no main effect of concreteness on accuracy for the patient group, F<1. A marginal main effect of relatedness was found, F(1,9)=4.05,  p =.07, due to lower accuracy when related words were present as compared to unrelated words (M = 0.858 vs. 0.872). The critical interaction between concreteness and relatedness was significant, F(1,9)=5.03,  p =.05. This interaction was driven by the significant effect of relatedness on abstract trials, t(9)=3.15,  p <.05, but not for concrete trials, t(9)=0.15,  p >.85 (see  Figure 2B ). Specifically, the TPC lesion group performed worse on abstract words in the context of related distractors than in the context of unrelated distractors, but recognition of concrete words was not affected by the relatedness of the distractors. 
 In a post-hoc analysis, we compared accuracy in participants whose lesions overlapped with the SLF in the Johns Hopkins University DTI Atlas to participants with lesions that did not overlap with SLF. No significant differences were found between these groups in any condition (abstract-unrelated, abstract-related, concrete-unrelated, concrete-unrelated; all  p 's > 0.12). This preliminary, post hoc analysis did not reveal an effect of SLF damage on semantic processing, but future finer-grained studies using DTI and functional connectivity measures will be in a stronger position to evaluate the role of SLF in semantic cognition. 
 Turning to response times, a main effect of concreteness on RTs was found, F(1,9)=9.90,  p <.05, due to relatively faster RTs in the concrete conditions compared to the abstract conditions (M = 2778 ms vs. 2842 ms), reflecting the standard concreteness effect. The main effect of relatedness, and the interaction of concreteness and relatedness were not significant, F<1. 
 The results of Experiment 2 show that, in our sample, participants with lesions to the left TPC had more difficulty processing abstract words presented in arrays of meaningfully related words than in unrelated arrays, but did not exhibit the same relatedness effect for concrete words. Their overall accuracy for concrete and abstract words was not significantly different, suggesting that the results are not simply due to baseline word difficulty. The selective impairment emerged when participants were required to select abstract words from a set of distracters with semantically similar representations but not when the distracters were semantically unrelated, further implicating a semantic deficit rather than other lexical, phonological, or orthographic factors. Specific difficulty in matching tasks when stimuli are presented with related distracters is a hallmark of semantic deficits in aphasia (for a recent review see  Mirman & Britt, 2014 ) as well as semantic dementia (e.g.,  Hurley, Paller, Rogalski & Mesulam, 2012 ). The results of Experiment 2 suggest that, in our sample, the TPC is specifically involved in representing and  differentiating  abstract, but not concrete, concepts, converging with results from Experiment 1 to indicate that TPC plays an important role in processing abstract concepts. 
 Participants had to hold the spoken word in short-term memory while reading the response options, so it is possible that STM deficits contributed to our finding. In fact, the participants in the lesion group were relatively impaired on short-term memory tasks (see  Table 4 ). Since abstract words are typically read more slowly than concrete words, they could potentially require more short term memory capacity during the period between hearing the word and making the selection. However, despite the difference in accuracy, participants in the lesion group were, on average, only 84 ms slower with abstract than concrete words in the unrelated condition, and only 44 ms slower in the related condition (see  Table 5 ). These very small differences (relative to an overall average response time of about 2800 ms) are unlikely to produce substantially greater short term memory load for abstract words. Furthermore, providing more lexical context, and therefore more words to remember, decreases response times in abstract words so that they match concrete words ( Schwanenflugel et al, 1992 ). It is therefore not clear that short term memory load plays a significant role in the processing differences identified between abstract and concrete words in general. In addition, a specific deficit of holding abstract words (but not concrete words) in STM is a STM-based version of the our general interpretation that TPC damage impairs processing abstract words presented in arrays of meaningfully related words. 
 Like many neuropsychological studies, this study included a limited sample size of ten participants in each group. The hypothesis was formed  a priori , based on functional imaging data in an independent sample of healthy adults, so the convergence between the two studies strengthens the conclusions despite the small sample size. Future studies using larger samples and voxel-based lesion symptom mapping techniques, would further strengthen these conclusions. 
 Finally, in the unrelated conditions in the spoken-to-written word matching task, participants performed slightly, but not statistically significantly, worse on concrete words compared to abstract words. This is in contrast to the results of the lexical decision task, in which the abstract and concrete words were more tightly controlled for a range of psycholinguistic variables, and in which the participants in the lesion group demonstrated the classic greater impairment for abstract words. The participants in the lesion group had relatively mild impairments across our tests, and performance on the concrete-unrelated condition was relatively high (mean accuracy = 0.859). Thus it is unlikely that a floor effect limited our ability to find a relatedness effect for concrete words. 
 
 
 
 
 5. General Discussion 
 The primary goal of this study was to explore neural networks of sites with coordinated activity during abstract and concrete concept processing using fMRI and to validate these findings in participants with focal lesions. Our first experiment found functionally distinct neural networks for abstract and concrete words. Thinking about abstract words activated a functionally connected network involving the aIFG and the angular gyrus and posterior STS, while regions in the MTG and left TP were integrated with the left aIFG during concrete word processing. These finding support the idea that abstract and concrete concepts rely on (partially) independent neural processing networks. Our second experiment confirmed our finding that the temporoparietal cortex, which included the angular gyrus, was specifically involved in abstract word representation. In our sample, participants with lesions in this area had more difficulty matching abstract spoken words to their printed forms when the words were presented in arrays of semantically related distracters but not when the same words were presented in arrays of unrelated distracters. These participants did not show the same effect of distracter relatedness for concrete words, indicating that they had specific difficulty differentiating the meanings of abstract words but not concrete words. Based on these findings, we propose the existence of two distinct networks for abstract and concrete conceptual representations that overlap in key nodes such as the left aIFG and may at times cooperate depending on the type of semantic information required by a task. 
 The hypothesis that abstract and concrete concepts depend on at least somewhat independent neural networks sets our proposal apart from other general accounts of the neural representation of semantic memory, in which abstract knowledge is represented within a subset of regions that belong to a larger, more complex concrete semantic network ( Binder & Desai, 2011 ;  Pulvermüller, 2013 ;  Rogers, Lambon Ralph, Gerrard, Bozeat, McClelland & Hodges, 2004 ). However, independent neural representation for abstract concepts is necessary to account for data from neuropsychological research, specifically the reversal of the concreteness effect. 
 The reversal of the concreteness effect is demonstrated when an individual with a neurological deficit is impaired on concrete words, but is relatively unimpaired or less impaired on abstract words. The first such case in the literature was reported by  Warrington (1975) , describing patient A.B., who likely suffered from semantic dementia. A.B. was able to provide definitions for abstract words like  vocation  and  supplication  but could not remember the meaning of concrete words, such as  acorn  or  needle . Since this report, there have been many case studies of patients with selective impairments for concrete words; a disproportionate number of these cases have been of patients with semantic dementia or herpes simplex encephalitis ( Breedin et al., 1994 ;  Cipolotti & Warrington, 1995 ;  Macoir, 2009 ;  Papagno, Capasso & Miceli, 2009 ;  Sirigu et al., 1991 ;  Warrington & Shallice, 1984 ). These case studies provide important constraints, but caution is required when drawing inferences from single case studies. For example, it is possible that these patients differed in their premorbid experiences and that this protected abstract representations or made concrete representations more vulnerable, and thus generalizations drawn from these cases may be invalid ( Hoffman & Lambon Ralph, 2011 ). However, two recent patient studies have demonstrated the reversal of the concreteness effect in relatively significant samples.  Loiselle and colleagues (2012)  tested a sample of seven patients with anterior temporal lobe resections and found that they were significantly more impaired on concrete words than abstract words, relative to patients with hippocampal resections who were impaired equally on both. Similarly,  Yi and colleagues (2007)  examined a sample of 41 semantic dementia patients, and demonstrated that they were more impaired with relatively concrete motion verbs, like  push , than with abstract cognition verbs, such as  concede , and the patients performed only marginally worse with abstract, compared to concrete, nouns. 
 This growing body of evidence for the reversal of the concreteness effect is problematic for theories that propose that abstract concept representations are merely a subset of the features or brain regions involved in representing concrete concepts. The double dissociation of impairment on either abstract or concrete words suggests that abstract concepts are, at least in part, dependent on systems that are independent from concrete processing.  Shallice and Cooper (2013)  recently suggested that an independent neural system for abstract words is necessary because abstract representations require more complex feature compilations. They argue that abstract words are more flexibly represented and that their features must be more probabilistic and subject to contextual influences, compared to concrete words. For example, a necessary feature of a concrete concept, like “bicycle” is that it  does have wheels . In contrast, abstract words like  hope  are meaningfully captured by tendencies, such as  likely involves belief in a possibility . Based on neuroimaging findings in this literature ( Binder et al., 2005a ;  Friederici et al., 2003 ;  Perani et al., 1999 ; and others discussed in detail in the introduction), Shallice and Cooper suggest the left IFG as a potential site for these probabilistic processes. 
 We concur with their hypotheses that abstract concepts need a distinct network from concrete concepts and that abstract words require more flexible representational processes, but we instead point to the TPC as a stronger candidate for the site of these abstract representational processes. Our results from the first experiment support this notion of partially independent neural networks for abstract and concrete processing. More specifically, we identified functional connections, including between the aIFG and the angular gyrus and posterior STS that were only involved during abstract processing. Other functional connections, such as between the aIFG and the left TP and anterior MTG, were only involved during concrete processing. 
 
 5.1 A Role for Temporal Parietal Cortex in Abstract Conceptual Representation 
 We found that subregions of the TPC played a significant role in abstract conceptual processing in both the neuroimaging and neuropsychological experiments. This is particularly interesting because this region, particularly the angular gyrus, frequently shows greater activation in response to concrete, over abstract, word processing ( Binder et al, 2009 ;  Wang et al, 2010 ). Notably, the area predicted by the interaction term for the abstract condition in our study is significantly anterior to those identified as responsive to concrete concepts, but it is still part of the same general cortical area. Furthermore, just inferior to the TPC in posterior MTG, we found overlapping networks for abstract and concrete conceptual processing. 
 This raises the question, why do neighboring subregions subserve these separate classes of words? Functional connectivity analyses are not superior to subtraction analyses, and our results should be interpreted in conjunction with the prior neuroimaging literature. Fortunately, our results do not contradict the finding that posterior and somewhat superior regions of the TPC respond to concrete words. A significant behavioral literature suggests that our experience with concrete words and concepts are much richer ( Paivio, 1991 ), and thus increased activation may be in part driven by this experiential information. However, when examining how regions of the brain work together, we observe that a large area in the TPC that selectively links with other critical language areas during abstract word processing. This finding is also supported by TMS research.  Papagno, Fogliata and colleagues (2009)  demonstrated that highly focal transient lesions induced in the posterior STS, within the abstract network that we identified, leads to significant increase in errors recognizing abstract, but not concrete words – and a separate stimulation site in the nearby parietal lobe produced no such effect. Thus, while some subregions in the posterior/dorsal TPC show response to rich, salient lexical stimuli such as concrete words, the larger region is selectively connected to key sites in the cortical language network during abstract word processing. 
 We therefore propose that the TPC is part of a larger network of regions involved in abstract processing. Specifically, left TPC may be involved in actively forming, updating, and differentiating abstract representations through a complex process that includes combining contextual information (which is flexible and temporal) and associative information (which is relatively stable) to assign meaning to abstract words, and furthermore weighing feature information to distinguish closely-related concepts. 
 What feature and contextual information the TPC may be accessing specifically for abstract words remains an open question. There is significant evidence that abstract words rely to a greater extent on the verbal context they appear in ( Schwanenflugel, Akin & Luh, 1992 ), and understanding the subtle meanings of abstract concepts can be highly reliant on contextual information and individual experience ( Ohlsson & Lehtinen, 1997 ). There is also evidence that accessing abstract words leads to spreading activation to concepts whose relationship are unique, compared to concrete words ( Crutch, 2006 ;  Crutch, Ridha & Warrington, 2006 ;  Crutch, Troche, Reilly & Ridgeway, 2013 ;  Crutch & Warrington, 2010 ), and the TPC may play a role specifically in the associative (rather than categorical) relationships that support abstract word meaning. Recent research suggests that abstract concepts may have an emotional basis ( Kousta, Vigliocco, Vinson, Andrews & Del Campo, 2011 ). While this may be true for some types of abstract words and not others ( Skipper & Olson, 2014 ), it reveals a significant variable that is frequently overlooked in the study of abstract semantics. Like concrete concepts, the everyday use of abstract concepts requires us to not only know the dictionary difference between related words, but also to recognize how contextual, relational, and feature information influences appropriate interpretations. 
 The TPC is traditionally considered heteromodal association cortex, meaning that it is not primarily sensory or motoric, but instead devoted to the integration of multiple sources of information ( Binder & Desai, 2011 ;  Mesulam, 1985 ). Diffusion tensor imaging has revealed that this region is highly interconnected with regions throughout the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes ( Turken & Dronkers, 2011 ). This region has been linked to a range of functions such as translating visual numerical symbols into abstract representations of quantity ( Cappelletti, Lee, Freeman & Price, 2010 ) and in understanding conceptual metaphors and proverbs, which require assigning an abstract meaning to concrete words and phrases ( Chen, Widick & Chatterjee, 2008 ;  Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2003 ) . Other findings, scattered across diverse literatures, also lend to the idea that the left TPC is involved in translating and contextualizing thoughts, ideas, and language. For example, this region has been implicated in following narrative structures ( Xu, Kemeny, Park, Frattali & Braun, 2005 ), which requires actively updating representations and relationships between them as the story continues. It has been repeatedly shown to activate in response to language-based social stimuli, such as vignettes used in the theory of mind literature ( Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003 ;  Völlm, Taylor, Richardson, Corcoran, Stirling, McKie, Deakin & Elliott, 2006 ). These require understanding and updating abstract representations of shared knowledge, intention, and social goals, as well as sociocultural norms. Furthermore, voxel based lesion symptom mapping has demonstrated that damage to the TPC is associated with impairments in using syntactical information in reversible sentence comprehension (“the man serves the woman,” or “the woman serves the man”) ( Thotharthiri, Kimberg & Schwartz, 2012 ; see also,  Dronkers, Wilkins, Van Valin, Redfern & Jaeger, 2004 ;  Race, Ochfeld, Leigh, & Hillis, 2012 ), a task that requires the use of context to understand the relationships between objects and people. 
 Patients with lesions in the left TPC tend to make thematically based semantic production errors ( Schwartz et al., 2011 ) and thematic interference in picture naming has been associated with activation in the left AG ( de Zubicaray et al., 2013 ). It is notable that thematic relationships typically do not rely on physical features of concepts ( Estes et al., 2011 ) and may be of particular importance for abstract conceptual knowledge ( Crutch & Warrington, 2005 ). Even as early as the 1950's, MacDonald Critchley, describing the work by Sir Henry Head, commented that left parietal lobe lesions led to defects that were characterized “by lack of recognition of the full significance of words and phrases apart from their immediate verbal meaning” ( Critchley, 1953 ). 
 All of these findings point to the TPC involvement in a diverse range of cognitive tasks, all of which appear to be united by the need for flexible translation between representations and contextualizing of abstract conceptual representations. While both concrete and abstract semantic knowledge are associated with the TPC, the specific functions of flexibly modifying representations, gleaning information from context, representing relationships, and making thematic associations may be particularly important for abstract concepts ( Crutch & Warrington, 2005 ;  Shallice & Cooper, 2013 ). The TPC is not the “site” of abstract concepts, but rather its general role in semantic memory is crucial for abstract conceptual representation. 
 
 
 5.2 The Importance of White Matter and Connectivity with the TPC 
 In Experiment 1, we found functional connectivity between the left inferior frontal lobe and the left TPC during abstract word processing. In Experiment 2, we found that lesions to the left TPC, in a relatively small sample of participants, led to impaired performance in selecting abstract words from semantically related distractors. However, we were unable to determine whether structural connectivity between the left frontal lobes and TPC was responsible for this impairment. This is in large part because we lack diffusion tensor data for the participants, and could only estimate whether underlying white matter tracts were affected based on an atlas. Based on the functional imaging findings, we hypothesize that the connectivity between these regions that support abstract conceptual processing are flexible, and the role of the TPC is to synchronize with frontal regions specifically when accessing abstract concepts. However, it is not clear that this functional connectivity should implicate a single white matter tract such as the SLF or arcuate fasciculus. A recent study of 99 participants with aphasia following left hemisphere stroke found that deficits in recognizing semantic relationships were associated with damage to a frontal “white matter bottleneck” that affected the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, the uncinated fasciculus, and the anterior thalamic radiations ( Mirman et al., 2015a ;  2015b ). Mirman et al. interpreted this result to mean that semantic cognition requires widespread connectivity between frontal regions and other brain regions involved in semantic memory, rather than a single connection between any two regions. Future studies will need to collect more detailed structural and functional connectivity data in order to fully evaluate these hypotheses. 
 
 
 5.3 A Possible Role for the Ventral ATL in Concrete Conceptual Representation 
 Our neuroimaging results revealed that the left ventral and anterior temporal lobes may be functionally connected to a wider semantic network during concrete semantic processing. The region has previously been identified as involved in integrating visual and semantic information ( Skipper, Ross & Olson, 2011 ) and receives projections from higher order visual cortex as the endpoint of the ventral visual stream ( Blaizot, Mansilla, Insausti, Constans, Salinas-Alaman, Pro-Sistiaga, Mohedano-Moriano & Insausti, 2010 ;  Ding, Van Hoesen, Cassell & Poremba, 2009 ). 
 This region is perhaps best understood through the results of semantic dementia, a neurodegenerative disease associated with widespread cell loss that is more concentrated in the ventral anterior temporal lobes ( Hodges, Patterson, Oxbury & Funnell, 1992 ), especially perirhinal cortex ( Mion, Patterson, Acosta-Cabronero, Pengas, Izquierdo-Garcia, Hong, Fryer, Williams, Hodges, & Nestor, 2010 ). Patients with semantic dementia demonstrate dramatic semantic memory loss, not limited to any single modality. When asked to provide definitions for concrete objects, patients with semantic dementia will focus on functional information and fail to produce visual feature information ( Lambon Ralph, Graham & Patterson, 1999 ;  McCarthy & Warrington, 1988 ), though they are markedly impaired on both. 
 The reversal of the concreteness effect also has interesting implications for the region, as the reversal appears disproportionately in cases of semantic dementia and herpes simplex encephalitis, which tend to cause focal medial and anterior temporal lobe damage ( Kapur, Barker, Burrows, Ellison, Brice, Illis, Colbourn, Wilson & Loates, 1994 ). Some have demonstrated that semantic dementia patients do typically perform worse with abstract than with concrete words ( Hoffman & Lambon Ralph, 2011 ). However, the reversal of the concreteness effect does not require better performance on abstract words compared to concrete, because even the healthy brain is biased towards concrete words and a significant impairment for concrete words alone could be demonstrated even if performance is better for them than for abstract words. That is, a reversal of the concreteness effect can be demonstrated through a greater impairment for concrete words than abstract words, relative to neurologically intact participants. Furthermore, the concreteness effect studies in SD rarely include a control group or baseline task, thus it is not possible to compare these results to the performance of the SD patients with any other kind of impairment of the semantic system. Our study differed from these because we employed a baseline (no semantically-related distractors) task, allowing us to assess the participants’ semantic impairment with abstract words against their own performance in a nonsemantic condition. 
 A recent study compared the performance of seven patients who had undergone resection of the anterior temporal lobe to a group of 15 patients with unilateral surgical resection of the amygdala and hippocampus ( Loiselle et al., 2012 ). Compared to healthy controls, both patient groups were significantly impaired on both abstract and concrete words. However, when the scores were normalized, it was discovered that patients in the anterior temporolobectomy group were significantly more impaired on concrete than abstract words, while the hippocampectomy patients were equally impaired on both. Although these are relative effects, and not an absolute reversal, the evidence points to a possible role for the temporal pole/ATL, specifically ventral subregions, in processing concrete and highly imageable semantic stimuli. If our experimental approach were used to test participants with TP/ATL damage, it may similarly reveal a greater effect of distractor relatedness on concrete words than on abstract words; that is, a complementary relatednessby-concreteness interaction to the one we observed for individuals with TPC damage. 
 
 
 5.4 The Qualitatively Different Representations Theory 
 The spoken-to-written word matching task used in Experiment 2 also tested the QDR theory for abstract and concrete concept representation ( Crutch, 2006 ;  Crutch, Ridha & Warrington, 2006 ;  Crutch, Troche, Reilly & Ridgeway, 2013 ;  Crutch & Warrington, 2010 ), but we failed to support the QDR hypothesis. Specifically, we found no interaction between concreteness (abstract/concrete) and type of relationship (thematic/taxonomic). Other recent neuropsychological and behavioral studies have also failed to find support for the QDR theory as well ( Brozdowski, Gordils & Magnuson, 2013 ;  Hamilton & Coslett, 2008 ;  Papagno, Martello & Mattavelli, 2013 ). However, the evidence for the QDR model is heavily based on patients with large non-focal lesions ( Crutch, 2006 ;  Crutch, Ridha & Warrington, 2006 ) and thus our patients may not have had severe enough impairments to show the critical effect. Furthermore, our sample, and effects, were relatively small, and we may have lacked the power to identify the effect predicted by the QDR model. Although not conclusive, our negative results add to the ongoing evaluation of the QDR theory. 
 
 
 5.5 Conclusions 
 In the study of semantic and conceptual knowledge, abstract concepts are frequently overlooked, and studies of the neural basis of abstract words have produced diverse and difficult to interpret results. However, the double dissociation that can be found in the neuropsychological patients, where most are impaired on abstract words, but some are unusually impaired on concrete words, suggests that a partially distinct system for abstract words is necessary. Using functional connectivity analyses of neuroimaging data from neurologically intact participants, we identified two unique networks for abstract and concrete word knowledge. The abstract network involved functional connections between aIFG and subregions of the temporoparietal cortex, including the AG and posterior STS. In a second experiment, we found that participants with lesions in the left temporoparietal cortex had degraded representations for abstract concepts. We propose that abstract concepts are represented through neural networks that are partly independent of those involved in concrete conceptual representation, and that the temporoparietal cortex may be involved in flexible translation and contextual updating of abstract representations. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding Statement: This work was funded in part by a National Institute of Health grants to I. Olson [RO1 MH091113] and D. Mirman [R01DC010805], the American Psychological Association Culture of Service Award and an NSF Graduate Fellowship to L. Skipper. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Adorni 
 R 
 
 
 Proverbio 
 AM 
 
 
 The neural manifestation of the word concreteness effect: An electrical neuroimaging study. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 880 
 891 
 22313624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Awh 
 E 
 
 
 Jonidas 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Schumacher 
 EJ 
 
 
 Koeppe 
 RA 
 
 
 Katz 
 S 
 
 
 Dissociation of storage and rehearsal in verbal working memory: Evidence from positron emission tomography. 
 Psychological Science 
 1996 
 7 
 25 
 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badgaiyan 
 RD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Alpert 
 NM 
 
 
 Retrieval of relational information: A role for the left inferior prefrontal cortex. 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 17 
 393 
 400 
 12482092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Semantic retrieval, mnemonic control, and prefrontal cortex. 
 Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews 
 2002 
 1 
 206 
 218 
 17715593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Yap 
 MJ 
 
 
 Cortese 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hutchison 
 KA 
 
 
 Kessler 
 B 
 
 
 Loftis 
 B 
 
 
 Neely 
 NH 
 
 
 Nelson 
 DL 
 
 
 Simpson 
 GB 
 
 
 Treiman 
 R 
 
 
 The English lexicon project. 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2007 
 39 
 445 
 459 
 17958156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beauregard 
 M 
 
 
 Chertkow 
 H 
 
 
 Bub 
 D 
 
 
 Murtha 
 S 
 
 
 Dixon 
 R 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 The neural substrate for concrete, abstract and emotional word lexica: A positron emission tomography study. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1997 
 9 
 441 
 461 
 23968210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Dravida 
 S 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Shindigs, brunches, and rodeos: The neural basis of event words. 
 Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2013 
 DOI: 10.3758/s13415-013-0217-z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 J 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 The neurobiology of semantic memory. 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 527 
 536 
 22001867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 J 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 L 
 
 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2767 
 2796 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 J 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Some neurophysiological constraints on models of word naming. 
 NeuroImage 
 2005b 
 27 
 677 
 693 
 15921937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 J 
 
 
 Westbury 
 CF 
 
 
 McKiernan 
 KA 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2005a 
 17 
 905 
 917 
 16021798 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blaizot 
 X 
 
 
 Mansilla 
 F 
 
 
 Insausti 
 AM 
 
 
 Constans 
 JM 
 
 
 Salinas-Alaman 
 A 
 
 
 Pro-Sistiaga 
 P 
 
 
 Mohedano-Moriano 
 A 
 
 
 Insasti 
 R 
 
 
 The human parahippocampal region: I. Temporal pole cytoarchitectonic and MRI correlation. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 2198 
 2212 
 20064939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bleasedale 
 FA 
 
 
 Concreteness-dependent associative priming: Separate lexical organization for concrete and abstract words. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 1987 
 13 
 582 
 594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bodke 
 AL 
 
 
 Tagamets 
 M 
 
 
 Friedman 
 RB 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 B 
 
 
 Functional interactions of the inferior frontal cortex during the processing of word and word-like stimuli. 
 Cortex 
 2001 
 30 
 609 
 617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonner 
 MF 
 
 
 Vesely 
 L 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Anderson 
 C 
 
 
 Richmond 
 L 
 
 
 Farag 
 C 
 
 
 Avants 
 B 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Reversal of the concreteness effect in semantic dementia. 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 2009 
 26 
 568 
 579 
 20183015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Breedin 
 SD 
 
 
 Saffran 
 EM 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Reversal of the concreteness effect in a patient with semantic dementia. 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 1994 
 11 
 617 
 660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brozdowski 
 CR 
 
 
 Gordils 
 J 
 
 
 Magnuson 
 JS 
 
 
 Contra the qualitatively different representation hypothesis (QDRH), concrete concepts activate associates faster than abstract concepts. 
 Abstracts of the Psychonomic Society 
 2013 
 18 
 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 New 
 B 
 
 
 Moving beyond Kučera and Francis: A critical analysis of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word frequency measure for American English. 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2009 
 41 
 977 
 990 
 19897807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cappelletti 
 M 
 
 
 Lee 
 HL 
 
 
 Freeman 
 ED 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The role of the right and left parietal lobes in the conceptual processing of numbers. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2010 
 22 
 331 
 346 
 19400672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 E 
 
 
 Widick 
 P 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 Functional-anatomical organization of predicate metaphor processing. 
 Brain and Language 
 2008 
 107 
 194 
 202 
 18692890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cipolotti 
 L 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 Semantic memory and reading abilities: A case report. 
 Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
 1995 
 1 
 104 
 110 
 9375215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coltheart 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Coltheart 
 M 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Marshall 
 JC 
 
 
 Deep Dyslexia: A right-hemisphere hypothesis. 
 Deep Dyslexia 
 1980 
 326 
 380 
 Routledge & Kegan Paul 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coltheart 
 M 
 
 
 The MRC psycholinguistic database. 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1981 
 33A 
 497 
 505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Costafreda 
 SG 
 
 
 Yu 
 CHY 
 
 
 Lee 
 L 
 
 
 Everitt 
 B 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 David 
 AS 
 
 
 A systematic review and quantitative appraisal of fMRI studies of verbal fluency: Role of the left inferior frontal gyrus. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2006 
 27 
 799 
 810 
 16511886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Critchley 
 M 
 
 
 The Parietal Lobes 
 1953 
 Williams and Wilkins 
 Oxford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Qualitatively different semantic representations for abstract and concrete words: Further evidence from the semantic reading errors of deep dyslexic patients. 
 Neurocase 
 2006 
 12 
 91 
 97 
 16714241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Ridha 
 BH 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 The differential frameworks underlying abstract and concrete knowledge: Evidence from a bilingual patient with a semantic refractory access dysphasia. 
 Neurocase 
 2006 
 12 
 151 
 163 
 16801151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Troche 
 J 
 
 
 Reilly 
 J 
 
 
 Ridgeway 
 GR 
 
 
 Abstract conceptual feature ratings: The role of emotion, magnitude, and other cognitive domains in the organization of abstract conceptual knowledge. 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2013 
 7 
 186 
 1 
 14 
 23355817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 Abstract and concrete concepts have structurally different frameworks. 
 Brain 
 2005 
 128 
 615 
 627 
 15548554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crutch 
 SJ 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 The differential dependence of abstract and concrete words upon associative and similarity-based information: Complementary interference and facilitation effects. 
 Cognitive Neuropsychology 
 2010 
 27 
 46 
 71 
 20658386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 When keeping in mind supports later bringing to mind: Neural markers of phonological rehearsal predict subsequent remembering. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2001 
 13 
 1059 
 1070 
 11784444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Day 
 J 
 
 
 Right-hemisphere language processing in normal right-handers. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 1977 
 3 
 518 
 528 
 886282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Groot 
 AMB 
 
 
 Representational aspects of word imageability and word frequency as assessed through word association. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 1989 
 15 
 824 
 845 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demb 
 JB 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Semantic encoding and retrieval in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: A functional MRI study of task difficulty and process specificity. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1995 
 15 
 5870 
 5878 
 7666172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Detre 
 JA 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Stallcup 
 M 
 
 
 Alsop 
 DC 
 
 
 Tippet 
 LJ 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 A functional MRI study of mental image generation. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1997 
 35 
 725 
 730 
 9153035 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: A combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation study. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 71 
 84 
 12590844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 GI 
 
 
 Hansen 
 S 
 
 
 McMahon 
 KL 
 
 
 Differential processing of thematic and categorical conceptual relations in spoken word production. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 2013 
 142 
 131 
 142 
 22642711 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ding 
 SL 
 
 
 Van Hoesen 
 GW 
 
 
 Cassell 
 MD 
 
 
 Poremba 
 A 
 
 
 Parcellation of the human temporal polar cortex: A combined analysis of multiple cytoarchitectonic, chemoachitectonic and pathological markers. 
 Journal of Computational Neurology 
 2009 
 514 
 595 
 623 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Wilkins 
 DP 
 
 
 Van Valin 
 RD 
 
 
 Redfern 
 BB 
 
 
 Jaeger 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lesion analysis of the brain areas involved in language comprehension. 
 Cognition 
 2004 
 92 
 145 
 177 
 15037129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Estes 
 Z 
 
 
 Galonka 
 S 
 
 
 Jones 
 LL 
 
 
 
 
 Ross 
 B 
 
 
 Thematic thinking: The apprehension and consequences of thematic relations. 
 The psychology of learning and motivation 
 2011 
 54 
 249 
 294 
 Academic Press 
 Burlington 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Processing concrete words: fMRI evidence against a specific right-hemisphere involvement. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 42 
 62 
 70 
 14615076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fliessbach 
 K 
 
 
 Weis 
 S 
 
 
 Klaver 
 P 
 
 
 Elger 
 CE 
 
 
 Weber 
 B 
 
 
 The effect of word concreteness on recognition memory. 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 32 
 1413 
 1421 
 16861011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 MF 
 
 
 Folstein 
 SE 
 
 
 McHugh 
 PR 
 
 
 Mini-mental state: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 1975 
 12 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Opitz 
 B 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 Y 
 
 
 Segregating semantic and syntactic aspects of processing in the human brain: an fMRI investigation of different word types. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2000 
 10 
 698 
 705 
 10906316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Rüschemeyer 
 S 
 
 
 Hahne 
 A 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 The role of the left inferior frontal cortex in sentence comprehension: Localizing syntactic and semantic processes. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2003 
 13 
 170 
 177 
 12507948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Psychophysical and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging. 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 6 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 The role of the left inferior frontal cortex in language and memory. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 1998 
 95 
 906 
 913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goodglass 
 H 
 
 
 Hyde 
 MR 
 
 
 Blumstein 
 S 
 
 
 Frequency, picturability and availability of nouns in aphasia. 
 Cortex 
 1969 
 5 
 104 
 119 
 5824429 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gough 
 PM 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Dissociating linguistic processes in the left inferior frontal cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation. 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2005 
 25 
 8010 
 8016 
 16135758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Smoth 
 EE 
 
 
 Koenig 
 P 
 
 
 Glosser 
 G 
 
 
 Devita 
 C 
 
 
 Moore 
 P 
 
 
 McMillan 
 C 
 
 
 The neural basis for categorization in semantic memory. 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 17 
 1549 
 1561 
 12414293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gvion 
 A 
 
 
 Friedmann 
 N 
 
 
 A selective deficit in imageable concepts: A window to the organization of the conceptual system. 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2013 
 7 
 226 
 1 
 13 
 23355817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 AC 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Refractory access disorders and the organization of concrete and abstract semantics: Do they differ? 
 Neurocase 
 2008 
 14 
 131 
 140 
 18569737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Oxbury 
 S 
 
 
 Funnell 
 E 
 
 
 Semantic dementia: Progressive fluent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy. 
 Brain 
 1992 
 115 
 1783 
 1806 
 1486461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 P 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Reverse concreteness effects are not a typical feature of semantic dementia: Evidence for the hub-and-spoke model of conceptual representation. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 2103 
 2112 
 21285258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kounios 
 J 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JW 
 
 
 West 
 WC 
 
 
 Dual-coding, context-availability, and concreteness effects in sentence comprehension: An electrophysiological investigation. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 1999 
 25 
 721 
 742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howell 
 JR 
 
 
 Bryden 
 MP 
 
 
 The effects of word orientation and imageability on visual half-field presentation with a lexical decision task. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1987 
 25 
 527 
 538 
 3683810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hua 
 K 
 
 
 Zhang 
 J 
 
 
 Wakana 
 S 
 
 
 Jiang 
 H 
 
 
 Li 
 X 
 
 
 Reich 
 DS 
 
 
 Calabresi 
 PA 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 van Zijl 
 PCM 
 
 
 Mori 
 S 
 
 
 Tract probability maps in stereotaxic spaces: Analyses of white matter anatomy and tract-specific quantification. 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 39 
 336 
 347 
 17931890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hurley 
 RS 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 Rogalski 
 EJ 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Neural mechanisms of object naming and word comprehension in primary progressive aphasia. 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 4848 
 4855 
 22492040 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 James 
 CT 
 
 
 The role of semantic information in lexical decisions. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 
 1975 
 1 
 130 
 136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 FSL. 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 62 
 782 
 790 
 21979382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kalénine 
 S 
 
 
 Peyrin 
 C 
 
 
 Pichat 
 C 
 
 
 Segebarth 
 C 
 
 
 Bonthoux 
 F 
 
 
 Baciu 
 M 
 
 
 The sensory-motor specificity of taxonomic and thematic conceptual relations: A behavioral and fMRI study. 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 44 
 1152 
 1162 
 18977304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanske 
 P 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Concreteness in emotional words: ERP evidence from a hemifield study. 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1148 
 138 
 148 
 17391654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kapur 
 N 
 
 
 Barker 
 S 
 
 
 Burrows 
 EH 
 
 
 Ellison 
 D 
 
 
 Brice 
 J 
 
 
 Illis 
 LS 
 
 
 Colbourn 
 C 
 
 
 Wilson 
 B 
 
 
 Loates 
 M 
 
 
 Herpes simplex encephalitis: Long term magnetic resonance imaging and neuropsychological profile. 
 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
 1994 
 57 
 1334 
 1342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katz 
 RB 
 
 
 Goodglass 
 H 
 
 
 Deep dyslexia: Analysis of a rare form of repetition disorder. 
 Journal of Brain and Language 
 1990 
 39 
 153 
 185 
 2207619 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 KA 
 
 
 Liddle 
 PF 
 
 
 Smith 
 AM 
 
 
 Mendrek 
 A 
 
 
 Forster 
 BB 
 
 
 Hare 
 RD 
 
 
 Neural pathways involved in the processing of concrete and abstract words. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 7 
 225 
 233 
 10408766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kounios 
 J 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 PJ 
 
 
 Concreteness effects in semantic processing: ERP evidence supporting dual-coding theory. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 1994 
 20 
 804 
 823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kousta 
 ST 
 
 
 Vigliocco 
 G 
 
 
 Vinson 
 DP 
 
 
 Andrews 
 M 
 
 
 Del Campo 
 E 
 
 
 The representation of abstract words: Why emotion matters. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 
 2011 
 140 
 14 
 34 
 21171803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kroll 
 JF 
 
 
 Merves 
 JS 
 
 
 Lexical access for concrete and abstract words. 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 1986 
 12 
 92 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kučera 
 H 
 
 
 Francis 
 WN 
 
 
 Computational Analysis of Present Day American English 
 1967 
 Brown University Press 
 Providence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuperman 
 V 
 
 
 Stadthagen-Gonzalez 
 H 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Age-of-acquisition ratings for 30 thousand English words. 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2012 
 44 
 978 
 990 
 22581493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Is a picture worth a thousand words? Evidence from concept definitions by patients with semantic dementia. 
 Brain and Language 
 1999 
 70 
 309 
 335 
 10600223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loiselle 
 M 
 
 
 Rouleau 
 I 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 DK 
 
 
 Dubeau 
 F 
 
 
 Macoir 
 J 
 
 
 Whatmough 
 C 
 
 
 Lepore 
 F 
 
 
 Joubert 
 S 
 
 
 Comprehension of concrete and abstract words in patients with selective anterior temporal lobe resection and in patients with selective amygdalo hippocampectomy. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 630 
 639 
 22245005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hirsh-Pasek 
 K 
 
 
 Michnick Golinkoff 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Hirsh-Pasek 
 K 
 
 
 Michnick Golinkoff 
 R 
 
 
 A unified theory of word learning: Putting verb acquisition in context. 
 Action meets world: How children learn verbs 
 2006 
 364 
 391 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Macoir 
 J 
 
 
 Is a plum a memory problem? Longitudinal study of the reversal of concreteness effect in a patient with semantic dementia. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 518 
 535 
 18973766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 N 
 
 
 Saffran 
 EM 
 
 
 A computational account of deep dyslexia: Evidence from a single case study. 
 Brain and Language 
 1992 
 43 
 240 
 274 
 1393522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 RA 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 Evidence for modality-specific meaning systems in the brain. 
 Nature 
 1988 
 344 
 428 
 430 
 3261389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mestres-Missé 
 A 
 
 
 Münte 
 TF 
 
 
 Rodriguez-Fornells 
 A 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of contextual acquisition of concrete and abstract words. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2009 
 2 
 2154 
 217 
 19199404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 Patterns in behavioral neuroanatomy: Association areas, the limbic system, and hemispheric specialization. 
 Principles of Behavioral Neurology 
 1985 
 1 
 70 
 Davis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mion 
 M 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Acosta-Cabronero 
 J 
 
 
 Pengas 
 G 
 
 
 Izquierdo-Garcia 
 D 
 
 
 Hong 
 YT 
 
 
 Fryer 
 TD 
 
 
 Williams 
 GB 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 What the left and right anterior fusiform gyri tell us about semantic memory. 
 Brain 
 2010 
 133 
 3256 
 3268 
 20952377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Britt 
 AE 
 
 
 What we talk about when we talk about access deficits. 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
 2014 
 369 
 doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0388 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Chen 
 Q 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 Z 
 
 
 Faseyitan 
 O 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Neural Organization of Spoken Language Revealed by Lesion-Symptom Mapping. 
 Nature Communications 
 2015a 
 10.1038/ncomms7762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Graziano 
 KM 
 
 
 Damage to temporo-parietal cortex decreases incidental activation of thematic relations during spoken word recognition. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 1990 
 1997 
 22571932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 Z 
 
 
 Branch Coslett 
 H 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 The ins and outs of meaning: Behavioral and neuroanatomical dissociation of semantically-driven word retrieval and multimodal semantic recognition in aphasia. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2015b 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.02.014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moseley 
 R 
 
 
 Carota 
 F 
 
 
 Hauk 
 O 
 
 
 Mohr 
 B 
 
 
 Pulvermüller 
 F 
 
 
 A role for the motor system in binding abstract emotional meaning. 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 1634 
 1647 
 21914634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nittono 
 H 
 
 
 Suehiro 
 M 
 
 
 Hori 
 T 
 
 
 Word imageability and N400 in an incidental memory paradigm. 
 International Journal of Psychophysiology 
 2002 
 44 
 219 
 229 
 12031296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Functional imaging of the semantic system: Retrieval of sensory-experienced and verbally learned knowledge. 
 Brain and Language 
 2003 
 84 
 120 
 133 
 12537955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Retrieval of abstract semantics. 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 22 
 164 
 170 
 15110006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ohlsson 
 S 
 
 
 Lehtinen 
 E 
 
 
 Abstraction and the acquisition of complex ideas. 
 International Journal of Educational Research 
 1997 
 27 
 37 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 Dual coding theory: Retrospect and current status. 
 Canadian Journal of Psychology 
 1991 
 45 
 255 
 287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papagno 
 C 
 
 
 Capasso 
 R 
 
 
 Miceli 
 G 
 
 
 Reversed concreteness effect for nouns in a subject with semantic dementia. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 1138 
 1148 
 19350708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papagno 
 C 
 
 
 Fogliata 
 A 
 
 
 Catricalà 
 E 
 
 
 Miniussi 
 C 
 
 
 The lexical processing of abstract and concrete nouns. 
 Brain Research 
 2009 
 1263 
 78 
 86 
 19368832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papagno 
 C 
 
 
 Martello 
 G 
 
 
 Mattavelli 
 G 
 
 
 The neural correlates of abstract and concrete words: Evidence from brain damaged patients. 
 Brain Sciences 
 2013 
 3 
 1229 
 1243 
 24961527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 The neural correlates of verbal working memory. 
 Nature 
 1993 
 362 
 342 
 345 
 8455719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 976 
 987 
 18026167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Schnur 
 T 
 
 
 Tettamanti 
 M 
 
 
 Collina 
 S 
 
 
 Rosa 
 MM 
 
 
 Fazio 
 F 
 
 
 The neural correlates of verb and noun processing: A PET study. 
 Brain 
 1999 
 122 
 2337 
 2344 
 10581226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pexman 
 PM 
 
 
 Hargreaves 
 IS 
 
 
 Edwards 
 JD 
 
 
 Henry 
 LC 
 
 
 Goodyear 
 BG 
 
 
 Neural correlates of concreteness in semantic organization. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 1407 
 1419 
 17651011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex. 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 10 
 15 
 35 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pulvermüller 
 F 
 
 
 Meaning and the brain: The neurosemantics of referential, interactive, and combinatorial knowledge. 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2013 
 25 
 423 
 459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Race 
 DS 
 
 
 Ochfeld 
 E 
 
 
 Leigh 
 R 
 
 
 Hillis 
 AE 
 
 
 Lesion analysis of cortical regions associated with nonreversable and reversable yes/no questions. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 1946 
 1953 
 22564483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramachandran 
 VS 
 
 
 Hubbard 
 EM 
 
 
 The phenomenology of synaethesia. 
 Journal of Consciousness Studies 
 2003 
 10 
 49 
 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Renoult 
 L 
 
 
 Brodeur 
 MB 
 
 
 Debruille 
 JB 
 
 
 Semantic processing of highly repeated concepts presented in single-word trials: Electrophysiological and behavioral correlates. 
 Biological Psychology 
 2010 
 84 
 206 
 220 
 20109518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Gerrard 
 P 
 
 
 Bozeat 
 S 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Structure and deterioration of semantic memory: A neuropsychological and computational investigation. 
 Psychological Review 
 2004 
 111 
 205 
 235 
 14756594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ross 
 LA 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Social cognition and the anterior temporal lobes. 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 49 
 3452 
 3462 
 19931397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 51 properties of 125 words: A unit analyses of verbal behavior. 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1980 
 19 
 736 
 755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabsevitz 
 DS 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 M 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Modulation of the semantic system by word imageability. 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 27 
 188 
 200 
 15893940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saffran 
 EM 
 
 
 Martin 
 N 
 
 
 
 
 Vallar 
 G 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Neuropsychological evidence for lexical involvement in short-term memory. 
 Neuropsychological impairments of short-term memory 
 1990 
 145 
 166 
 Cambridge University Press 
 Cambridge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 People thinking about thinking people: The role of the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind.” 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 1835 
 1842 
 12948738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwanenflugel 
 PJ 
 
 
 Akin 
 C 
 
 
 Luh 
 WM 
 
 
 Context availability and the recall of abstract and concrete words. 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1992 
 20 
 96 
 104 
 1549068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Brecher 
 AR 
 
 
 Whyte 
 J 
 
 
 Klein 
 MG 
 
 
 A patient registry for cognitive rehabilitation research: A strategy for balancing patients’ privacy rights with researchers’ need for access. 
 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
 2005 
 86 
 1807 
 1814 
 16181947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Kimberg 
 DY 
 
 
 Walker 
 GM 
 
 
 Brecher 
 A 
 
 
 Faseyitan 
 OK 
 
 
 Dell 
 GS 
 
 
 Mirman 
 D 
 
 
 Coslett 
 HB 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical dissociation for taxonomic and thematic knowledge in the human brain. 
 PNAS 
 2011 
 108 
 8520 
 8524 
 21540329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Cooper 
 R 
 
 
 Is there a semantic system for abstract words? 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2013 
 7 
 175 
 1 
 10 
 23355817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sirigu 
 A 
 
 
 Duhamel 
 JR 
 
 
 Poncet 
 M 
 
 
 The role of sensorimotor experience in object recognition. 
 Brain 
 1991 
 114 
 2555 
 2573 
 1782531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skipper 
 LM 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Semantic memory: Distinct neural representations for abstractness and valence. 
 Brain and Language 
 2014 
 130 
 1 
 10 
 24561187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skipper 
 LM 
 
 
 Ross 
 LA 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Sensory and semantic category subdivisions within the anterior temporal lobes. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2011 
 49 
 3419 
 3429 
 21889520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tettamanti 
 M 
 
 
 Manenti 
 R 
 
 
 Della Rosa 
 AP 
 
 
 Falini 
 A 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Moro 
 A 
 
 
 Negation and the brain: Modulating action representations. 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 43 
 358 
 367 
 18771737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thotharthiri 
 M 
 
 
 Kimberg 
 DY 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 The neural basis of reversible sentence comprehension: Evidence from voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2012 
 24 
 212 
 222 
 21861679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tolentino 
 LC 
 
 
 Tokowicz 
 N 
 
 
 Are pumpkins better than heaven? An ERP investigation of order effects in the concrete-word advantage. 
 Brain and Language 
 2009 
 110 
 12 
 22 
 19268347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsai 
 P 
 
 
 Yu 
 BH 
 
 
 Lee 
 C 
 
 
 Tzeng 
 OJ 
 
 
 Hung 
 DL 
 
 
 Wu 
 DH 
 
 
 An event-related potential study of the concreteness effect between Chinese nouns and verbs. 
 Brain Research 
 2009 
 1253 
 149 
 160 
 19059223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turken 
 AU 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: Converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analysis. 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 2011 
 5 
 1 
 1 
 20 
 21347218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Völlm 
 BA 
 
 
 Taylor 
 ANW 
 
 
 Richardson 
 P 
 
 
 Corcoran 
 R 
 
 
 Stirling 
 J 
 
 
 McKie 
 S 
 
 
 Deakin 
 JFW 
 
 
 Elliott 
 R 
 
 
 Neuronal correlates of theory of mind and empathy: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study in a nonverbal task. 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 29 
 90 
 98 
 16122944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wallentin 
 M 
 
 
 Østergaard 
 S 
 
 
 Lund 
 TE 
 
 
 Østergaard 
 L 
 
 
 Roepstorff 
 A 
 
 
 Concrete spatial language: See what I mean? 
 Brain and Language 
 2005 
 92 
 221 
 223 
 15721955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Conder 
 JA 
 
 
 Blitzer 
 DN 
 
 
 Shinkareva 
 SV 
 
 
 Neural representation of abstract and concrete concepts: A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2010 
 21 
 1459 
 1468 
 20108224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 The selective impairment of semantic memory. 
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1975 
 27 
 635 
 657 
 1197619 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Warrington 
 EK 
 
 
 Concrete word dyslexia. 
 British Journal of Psychology 
 1981 
 72 
 175 
 196 
 7248674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Warrinton 
 EK 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Category specific semantic impairments. 
 Brain 
 1984 
 107 
 829 
 853 
 6206910 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 West 
 WC 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 PJ 
 
 
 Processing of concrete and abstract words: An electrophysiological investigation. 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2000 
 12 
 1024 
 1037 
 11177422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whaley 
 CP 
 
 
 Word-nonword classification times. 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1978 
 17 
 143 
 154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJS 
 
 
 Howard 
 D 
 
 
 Mummery 
 CJ 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Leff 
 A 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 Noun imageability and the temporal lobes. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2000 
 38 
 985 
 994 
 10775709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Kemeny 
 S 
 
 
 Park 
 G 
 
 
 Frattali 
 C 
 
 
 Braun 
 A 
 
 
 Language in context: Emergent features of word, sentence, and narrative comprehension. 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 25 
 1002 
 1015 
 15809000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yi 
 H 
 
 
 Moore 
 P 
 
 
 Grossman 
 P 
 
 
 Reversal of the concreteness effect in patients with semantic dementia. 
 Neuropsychology 
 2007 
 21 
 9 
 19 
 17201526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Q 
 
 
 Guo 
 C 
 
 
 Ding 
 J 
 
 
 Wang 
 Z 
 
 
 Concreteness effects in the processing of Chinese words. 
 Brain and Language 
 2006 
 96 
 59 
 68 
 15913753 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 (A) Seed region, corresponding to the left aIFG, used in the connectivity analysis in Experiment 1. (B) Results of the connectivity analysis from Experiment 1. The network identified for abstract concepts is shown in red, and the network identified for concrete concepts is shown in blue. All results are presented at an FDR and cluster corrected  p <.05. (C) An overlay map of the cortical lesions identified in the ten participants in the lesion group in Experiment 2. The scale shown represents number of participants with a lesion including that voxel. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 (A) A schematic diagram of a single trial in Experiment 2. The example shown is from the abstract-related condition. (B) Accuracy results for participants in the lesion group across the abstract and concrete, related and unrelated conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Mean scores on psycholinguistic variables for each condition, standard error in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 
 Psycholinguistic Variables 
 Abstract 
 Concrete 
 
 
 
 
 Concreteness* 
 307 (6) 
 544 (5) 
 
 
 Imageability* 
 338 (5) 
 567 (7) 
 
 
 Hedonic Valence 
 0.85 (0.08) 
 0.73(0.07) 
 
 
 Arousal 
 3.81 (0.12) 
 3.58 (0.12) 
 
 
 Age of Acquisition* 
 9.72 (0.24) 
 7.35 (0.29) 
 
 
 Kučera-Francis Verbal Frequency 
 33.34 (4.00) 
 30.97 (4.76) 
 
 
 log SUBTLEX WF 
 2.3 (7.4) 
 2.6 (9.1) 
 
 
 Orthographic Neighbors 
 1.28 (0.31) 
 1.35 (0.32) 
 
 
 Sum Bigram Frequency 
 14263 (756) 
 14113 (777) 
 
 
 Number of Morphemes 
 1.73 (0.08) 
 1.66 (0.08) 
 
 
 Number of Phonemes 
 6.73 (0.22) 
 6.38 (0.23) 
 
 
 Number of Letters 
 7.58 (0.22) 
 7.60 (0.23) 
 
 
 
 
 Note:  Asterisk indicates measures in which the abstract and concrete stimuli were significantly different. 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Average accuracy and response times on the question screen for all conditions in Experiment 1. Standard deviation shown in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accuracy 
 RT 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 
 0.86 (0.09) 
 2071 (264) 
 
 
 
 Concrete 
 
 0.89 (0.09) 
 1988 (262) 
 
 
 
 Nonword 
 
 0.79 (0.10) 
 2128 (331) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 MNI coordinates of the peak activations for the connectivity analyses for the abstract and concrete conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Network 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 left supramarginal gyrus 
 40 
 −52 
 −40 
 32 
 
 
 left posterior superior temporal sulcus 
 22 
 −50 
 −38 
 −4 
 
 
 left postcentral gyrus 
 3 
 −32 
 −40 
 44 
 
 
 left medial orbitofrontal cortex 
 11 
 −2 
 56 
 −20 
 
 
 left posterior middle temporal gyrus 
 37 
 −48 
 −40 
 −6 
 
 
 left angular gyrus 
 39 
 −50 
 −48 
 18 
 
 
 right lateral orbitofrontal cortex 
 11 
 22 
 38 
 −20 
 
 
 right temporal pole, superior temporal sulcus 
 38 
 54 
 14 
 −14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Concrete Network 
 
 
 Region 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 left middle insula 
 52 
 −36 
 −16 
 −10 
 
 
 left middle temporal gyrus 
 21 
 −50 
 −16 
 −18 
 
 
 left anterior superior temporal sulcus 
 22 
 −44 
 −2 
 −28 
 
 
 left posterior superior temporal sulcus 
 22 
 −44 
 −28 
 0 
 
 
 left posterior inferior temporal gyrus 
 37 
 −42 
 −44 
 −8 
 
 
 left temporal pole, superior temporal sulcus 
 38 
 −54 
 10 
 −14 
 
 
 left medial orbitofrontal cortex 
 11 
 −10 
 42 
 −14 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Demographic information and performance on a range of memory tasks for participants in the lesion group for Experiment 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 Gender 
 Education 
 WAB AQ 
 Time since injury (in months) 
 PRT accuracy 
 PNT accuracy 
 Nonword Repetition Accuracy 
 Category STM Span 
 Phonological STM Span 
 ISR STM Span 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 63 
 F 
 16 
 91.5 
 55 
 96 
 86 
 52 
 4.44 
 3.67 
 3 
 
 
 2 
 69 
 M 
 14 
 41.4 
 40 
 39 
 25 
 8 
 0.5 
 0.5 
 1.2 
 
 
 3 
 53 
 F 
 14 
 87.8 
 58 
 95 
 93 
 75 
 3.32 
 3 
 3.8 
 
 
 4 
 52 
 M 
 14 
 65 
 53 
 97 
 55 
 37 
 2 
 3 
 2.8 
 
 
 5 
 34 
 F 
 19 
 78.7 
 41 
 77 
 93 
 32 
 1.62 
 2 
 2 
 
 
 6 
 67 
 M 
 19 
 94.5* 
 33 
 99 
 98 
 78 
 6 
 3.8 
 4 
 
 
 7 
 77 
 M 
 21 
 80.8 
 72 
 98 
 93 
 70 
 2.65 
 6.18 
 3 
 
 
 8 
 57 
 M 
 12 
 85.6 
 62 
 84 
 81 
 35 
 2.46 
 5 
 4 
 
 
 9 
 63 
 M 
 17 
 84.7 
 17 
 98 
 83 
 78 
 2.55 
 2 
 3.6 
 
 
 10 
 54 
 M 
 12 
 76.6 
 58 
 66 
 75 
 13 
 2.79 
 2 
 2.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 -- 
 59 
 3 F/7 M 
 16 
 76.9 
 49 
 84.9 
 78.2 
 47.8 
 2.8 
 3.1 
 3.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Performance in controls (n=20): 
 
 
 
 97.2 (2.7) 
 82.6 (10.5) 
 5.4 (1.3) 
 6.5 (1.6) 
 4.8 (0.3) 
 
 
 
 
 Note:  Participant #6 in the lesion group would be classified as “recovered” by standard WAB AQ criteria (Kertesz, 1982) 
 Participants in the neurologically intact control group were matched on age, gender, education and ethnicity, to these participants on an individual basis. WAB AQ refers to the Western Aphasia Battery Aphasia Quotient. Means are shown below. The bottom row shows normal performance (mean and standard deviation) based on an independent sample of 20 older adults with no neurological or psychiatric conditions. WAB AQ = Western Aphasia Battery Aphasia Quotient; PRT = Philadelphia Repetition Test; PNT = Philadelphia Naming Test; STM = Short Term Memory; ISR = Immediate Serial Recall. 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Mean accuracy and response times in Experiment 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Control Group 
 
 
 
 Accuracy 
 RT 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 Concrete 
 Abstract 
 Concrete 
 
 
 
 
 
 Unrelated 
 
 0.998 (0.006) 
 0.998 (0.006) 
 2737 (275) 
 2711 (251) 
 
 
 
 Related 
 
 0.998 (0.006) 
 0.995 (0.011) 
 2759 (267) 
 2731 (253) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lesion Group 
 
 
 
 Accuracy 
 RT 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 Concrete 
 Abstract 
 Concrete 
 
 
 
 Unrelated 
 
 0.883 (0.064) 
 0.859 (0.064) 
 2849 (545) 
 2765 (449) 
 
 
 
 Related 
 
 0.854 (0.065) 
 0.861 (0.061) 
 2835 (525) 
 2791 (505) 
 
 
 
 
 Standard deviations reported in parentheses. 
 
 
 
