
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 26254587 
 4618189 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.083 
 NIHMS713700 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neural Networks Involved in Adolescent Reward Processing: An Activation Likelihood Estimation Meta-Analysis of Functional Neuroimaging Studies 
 
 
 
 
 Silverman 
 Merav H. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Jedd 
 Kelly 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Luciana 
 Monica 
 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 1 University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Department of Psychology, 75 East River Parkway, Minneapolis, MN 55455 
 2 University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Institute of Child Development, 51 East River Parkway, Minneapolis, MN 55455 
 3  University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Center for Neurobehavioral Development, 717 Delaware, Minneapolis MN 55455 
 
 Corresponding Author:  Merav H. Silverman, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Department of Psychology, 75 East River Parkway, Minneapolis, MN 55455.  silve369@umn.edu . 
 
 
 24 
 8 
 2015 
 
 
 06 
 8 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 11 
 2016 
 
 122 
 427 
 439 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Behavioral responses to, and the neural processing of, rewards change dramatically during adolescence and may contribute to observed increases in risk-taking during this developmental period. Functional MRI (fMRI) studies suggest differences between adolescents and adults in neural activation during reward processing, but findings are contradictory, and effects have been found in non-predicted directions. The current study uses an activation likelihood estimation (ALE) approach for quantitative meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies to: 1) confirm the network of brain regions involved in adolescents’ reward processing, 2) identify regions involved in specific stages (anticipation, outcome) and valence (positive, negative) of reward processing, and 3) identify differences in activation likelihood between adolescent and adult reward-related brain activation. Results reveal a subcortical network of brain regions involved in adolescent reward processing similar to that found in adults with major hubs including the ventral and dorsal striatum, insula, and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). Contrast analyses find that adolescents exhibit greater likelihood of activation in the insula while processing anticipation relative to outcome and greater likelihood of activation in the putamen and amygdala during outcome relative to anticipation. While processing positive compared to negative valence, adolescents show increased likelihood for activation in the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and ventral striatum. Contrasting adolescent reward processing with the existing ALE of adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ) reveals increased likelihood for activation in limbic, frontolimbic, and striatal regions in adolescents compared with adults. Unlike adolescents, adults also activate executive control regions of the frontal and parietal lobes. These findings support hypothesized elevations in motivated activity during adolescence. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Adolescents are more likely than either adults or children to take risks. Preventable situations, such as vehicle accidents, substance use, suicide, and homicide, are the leading causes of death in people ages 10-24 in the United States ( Eaton et al., 2012 ;  SAMHSA, 2012 ) and this risk of mortality likely extends to other cultures. Animal models suggest a biological mechanism since risky behavior during the adolescent period is not specific to humans; for example, adolescent as compared to adult rats show increased risk-taking, novelty seeking, and voluntary alcohol consumption ( Doremus et al., 2005 ;  Spear, 2011 ;  Wilmouth & Spear, 2009 ). Given the public health costs of adolescent risk taking, research has focused on examinations of the neural mechanisms that support it, particularly developmental changes in brain networks that mediate motivational processing ( Ernst et al., 2006 ;  Luciana et al., 2012 ;  Steinberg, 2010 ). 
 The link between motivational processing and adolescent risk-taking is based on the idea that in order to meet expectations associated with adult roles and to facilitate a sense of personal agency, adolescents are biologically driven to seek contexts that are novel and that bring the potential for positive reinforcement ( Wahlstrom et al., 2010a ;  Luciana and Collins, 2012 ;  Luciana et al., 2012 ). When confronted by such situations, adolescents may be motivationally biased toward reward pursuit because of heightened sensitivity to incentive-based stimuli, perhaps to the point of neglecting threat-based cues ( Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010b ). Accordingly, adolescents would be expected to show greater anticipation to potentially rewarding stimuli and heightened responses when rewards are received, as compared to adults or to children. Importantly, these patterns may extend beyond behavior to neural activations within networks typically associated with reward processing during incentive-based tasks. Task-based neuroimaging provides a means of testing these hypotheses. 
 The development of reward processing is a rapidly growing area of research, and brain activation differences in subcortical regions associated with reward and reward-based learning, such as the ventral striatum (VS), have been observed in adolescents, as compared with children or adults (e.g.  Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Galvan, 2010 ). However, findings are inconsistent. Studies have found both hyper- and hypo-activation in the VS and interconnected regions during different stages of motivational processing (e.g.,  Bjork et al., 2010 ;  Geier et al., 2010 ), and use of similar task designs does not always yield equivalent results. These contradictory findings may result from different developmental stages or ages of participants, cohort effects, or the influence of distinct task demands ( Galvan, 2010 ;  Richards et al., 2013 ). Accordingly, it has not yet been confirmed that, across studies, adolescents reliably activate the same regions during reward based processing as do adults ( McClure et al., 2004 ;  Liu et al., 2011 ;  Bartra et al., 2013 ). 
 Although there is diversity in the fMRI tasks that have dominated the literature, many paradigms differentiate between stages or valences of reward processing, or both. Animal studies indicate that reward processing can be dissociated into appetitive or motivational versus consummatory components ( Robbins and Everitt, 1996 ;  Ikemoto and Panksepp, 1999 ). A related theory finds evidence for dissociable neural underpinnings of ‘wanting,’ or incentive motivation, and ‘liking,’ the pleasure of reward consumption ( Robinson and Berridge, 1993 ;  Berridge, 2009 ). Such distinctions between different stages of reward processing are supported by studies using reward tasks during fMRI, where different patterns of brain activation have been linked to reward anticipation and reward receipt ( Knutson et al., 2001 ). Similarly, positive reward valence and negative reward valence, which refer to the subjective states associated with gain or loss, yield distinct functional activation patterns and as a result are sometimes measured separately ( Liu et al., 2007 ). Better characterization of neural activations that are reliably associated with distinct stages and valences of reward processing may contribute to an understanding of the temporal course of adolescent decision-making in risky contexts ( Ernst et al., 2005 ; Spear, 2011b;  Bjork et al., 2012 ;  Blakemore and Robbins, 2012 ;  Sturman and Moghaddam, 2012 ). 
 The heterogeneity of findings on adolescent reward processing justifies a meta-analysis to confirm that there are core brain regions activated across studies. The current project aims to shed light on this contradictory research area and to serve as a road map for future inquiries on the topic of adolescent reward processing. This study employs a coordinate-based meta-analytic method, activation likelihood estimation (ALE), to determine regions commonly activated across a large number of studies ( Eickhoff et al., 2009 ;  Turkeltaub et al., 2012 ). This type of analysis is valuable, because individual studies may be limited by small samples and low reliability ( Eickhoff et al., 2012 ). Pooling data across studies that assess similar constructs allows spatial coordinates to be identified that show consistent activation patterns across hundreds of participants, allowing the most robust findings to be discerned. 
 Accordingly, this study's goals are to: 1) confirm brain regions involved in adolescent reward processing broadly defined, 2) identify regions with significant likelihoods of activation during different stages (anticipation, outcome) and valence (positive, negative) in adolescents as they process reward contexts, and 3) identify differences between adults and adolescents in their activation patterns. It may be that the groups activate similar regions but that there is a stronger likelihood of some regions’ activation in one group or the other. Despite the diversity of methods used among individual studies, we hypothesize that, regardless of task demands, a meta-analysis will reveal that a similar set of structures show a strong likelihood of activation in both adolescents and adults ( Liu et al., 2011 ) during reward processing. We hypothesize that these structures will represent nodes of the ascending mesocorticolimbic dopamine system ( Berridge and Robinson, 1998 ;  Goto and Grace, 2005 ;  Wahlstrom et al., 2010b ). We hypothesize that both anticipation and outcome phases of reward processing will yield likelihoods of activation in dorsal and ventral striatal regions but that the processing of outcomes will be more strongly associated with activation likelihood in orbitofrontal regions and other areas involved in reward-based learning. We predict that negative valence cues and outcomes will show blunted likelihood of activation in frontolimbic and striatal regions relative to positive valence, suggestive of failures to weigh consequences of loss events relative to gain events. We further hypothesize that adolescents (as compared to adults) will generally exhibit a heightened sensitivity to reward contexts ( Luciana et al., 2012 ), manifested as greater likelihood of activation in subcortical regions that are integral to reward processing ( Wahlstrom et al., 2010a ,  2010b ). Finally, we expect adolescents, relative to adults, to show less activation likelihood in higher cortical regions associated with executive control. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Study selection 
 Two independent researchers identified studies investigating reward processing during adolescence. An exhaustive literature search was conducted from two databases, PUBMED and BrainMap (using Sleuth). Search terms chosen were the same as those used by  Liu and colleagues (2011)  in their ALE of adult reward processing. PUBMED was searched with the following terms: 1) “fMRI” AND “reward” AND “Decision” and 2) “reward decision making task” AND “fMRI” AND “human. These searches yielded a total of 516 non-overlapping studies. These searches were replicated with the added conjunctive and keyword search term: AND “adolescents,” which did not yield any additional non-overlapping results. The BrainMap database was searched with the terms “fMRI” AND “reward” which yielded an additional 167 papers, 120 of which were non-overlapping. Twelve additional articles were identified from one of the researcher's reference base, utilizing search terms “adolescent” and “reward.” These three searches conducted in October, 2014 yielded a total of 648 studies. 
 Studies were deemed eligible for inclusion if they met the following criteria: 1) studies were empirical and data-based, and could not be review articles, 2) results were reported in standard stereotactic space (either in Talairach or Montreal Neurological Institute, MNI, space), 3) studies employed fMRI 4), results reported peak activation coordinates from group activation maps from whole-brain analyses (and could not employ a region of interest, ROI, approach), 5) participants were adolescents, defined as ages 8 to18 years 6) special populations (i.e., psychiatric populations) were excluded, though control subjects from these studies were included. The wide age range was selected to capture the full range of adolescence as currently defined in Western culture and to capture the full range of pubertal development ( Dorn et al., 2006 ;  Forbes & Dahl, 2010 ), although pubertal status was rarely reported within individual studies. 
 All 648 studies identified from search databases were reviewed for adherence to these criteria. This review process involved at least one of the authors reading the title and abstract initially, to determine whether the study population included adolescents. A large number of studies (n=586) were excluded at this stage because they did not include adolescents. Sixty-two studies included adolescents and warranted more in depth review. These studies were evaluated by reading the title, abstract, and methods. Among these 62 studies, the most common reasons for exclusion were: using an ROI approach (6 studies), not reporting whole group activation for adolescents separately from adults or special populations (10 studies), and not reporting peak coordinates from whole brain analyses (5 studies). 
 Additionally, after consulting with investigators who had first-authored more than one paper included in the final list, it was determined that papers from two laboratories [( Bjork et al., 2004 ,  2008 ) and ( Telzer et al., 2013a ,  2013b )] included overlapping samples. Although sample overlap is rarely accounted for within ALE analyses ( Caspers et al., 2010 ;  Liu et al., 2011 ;  Cortese et al., 2012 ), it could introduce bias due to non-independence of observations. As a result, the dataset with the smaller sample within each of these two sets of studies ( Bjork et al., 2004 ;  Telzer et al., 2013b ) was excluded from the current analyses. 
 Twenty-six studies (with thirty discrete samples or experiments) remained for the final analyses. The discrepancy results from the fact that four of the twenty-six studies included two separate adolescent samples, which are listed in the analyses as distinct experiments ( Forbes et al., 2010 ;  Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010a ,  2010b ;  Op de Macks et al., 2011 ). This number of included studies is consistent with other recent ALE analyses in the field of fMRI research (e.g.,  Albrecht et al., 2010 ;  Mohr et al., 2010 ;  Bzdok et al., 2011 ;  Belyk and Brown, 2014 ). The total number of participants for the overall ALE is 830. The mean weighted age of study subjects for the overall adolescent ALE is 14.10. The mean age of study participants within each included study ranged from 11.1 to 17.1 years. Based on personal correspondence with study authors, it was estimated that only 3 participants between the ages of 8 and 9 were represented in the final sample. These were retained, because they were grouped, within the selected studies, with individuals who were older. Exclusion would have compromised the sample size for the final analyses. 
 Studies that did not report coordinates in MNI space were grouped together based on the coordinate transformations available in GingerALE ( http://brainmap.org , Research Imaging Center of the University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas). Coordinates were converted into MNI space using the icbm2tal space transform ( Lancaster et al., 2007 ). 
 
 
 Study categorization 
 Coordinates that met the general inclusion criteria were recorded for the overall adolescent reward processing ALE. Studies were then further categorized based on different aspects of reward processing. Following from the organization scheme laid out in  Liu et al. (2011) , coordinates were categorized based on valence (positive, negative) and stage (anticipation and outcome) of reward processing. Reflecting the diversity of condition types characterized as positive and negative valence in the literature, coordinates were categorized as pertaining to positive valence when subjects won something (including money, points, juice, encouragement) ( Bjork et al., 2010 ;  Galván and McGlennen, 2013 ); avoided loss ( Schlund et al., 2010 ); or received the greater of two gains ( Ernst et al., 2005 ). Coordinates were categorized as pertaining to negative valence when subjects lost something (including money, points, juice, encouragement) ( Paloyelis et al., 2012 ); missed a gain opportunity ( Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010b ); won the smaller of two amounts ( Crowley et al., 2010 ); or received discouraging feedback or images (no studies included in the current analysis met this last criterion). Experiments that indexed positive valence (n = 27) were considerably more common than those that assessed negative valence (n = 11). 
 Included studies varied in terms of what each used for its contrast baseline. Some studies reported results from contrasts against no-incentive / no consequence cues (e.g.,  Bjork et al., 2008 ), some studies compared one condition against another condition (e.g., Win $4.00> Win $0.50, see  Ernst et al., 2005 ), and some studies compared against an implicit baseline (e.g.,  Jarcho et al., 2012 ). Additionally, even though individual fMRI studies examine different magnitudes of gain and loss separately (e.g., large, medium and small gain compared to baseline: ( Jarcho et al., 2012 )), in the current analyses we collapsed across different magnitudes to increase the power of the valence analyses. The extant meta-analysis of adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ) similarly collapsed across gains and losses of varying magnitudes. 
 Anticipation was reflected by tasks in which participants deliberated reward-related options or outcomes prior to their delivery. Outcome was characterized as a stage in which participants received feedback about gains or losses associated with their decisions or behavior. All but two studies that were included used paradigms in which participants would have been uncertain about the nature of the outcome (positive or negative; high versus low reward).  Liu et al. (2011)  in a meta-analysis of adult studies also included a stage of  evaluation , which was characterized as a stage in which participants incorporated feedback, which then influenced subsequent trials, based on principles of learning. In the current analysis, only two studies ( Scott-Van Zeeland et al., 2010 ;  Christakou et al., 2013 ) could be categorized in this manner, so this stage was not pursued for meta-analysis. These coordinates were nonetheless included in the main adolescent reward processing analysis. Two of the authors (MHS and KJ) reviewed each paper and reached consensus about study inclusion and categorization for stage, and valence. 
 Thirty experiments met the inclusion criteria for the overall adolescent reward-processing analysis (see  Table 1 ), resulting in 846 reward-related foci in a sample of 830 subjects (Study Aim 1). Coordinates were then categorized from these thirty experiments as pertaining to different stages (anticipation, outcome) and valences (positive, negative) of reward processing. 
 Studies often separately report coordinates for stage and valence; as a result the same study could contribute different coordinates to both stage lists and to both valence lists. Eighteen experiments (286 foci; 613 subjects) were included in the anticipation analysis and twenty-four experiments were included in the outcome analysis (498 foci; 533 subjects; Study Aim 2). Twenty-seven experiments were included in the positive valence analysis (661 foci; 756 subjects) and eleven experiments were included in the negative valence analysis (117 foci; 266 subjects; Study Aim 2). It was not possible to examine the interactive effects between stage and valence with adequate power because of the small number of studies that indexed negative valence (n=11); of these, only 5 studies reported coordinates for anticipation of a negative valence event. 
 For the purpose of contrasting adolescent and adult reward processing, an additional ALE of adult reward processing was conducted using coordinates provided by Liu and colleagues from their research on the topic (2011); this consisted of 655 experiments (5214 foci; 11,904 subjects; Study Aim 3). 
 Because many definitions of adolescence exclude individuals that are below 12 years old, all ALEs were replicated in post hoc analyses excluding the ten studies that included subjects younger than 12 in their sample (see  Table 1 ) to verify that results were not inordinately impacted by inclusion of these younger participants. For the overall adolescent ALE, this resulted in 499 foci from 585 subjects. 
 
 
 ALE meta-analyses 
 ALE meta-analyses were computed in GingerALE v2.3, a BrainMap program ( Eickhoff et al., 2009 ,  2012 ;  Turkeltaub et al., 2012 ). Peak activation coordinates across a number of studies examining similar behavioral processes are pooled together. ALE differs from other meta-analytic techniques, because the goal of ALE is to identify the spatial coordinates of brain regions and networks involved in a function or behavior of interest, as opposed to estimating the true effect size of a given phenomenon. Coordinates from pooled studies are used to produce activation likelihood estimates for every voxel in the brain. In this method, every voxel's ALE score represents its likelihood of being activated given its proximity to one of the peak activation coordinates from included studies, using three-dimensional Gaussian probability densities centered at the coordinates. The widths of these Gaussian distributions around peak activation coordinates are calculated based on the sample size of each experiment ( Eickhoff et al., 2009 ). The modeled activation map from each study is then combined into an unthresholded ALE map representing the convergence of activation likelihoods for every voxel across all of the studies. This unthresholded group ALE is compared to a null distribution map derived from a permutation procedure of randomly generated activation likelihoods. This produces a statistical map of p-values from the ALE scores, indicating the probability that any voxel in the brain is included within the region surrounding one of the contributing peak activation coordinates. 
 
 
 Meta-analyses of sub-lists 
 Using these methods, a series of ALE meta-analyses were conducted. The first analysis included all of the reward-related foci for adolescents, regardless of stage or valence. Next, meta-analyses were conducted separately for two stages (anticipation, outcome) and two valences (positive, negative). Each stage and valence was examined on its own, and then contrast analyses (see below) were implemented to compare stages and valences. Significance in the overall, stage, and valence ALE analyses was determined using a cluster-level inference corrected threshold of p<0.05, 5000 thresholding permutations, and an uncorrected p-value of < 0.001 as the cluster forming threshold ( Eickhoff et al., 2012 ). Finally, using the coordinates for the overall adult reward processing ALE provided by  Liu and colleagues (2011)  and the thresholding parameters outlined in their manuscript, we reproduced the findings reported in their study as a validation check of our procedures. This ALE was used for contrasting the likelihood of reward related brain activity in adolescents compared with adults. 
 
 
 Contrast Analyses between sub-lists 
 Contrast, or subtraction, analyses were conducted to determine brain areas that showed differences in activation likelihood in different stages and valences ( Laird et al., 2005 ). An additional contrast analysis was conducted between the overall reward-related ALE for adolescents compared to the overall reward-related ALE for adults ( Liu et al., 2011 ), to identify regions that were more likely to be activated in either of these populations. During contrast analyses, ALE scores are calculated for every voxel as the difference in ALE values between the meta-analysis of the two contrasting coordinate lists independently. To determine statistical significance, these values are then compared to a null distribution based on the difference in ALE values for two randomly distributed sets of voxels. In the current study, a smoothing kernel of 10 mm FWHM was employed for contrast analyses. For these analyses, an uncorrected p-value of <.01 and a minimum cluster size of 60 voxels (480 mm^3) were used to determine statistical significance against a null distribution (derived from 5000 permutations). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 Three overarching questions were pursued in our analyses. Namely, we sought to confirm the network of brain regions involved in adolescent reward processing broadly defined. Next we wanted to determine the regions involved in valence and stage of processing, and to determine whether any regions were more likely to be activated during anticipation versus outcome (stage of processing) or during positive versus negative conditions (valence) of reward processing. Last, we sought to determine whether there were differences between adolescents and adults in their likelihood of activating specific brain regions during reward processing. 
 All ALE tables in the current study report brain regions based on the coordinates (in MNI space) provided for the maximum ALE values or maximum ALE difference scores (reported as z-scores, for the contrast analyses). Brain regions reported in tables are derived from the Harvard-Oxford subcortical and cortical structural atlases. Because large clusters encompassed multiple brain regions (many of which are not reflected by the peak coordinates listed in the tables), likelihood of activation in regions within each cluster that were found to be significant is reported in the text (and in figures). 
 
 Confirmation of Regions Involved in Adolescent Reward Processing 
 To address the nature of the network implicated in reward-relevant processing, an analysis that included all adolescent reward-related foci that met inclusion criteria, regardless of stage of reward processing (anticipation, outcome, or evaluation) or valence (positive or negative) was conducted. A significant likelihood of reward-related activity was found bilaterally in the dorsal and ventral striatum, insula, PCC, paracingulate gyrus, amygdala, lateral occipital gyrus, and occipital pole, all areas that have been implicated in similar meta-analyses of adult reward processing (Liu et al., 2011b;  Bartra et al., 2013 ). Results can be found in  Table 2  and in  Figure 1  (top panel). This analysis confirms that adolescents generally activate a similar set of subcortical structures as adults when processing reward-relevant contexts. Evidence of higher cortical activation likelihood was notably absent. 
 
 
 ALE Results for Adolescent Stage of Processing: Anticipation versus Outcome 
 Separate meta-analyses were conducted to examine the neural representation of reward anticipation and outcome. Concordant with our hypotheses, significant likelihood of activation was found bilaterally in the ventral and dorsal striatum, OFC, frontal opercular regions, and anterior insula during both the anticipation stage ( Figure 1 , second panel;  Table 3 ) and outcome stage ( Figure 1 , third panel;  Table 3 ) of reward processing. 
 Contrast analyses ( Figure 2 ;  Table 4 ) reveal a stronger likelihood of neural representation in the left insula and frontal operculum during anticipation as compared to outcome. Contrast analyses also reveal a stronger likelihood of neural representation in the left putamen and amygdala during outcome compared to anticipation. 
 
 
 ALE Results for Adolescent Valence of Processing: Positive versus Negative Contexts 
 Separate meta-analyses were also conducted to examine the neural representation of positive and negative valence. 
 As expected, positive valence ( Figure 1 , fourth panel;  Table 3 ) was associated with likelihood of activation bilaterally in the ventral and dorsal striatum, OFC, insula, paracingulate gyrus, and PCC. Negative valence ( Figure 1 , fifth panel;  Table 3 ) was associated with a significant likelihood of activation in the left dorsal striatum, precuneous, and brain stem and right thalamus, supplementary motor cortex, insula, and precentral gyrus. 
 Contrast analysis ( Figure 2 , bottom panel;  Table 4 ) shows increased likelihood for activation in the right PCC, subcallosal cortex, nucleus accumbens, and lateral occipital cortex during positive compared to negative valence processing. No significant neural substrates were found in the contrast of negative greater than positive valence processing. 
 
 
 ALE Results for Adolescent and Adult Contrast Analyses 
 Contrast analyses were conducted to examine differences between overall adolescent reward processing and overall adult reward processing ( Figure 3 ;  Table 5 ), using the coordinates from the existing study of adults on this topic ( Liu et al., 2011 ). 
 No significant neural substrates were found where overall adult reward processing showed greater activation likelihoods than overall adolescent reward processing. However, in support of our predictions, contrast analyses revealed an increased likelihood for activation in adolescents compared with adults in the bilateral ventral and dorsal striatum, insula, OFC, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), PCC, frontal opercular regions, paracingulate gyrus, subcallosal cortex; right amygdala, right occipital pole; and left lateral occipital cortex. To confirm that the discrepant sample sizes between adolescent and adult foci were not influencing the contrast analyses, the adult list was randomly divided into multiple sub-lists with comparable numbers of foci to the adolescent sample (Laird et al., 2005). Again, no findings for the adults>adolescent contrast emerged. Findings for adolescent>adults across the sub-lists consistently showed similar regions as reported above, in  Table 5 , and as shown in  Figure 3 . 
 Finally, to exclude the possibility that findings were inordinately influenced by the inclusion of relatively young participants, all ALE analyses were repeated excluding participants below the age of 12. Findings did not vary from what is described above. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study employs an ALE approach -- a quantitative, meta-analytic method – that makes it possible to base conclusions regarding neural correlates of adolescent reward processing on a synthesis of the broad literature. Three central questions were explored: 1) what are the core brain regions involved in adolescent reward processing, 2) what regions are likely to be activated during specific stages and valences, and 3) what distinctions characterize brain networks supporting adolescent versus adult behavior. 
 
 Brain Regions Involved in Adolescent Reward Processing 
 We included data from 830 participants across 26 studies (with a total of 30 unique samples/experiments). Pooling coordinates across studies revealed a core network of regions involved in adolescent reward processing, broadly defined. Major nodes included the ventral and dorsal striatum, insula, and PCC. These regions overlap the subcortical regions identified in similar ALEs of adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ;  Bartra et al., 2013 ) and include major dopaminergic projection regions (e.g., accumbens region of the ventral striatum), and regions (anterior insula) that are associated with salience, affective control, and the processing risk and uncertainty ( Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Mohr et al. , 2010 ;  Preuschoff et al., 2008 ). The posterior cingulate region is part of the brain's hub architecture as well as a core node in the default mode network ( Leech and Sharp, 2014 ); it participates in a number of functions, including attention, episodic memory, and awareness. Although implicated in adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ), its likelihood of activation appears to be more pronounced in adolescents. These regions cohere in a manner that is consistent with prior studies of animal ( Schultz, 2000 ) and human ( Liu et al., 2011 ;  Bartra et al., 2013 ) behavior, generally confirming that adolescents activate a similar set of subcortical regions as adults in perceiving, processing, and responding to reward-based contexts. 
 Notably,  Liu et al. (2011)  also reported strong activation likelihoods for numerous regions of the dorsal and ventral prefrontal cortex as well as superior and inferior parietal areas. The lack of significance of these regions in the current ALE suggests that in adolescents, reward processing is driven more strongly by limbic, paralimbic, and striatal regions without reliable contributions from higher cortical regions. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in concert with parietal regions is integral to the brain's executive control network, as discerned from studies of the brain's intrinsic functional connectivity ( Beckmann et al., 2005 ;  Seeley et al., 2007 ;  Heine et al., 2012 ). In adults, the executive control network recruits sustained attention, working memory monitoring and manipulation processes, and flexibility so that behavioral options can be assessed relative to the current environmental context, past experience, and outcome contingencies ( Seeley et al., 2007 ) prior to response initiation. In adolescents, this network continues to mature ( Fair et al., 2007 ;  Sherman et al., 2014 ), such that increasing within-network functional connectivity is evident with increasing age. In the absence of such coherence, executive control regions may be only inconsistently activated in adolescents. Response selection in the midst of reward-based motivational situations may be less deliberate than in adults and may be weighted based on input from other regions. 
 
 
 Processing Stages of Reward 
 In the current analysis, anticipation was associated with activation likelihood in dorsal and ventral striatal regions, motor regions, insula, and the frontal operculum. These areas overlap with those generally known to be involved in incentive motivational processing ( Depue and Collins, 1999 ) and what has been termed the “wanting” component of positive motivation ( Berridge and Kringelbach, 2013 ). Some of these regions overlap with those involved in processing reward outcomes given that the latter process is also associated with activation likelihood in the striatum and insula. 
 Direct comparison of anticipation versus receipt of gain or loss cues revealed a more preferential likelihood of activation during anticipation in the anterior insula and left frontal operculum, near the posterior extent of the inferior frontal gyrus. Liu (2011) reported a similar finding for the anterior insula in adults in addition to regions such as the supplementary motor area and anterior cingulate cortex. The ALE by  Mohr and colleagues (2010)  found the anterior insula, a region associated with aversive emotion processing ( Reiman et al., 1997 ;  Paulus et al., 2003 ), to be specifically activated during risk processing, which was the focus of their analysis. The insula is a critical component of the brain's salience network ( Craig, 2009 ;  Menon and Uddin, 2010 ) and participates in interoceptive awareness, the representation of physiological states associated with risk ( Xue et al., 2010 ), and integration of such states with behavior during risky contexts that are characterized by uncertainty ( Singer et al., 2009 ). These findings suggest that adolescents may be highly sensitive to stimulus salience and to visceral experiences as they anticipate reward-based outcomes. The surging hormones of puberty may further heighten somatosensory awareness. 
 In the current analysis, regions more likely to be activated during outcome versus anticipation included the putamen and amygdala. The amygdala has been long-recognized as a core node within the mesolimbocortical dopamine system ( Berridge, 2004 ) and serves to modulate ventral striatal activity ( Ernst and Fudge, 2009 ). In reward contexts, the nucleus accumbens region of the ventral striatum acts as a motivation-to-behavior interface, facilitating approach behavior by integrating information provided by excitatory inputs from the amygdala as well as other regions ( Spear, 2011 ). The prominence of the amygdala in the processing of reward-based outcomes permits the emotive signals generated by such outcomes to impact future behavior. Similarly, the putamen may contribute to the learning of outcome contingencies and modulates motor responses based on reward outcomes ( Hori et al., 2009 ;  Muranishi et al., 2011 ). 
 Liu et al. (2011)  found a significant likelihood of nucleus accumbens and OFC activation in adults’ processing of reward outcomes versus anticipation. In contrast, the prominence of the insula, amygdala, and putamen in adolescents’ stage-related processing suggests that adolescent behavior is strongly influenced by the salience of anticipated rewards and by amygdala-based valuation of outcomes. 
 
 
 Processing Valence of Reward 
 Task-related activation to positive valence stimuli and outcomes revealed a network similar to the broad one outlined above for the overall ALE, consistent with  Liu et al. (2011) . Positive valence is associated with a strong likelihood of activation in the ventral and dorsal striatum, insula, OFC, and PCC. Though there are fewer studies included in the current ALE that assessed responses to negative stimuli (and, accordingly, findings should be interpreted with caution), findings converge on regions including the putamen, precuneous, thalamus, precentral gyrus, and anterior insula. Relative to negative valence, positive valence yields more consistent processing in the PCC, accumbens, and lateral occipital cortex, suggesting a link between the limbic-motor interface that allows approach to incentive-based stimuli ( Depue and Collins, 1999 ) and the facilitation of self-referential cognitive activity that is mediated by the PCC ( Johnson et al., 2002 ;  Kelley et al., 2002 ). Although speculative, the findings for positive versus negative processing and anticipation relative to outcome-based processing suggest that in adolescence, incentive-seeking behavior is dominated by regions that contribute to self-referential visceral (e.g., insula) and cognitive (PCC) experience. 
 Among the studies that have studied loss events in adolescents, a number have found reduced responses in the amygdala, OFC, and ACC ( Ernst et al., 2005 ;  Bjork et al., 2010 ;  Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010a ). It has been hypothesized that blunted responses during threat/loss events could partially explain adolescent risk-taking, as this might indicate that the negative consequences of risks are not given appropriate weight relative to positive gain events ( Luciana, 2013 ). We did not find differential likelihood of amygdala activation during the processing of valenced stimuli. Indeed, neither the current analysis nor the one by  Liu et al. (2011)  found any regions that showed stronger activation likelihoods in the processing of negative relative to positive contexts. The relative dearth of studies on loss conditions, as evidenced by this meta-analysis, suggests that more work in this area is needed, in order to assess whether inattention to such cues impacts decision-making in risk contexts. 
 
 
 Comparing Adolescent and Adult Reward Processing 
 A major finding of the current analysis is that adolescents and adults varied in activations during reward processing as supported by descriptive comparisons between our overall ALE and findings reported by  Liu et al. (2011)  as well as our contrast analysis. In our contrast analysis (using the coordinates for adult processing provided by  Liu et al. (2011) ), adolescents exhibited increased likelihood for activation in a large region that encompassed portions of the ventral and dorsal striatum, subcallosal cortex, insula, orbitofrontal region, and amygdala as well as the ACC, PCC, and paracingulate region. Although there were no regions where adults showed a greater activation likelihood relative to adolescents, the patterning of our findings is notable given the predominance of limbic and striatal regions and the relative absence of higher cortical regions with the exception of the lateral occipital cortex, which plays a crucial role in stimulus recognition ( Grill-Spector et al., 2001 ). 
 Recent models of adolescent brain development predict peak levels of activation in the striatal-limbic system, particularly in the pursuit or receipt of positive incentives, and lower-than-adult levels of frontal control as indexed by activation differences in the lateral prefrontal and parietal cortices in adolescents relative to both children and adults ( Casey et al., 2008 ;  Steinberg, 2010 ;  Luciana et al., 2012 ). Peaks in dopamine activity during adolescence and subsequent declines into adulthood may underlie adolescents’ sensitivity to positive reward contexts ( Wahlstrom et al., 2010a ) given that midbrain dopamine projections to the limbic, striatal and frontal regions facilitate incentive motivation ( Depue and Collins, 1999 ; Björklund and Dunnett, 2007;  Haber, 2003 ). We have suggested that adolescents may experience a biologically-based readiness to respond when sources of reward are present or anticipated. This readiness may be evolutionarily adaptive in guiding behavior toward future goals, but may also place adolescents at risk of poor decision-making in motivationally salient contexts ( Luciana et al., 2012 ). 
 This model is supported by evidence of relatively increased activation likelihoods in adolescents relative to adults centered within the nucleus accumbens region of the ventral striatum (part of the first cluster represented in  Table 5 ) given its prominence in the facilitation of incentive-guided behavior. Other regions that showed strong likelihoods of activations in adolescents relative to adults include the insula, amygdala, putamen, and anterior cingulate cortex. These regions are interconnected with the ventral striatum and form core components of the brain's incentive salience system ( Menon and Uddin, 2010 ). 
 Highly processed cortical sensory inputs reach the ventral striatum through unidirectional projections from the insula as well as from the orbitofrontal cortex ( Haber, 2003 ). The insula serves as a sensory convergence region, and there are strong connections between the insula and OFC. Thus, information processed by the insula, i.e., somatovegetative and autonomic signals ( Paulus and Stein, 2006 ;  Craig, 2009 ), is transferred to and used by the VS to code stimulus value and structure behavioral responses. The stronger likelihood of insular activation by adolescents relative to adults parallels findings from a recent study of striatal intrinsic functional connectivity in which it was demonstrated that the ventral striatum and insula are more tightly interconnected in adolescents than in adults ( Porter et al., 2015 ). These findings suggest that in adolescents, incentive-related behavior may be more strongly bound to stimulus salience or to the physical arousal generated by the stimulus context. In the same study ( Porter et al., 2015 ), the ventral striatum was more strongly interconnected to the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents versus adults. The anterior cingulate, frequently co-activated with the anterior insula ( Menon and Uddin, 2010 ) may play a role in integrating emotion and motivational signals pertaining to contextual salience with executive control systems ( Pessoa, 2009 ) so that adaptive behavioral responses can be formulated and executed. Importantly, the ACC is rich in dopamine receptors and recognized as a core node within the incentive motivational system ( Depue and Collins, 1999 ;  Haber, 2003 ;  Berridge, 2004 ), suggesting the possibility of a neurochemical basis for the aggregation of regions that showed stronger activation likelihoods in adolescents relative to adults. Importantly, these regions collectively code hedonic drive (nucleus accumbens, OFC, amygdala), outcome-based behavioral flexibility and learning (putamen; paracingulate), and incentive salience (insula, amygdala, ACC). 
 Findings from discrete studies have suggested relative peaks in limbic and striatal activation in adolescents during reward processing and reward-based learning (c.f.,  Galvan et al., 2006 ;  Cohen et al., 2010 ) but these findings are not definitive. The current meta-analysis brings a powerful tool to the examination of this issue by consolidating findings across a broad range of paradigms and samples. Findings suggest that in adolescents, reward-based behavior is strongly driven by incentive salience and concordant activation within what has been termed the salience network. 
 
 
 Future Directions 
 In recent years, there has been a growing emphasis on the importance of not only understanding the ways that brain regions activate in response to stimuli, but also how brain regions functionally connect to one another over time ( Menon, 2013 ). Using methods for measuring functional connectivity, studies have added to our understanding of adolescent reward processing as it relates to risk-related behavior. One study of adolescents found that increased NAcc connectivity to the ACC and mPFC during the monetary incentive delay task correlated with a measure of drug use ( Bjork et al., 2011 ). Another study found that the connection between the VS and the ventromedial PFC changed from adolescence into adulthood; this change correlated with a decrease in preference for immediate, smaller rewards in favor of larger, delayed rewards. That study also found that insula-vmPFC connectivity interacted with age predicting the steepness of delayed discounting ( Christakou et al., 2011 ). We believe that one promising future direction of inquiry will be to incorporate the findings from the current meta-analysis of activation studies in guiding future studies examining the dynamic connections between brain regions during reward processing. 
 
 
 Limitations 
 This analysis is not without limitations, many of which stem from the current status of research in this area. A number of studies could not be included in this ALE given our inclusion criteria. Consistent with other ALEs, studies were excluded when they failed to report activation coordinates in whole brain analyses for adolescents separately from adults or other populations (e.g.,  Finger et al., 2011 ;  Galvan et al., 2007 ;  Hauser et al., 2014 ). Similarly, studies that reported only regions of interest (ROIs) based on  a priori  hypotheses were excluded (e.g.,  Galvan et al., 2006 ;  Eshel et al., 2007 ;  Shad et al., 2011 ). This is because ROI analyses limit detection of non-hypothesized findings, which in the context of ALE analysis would overly weigh regions with specific functional hypotheses. We acknowledge that there are many reasons one might use an ROI approach ( Poldrack, 2007 ) despite the inability of such studies to contribute to analyses such as ours. Future studies employing an  a priori  ROI approach might report  post-hoc  findings from whole brain analyses as well, in order to facilitate inclusion in similar meta-analytic reports. Additionally, we excluded studies that only reported continuous correlations with age, as it was not possible to identify activation specific to adolescents ( Christakou et al., 2011 ). Even after excluding a number of relevant studies, our sample (30 discrete samples from 26 studies) remains comparable in size, or larger, than other recent ALEs of task related brain activation. 
 Many studies included relatively small sample sizes potentially limiting the ability to observe true effects ( Button et al., 2013 ). While the field of fMRI research is moving toward larger samples, small sample sizes can impact meta-analytic findings due to the skewed nature of the sample of studies included ( Pereira and Ioannidis, 2011 ). An additional challenge for ALE is that it is common for multiple studies to report results using the same or overlapping samples. There is currently no accepted means of correcting for overlapping samples using ALE. In the current study, findings were based on studies without known overlap in participants. 
 Another possible limitation was the wide age range across studies. Some included studies narrowly limited adolescence to a range of 14-15 years of age (Van Leijenhorst et al., 2010); others included participants as young as 9-12 years ( Ernst et al., 2005 ). The most typical demographic information provided in the included studies was average age of participants and the standard deviation. As a result, in the current meta-analysis it was not possible to further characterize the sample beyond those characteristics or to determine whether certain discrete ages were more strongly represented. Our purpose was not to definitively establish the age range of adolescence, but rather to broadly characterize neural correlates of reward processing across this developmental period. Nonetheless, the proportion of participants below age 12 was relatively small in comparison to the full sample (and only 3 participants were below age 9). Running the analyses with and without studies that included individuals under age 12 revealed negligible differences in regions activated or regions found in the adolescent versus adults contrast. Inclusion of younger subjects is supported by hormonal evidence that puberty begins at an early age ( Dorn et al., 2006 ;  Forbes and Dahl, 2010 ). Unfortunately, pubertal influences could not be measured in this study. Additionally, sex differences that might impact brain development ( Giedd et al., 1996 ) could not be examined given lack of reporting across studies. 
 Future meta-analyses on this topic would benefit from including studies of reward related brain activation in children, in addition to adolescents and adults. Such a study would help clarify the trajectory of reward related brain activation across development and could shed light on whether there is a peak in VS activation during the adolescent period relative to both childhood and adulthood. To date, though, an insufficient number of studies examining reward processing in children separately exist to conduct such an analysis. 
 Finally, there was wide variability in tasks. A recent review of reward tasks in adolescents identified sub-types of fMRI reward paradigms (i.e. passive reward tasks, instrumental-reward tasks, decision making tasks) and found neural differences related to specific features from each sub-type ( Richards et al., 2013 ). The benefit of the ALE method is that it elucidates commonalities across diverse paradigms. This feature could also be perceived as a limitation given that activation likelihoods might vary depending on factors such as the nature of reward feedback, the baseline condition used for the reported contrast, or for different magnitudes of valence (e.g, large, medium, and small gains or losses). The studies included in this analysis predominantly included paradigms in which participants could receive differential feedback during the outcome phase of various tasks. Furthermore, in the current analysis studies were collapsed into stage and valence sub-lists despite often utilizing different baseline conditions and rewards of different magnitudes. As the field advances, future ALE analyses of reward processing may have the power to meta-analytically examine such distinctions. In addition, there was insufficient power to assess interactions between stage of processing and valence (e.g., to detect interaction effect sizes of d =.20, the current study would be underpowered at .359). Examination of such interactions would be useful in testing whether adolescents display particularly heightened responsivity to positive incentives during the anticipation phase as has been proposed ( Luciana et al., 2012 ). 
 Moreover, additional research on factors such as pubertal status, developmental stage (i.e. early, middle, and, late adolescence), and sex, will further elucidate how activity in these regions changes with development. Dissociating different features of the various reward paradigms, in addition to more studies of negative valence, will further clarify how these age-related neural changes impact behavior -- particularly risk-taking tendencies that can be ascribed to over-activity in reward processing networks. Notably, previous studies on adolescent reward processing have relied on studies of adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ) for guiding hypothesis testing and ROI analyses (e.g.,  Lorenz et al., 2014 ). Given the differences found here between adolescent and adult reward processing, this and similar meta-analyses of adolescent reward processing can guide hypothesis testing for future studies focusing on adolescents. 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 MHS was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. ML's work on the project was supported by AA020033 from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. We would like to thank Xun Liu and colleagues for their generosity in sharing the coordinates used in their 2011 ALE on adult reward processing. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 Conflict of Interest:  None 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 
 
 Appendix A. List of articles included in the current ALE meta-analysis 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Incentive-elicited striatal activation in adolescent children of alcoholics. 
 Addiction 
 2008 
 103 
 1308 
 1319 
 18851716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Adolescents, adults and rewards: comparing motivational neurocircuitry recruitment using fMRI. 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 e11440 
 20625430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christakou 
 A 
 
 
 Gershman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Neural and psychological maturation of decision-making in adolescence and young adulthood. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013 
 25 
 1807 
 1823 
 23859647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JR 
 
 
 Asarnow 
 RF 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 A unique adolescent response to reward prediction errors. 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2010 
 13 
 669 
 671 
 20473290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crowley 
 TJ 
 
 
 Dalwani 
 MS 
 
 
 Mikulich-Gilbertson 
 SK 
 
 
 Du 
 YP 
 
 
 Lejuez 
 CW 
 
 
 Raymond 
 KM 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Risky decisions and their consequences: neural processing by boys with Antisocial Substance Disorder. 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 e12835 
 20877644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cservenka 
 A 
 
 
 Nagel 
 BJ 
 
 
 Risky decision-making: an FMRI study of youth at high risk for alcoholism. 
 Alcohol Clin Exp Res 
 2012 
 36 
 604 
 615 
 22250647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado-Rico 
 E 
 
 
 Soriano-Mas 
 C 
 
 
 Verdejo-Román 
 J 
 
 
 Río-Valle 
 JS 
 
 
 Verdejo-García 
 A 
 
 
 Decreased insular and increased midbrain activations during decision-making under risk in adolescents with excess weight. 
 Obesity 
 2013 
 21 
 1662 
 1668 
 23723089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Jazbec 
 S 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Blair 
 J 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Amygdala and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and omission of gains in adults and adolescents. 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 1279 
 1291 
 15850746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galván 
 A 
 
 
 McGlennen 
 KM 
 
 
 Enhanced striatal sensitivity to aversive reinforcement in adolescents versus adults. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013 
 25 
 284 
 296 
 23163417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Moyles 
 DL 
 
 
 Tarr 
 JA 
 
 
 Sciarrillo 
 SR 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Healthy adolescents’ neural response to reward: associations with puberty, positive affect, and depressive symptoms. 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 2010 
 49 
 162 
 172 
 20215938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jarcho 
 JM 
 
 
 Benson 
 BE 
 
 
 Plate 
 RC 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 Detloff 
 AM 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Developmental effects of decision-making on sensitivity to reward: an fMRI study. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2012 
 2 
 437 
 447 
 22591860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 
 JC 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging of reward-related brain circuitry in children and adolescence. 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2004 
 55 
 359 
 366 
 14960288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Overgaauw 
 S 
 
 
 Güroğlu 
 B 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Testosterone levels correspond with increased ventral striatum activation in response to monetary rewards in adolescents. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 1 
 506 
 516 
 22436568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paloyelis 
 Y 
 
 
 Mehta 
 MA 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Asherson 
 P 
 
 
 Kuntsi 
 J 
 
 
 Striatal sensitivity during reward processing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 2012 
 51 
 722 
 732 
 e9 
 22721595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulsen 
 DJ 
 
 
 Carter 
 RM 
 
 
 Platt 
 ML 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 Brannon 
 EM 
 
 
 Neurocognitive development of risk aversion from early childhood to adulthood. 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 2011 
 5 
 178 
 22291627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ripke 
 S 
 
 
 Hübner 
 T 
 
 
 Mennigen 
 E 
 
 
 Müller 
 KU 
 
 
 Rodehacke 
 S 
 
 
 Schmidt 
 D 
 
 
 Jacob 
 MJ 
 
 
 Smolka 
 MN 
 
 
 Reward processing and intertemporal decision making in adults and adolescents: the role of impulsivity and decision consistency. 
 Brain Res 
 2012 
 1478 
 36 
 47 
 22940231 
 
 
 
 
 
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
 
 Results from the 2010 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Mental Health Findings 
 2012 
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
 Rockville, MD 
 NSDUH Series H-42, HHS Publication No (SMA) 11-4667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Ventral striatal hyporesponsiveness during reward anticipation in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2007 
 61 
 720 
 724 
 16950228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlund 
 MW 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Silk 
 JS 
 
 
 Cataldo 
 MF 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Nothing to fear? Neural systems supporting avoidance behavior in healthy youths. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 52 
 710 
 719 
 20430103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scott-Van Zeeland 
 AA 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Ghahremani 
 DG 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Reward processing in autism. 
 Autism Res 
 2010 
 3 
 53 
 67 
 20437601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Meaningful family relationships: neurocognitive buffers of adolescent risk taking. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013b 
 25 
 374 
 387 
 23163412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Duijvenvoorde 
 ACK 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Overgaauw 
 S 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 A cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis of reward-related brain activation: effects of age, pubertal stage, and reward sensitivity. 
 Brain Cogn 
 2014 
 89 
 3 
 14 
 24512819 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Neural correlates of developmental differences in risk estimation and feedback processing. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2006 
 44 
 2158 
 2170 
 16574168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 PM 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Adolescent risky decision-making: neurocognitive development of reward and control regions. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010a 
 51 
 345 
 355 
 20188198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Zanolie 
 K 
 
 
 Van Meel 
 CS 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 PM 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 What motivates the adolescent? Brain regions mediating reward sensitivity across adolescence. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010b 
 20 
 61 
 69 
 19406906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Verdejo-García 
 A 
 
 
 Verdejo-Román 
 J 
 
 
 Rio-Valle 
 JS 
 
 
 Lacomba 
 JA 
 
 
 Lagos 
 FM 
 
 
 Soriano-Mas 
 C 
 
 
 Dysfunctional involvement of emotion and reward brain regions on social decision making in excess weight adolescents. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2015 
 36 
 226 
 237 
 25168709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yaxley 
 RH 
 
 
 Van Voorhees 
 EE 
 
 
 Bergman 
 S 
 
 
 Hooper 
 SR 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 De Bellis 
 MD 
 
 
 Behavioral risk elicits selective activation of the executive system in adolescents: clinical implications. 
 Front psychiatry 
 2011 
 2 
 68 
 22194728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Albrecht 
 J 
 
 
 Kopietz 
 R 
 
 
 Frasnelli 
 J 
 
 
 Wiesmann 
 M 
 
 
 Lundström 
 JN 
 
 
 The neuronal correlates of intranasal trigeminal function – An ALE meta-analysis of human functional brain imaging data. 
 Brain Res Rev 
 2010 
 62 
 183 
 196 
 19913573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bartra 
 O 
 
 
 McGuire 
 JT 
 
 
 Kable 
 JW 
 
 
 The valuation system: A coordinate-based meta-analysis of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural correlates of subjective value. 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 76 
 412 
 427 
 23507394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Deluca 
 M 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Investigations using independent component connectivity analysis. 
 Philos Trans R Soc 
 2005 
 360 
 1001 
 1013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Belyk 
 M 
 
 
 Brown 
 S 
 
 
 Perception of affective and linguistic prosody: an ALE meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2014 
 9 
 1395 
 1403 
 23934416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 Motivation concepts in behavioral neuroscience. 
 Physiol Behav 
 2004 
 81 
 179 
 209 
 15159167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 “Liking” and “wanting” food rewards: Brain substrates and roles in eating disorders. 
 Physiol Behav 
 2009 
 97 
 537 
 550 
 19336238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 Kringelbach 
 ML 
 
 
 Neuroscience of affect: Brain mechanisms of pleasure and displeasure. 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2013 
 23 
 294 
 303 
 23375169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 Robinson 
 TE 
 
 
 What is the role of dopamine in reward: Hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience? 
 Brain Res Rev 
 1998 
 28 
 309 
 369 
 9858756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 GW 
 
 
 Caggiano 
 DM 
 
 
 Bennett 
 SM 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Incentive-elicited brain activation in adolescents: similarities and differences from young adults. 
 J Neurosci 
 2004 
 24 
 1793 
 1802 
 14985419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Incentive-elicited striatal activation in adolescent children of alcoholics. 
 Addiction 
 2008 
 103 
 1308 
 1319 
 18851716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Lynne-Landsman 
 SD 
 
 
 Sirocco 
 K 
 
 
 Boyce 
 CA 
 
 
 Brain Maturation and Risky Behavior: The Promise and the Challenges of Neuroimaging-Based Accounts. 
 Child Dev Perspect 
 2012 
 6 
 385 
 391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Adolescents, adults and rewards: comparing motivational neurocircuitry recruitment using fMRI. 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 e11440 
 20625430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork 
 JM 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Hommer 
 DW 
 
 
 Psychosocial problems and recruitment of incentive neurocircuitry: Exploring individual differences in healthy adolescents. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 1 
 570 
 577 
 21927631 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 S-J 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Decision-making in the adolescent brain. 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2012 
 15 
 1184 
 1191 
 22929913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Button 
 KS 
 
 
 Ioannidis 
 JPA 
 
 
 Mokrysz 
 C 
 
 
 Nosek 
 BA 
 
 
 Flint 
 J 
 
 
 Robinson 
 ESJ 
 
 
 Munafò 
 MR 
 
 
 Power failure: why small sample size undermines the reliability of neuroscience. 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2013 
 14 
 365 
 376 
 23571845 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Kurth 
 F 
 
 
 Habel 
 U 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 A 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 ALE meta-analysis on facial judgments of trustworthiness and attractiveness. 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2011 
 215 
 209 
 223 
 20978908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Getz 
 S 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 The adolescent brain. 
 Dev Rev 
 2008 
 28 
 62 
 77 
 18688292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 ALE meta-analysis of action observation and imitation in the human brain. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 1148 
 1167 
 20056149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christakou 
 A 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Maturation of limbic corticostriatal activation and connectivity associated with developmental changes in temporal discounting. 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 54 
 1344 
 1354 
 20816974 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christakou 
 A 
 
 
 Gershman 
 SJ 
 
 
 Niv 
 Y 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Rubia 
 K 
 
 
 Neural and Psychological Maturation of Decision-making in Adolescence and Young Adulthood. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013 
 25 
 1807 
 1823 
 23859647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JR 
 
 
 Asarnow 
 RF 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 A unique adolescent response to reward prediction errors. 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2010 
 13 
 669 
 671 
 20473290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cortese 
 S 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Chabernaud 
 C 
 
 
 Proal 
 E 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Towards systems neuroscience of ADHD: A meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies. 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2012 
 169 
 1038 
 1055 
 22983386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craig 
 AB 
 
 
 How do you feel--now? The anterior insula and human awareness. 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2009 
 10 
 59 
 70 
 19096369 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crowley 
 TJ 
 
 
 Dalwani 
 MS 
 
 
 Mikulich-Gilbertson 
 SK 
 
 
 Du 
 YP 
 
 
 Lejuez 
 CW 
 
 
 Raymond 
 KM 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Risky decisions and their consequences: neural processing by boys with Antisocial Substance Disorder. 
 PLoS One 
 2010 
 5 
 e12835 
 20877644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Depue 
 RA 
 
 
 Collins 
 PF 
 
 
 Neurobiology of the structure of personality: Dopamine, facilitation of incentive motivation, and extraversion. 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 1999 
 22 
 491 
 569 
 11301519 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doremus 
 TL 
 
 
 Brunell 
 SC 
 
 
 Rajendran 
 P 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 Factors Influencing Elevated Ethanol Consumption in Adolescent Relative to Adult Rats. 
 Alcohol Clin Exp Res 
 2005 
 29 
 1796 
 1808 
 16269909 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dorn 
 LD 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Woodward 
 HR 
 
 
 Biro 
 F 
 
 
 Defining the Boundaries of Early Adolescence: A User's Guide to Assessing Pubertal Status and Pubertal Timing in Research With Adolescents. 
 Appl Dev Sci 
 2006 
 10 
 30 
 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eaton 
 DK 
 
 
 Kann 
 L 
 
 
 Kinchen 
 S 
 
 
 Shanklin 
 S 
 
 
 Flint 
 KH 
 
 
 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance — United States, 2011 
 2012 
 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Kurth 
 F 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis revisited. 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 2349 
 2361 
 21963913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Wang 
 LE 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: a random-effects approach based on empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2009 
 30 
 2907 
 2926 
 19172646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Fudge 
 JL 
 
 
 A developmental neurobiological model of motivated behavior: Anatomy, connectivity and ontogeny of the triadic nodes. 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2009 
 33 
 367 
 382 
 19028521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Jazbec 
 S 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Blair 
 J 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Amygdala and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and omission of gains in adults and adolescents. 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 25 
 1279 
 1291 
 15850746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Hardin 
 M 
 
 
 Triadic model of the neurobiology of motivated behavior in adolescence. 
 Psychol Med 
 2006 
 36 
 299 
 312 
 16472412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eshel 
 N 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Blair 
 J 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Neural substrates of choice selection in adults and adolescents: Development of the ventrolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 1270 
 1279 
 17118409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NU 
 
 
 Church 
 JA 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AL 
 
 
 Brahmbhatt 
 S 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Development of distinct control networks through segregation and integration. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2007 
 104 
 13507 
 13512 
 17679691 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Finger 
 EC 
 
 
 Marsh 
 AA 
 
 
 Blair 
 KS 
 
 
 Reid 
 ME 
 
 
 Sims 
 C 
 
 
 Ng 
 P 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Blair 
 RJR 
 
 
 Disrupted reinforcement signaling in orbital frontal cortex and caudate in youths with conduct disorder/oppositional defiant disorder and high psychopathic traits. 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 2011 
 168 
 152 
 162 
 21078707 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Pubertal development and behavior: hormonal activation of social and motivational tendencies. 
 Brain Cogn 
 2010 
 72 
 66 
 72 
 19942334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Phillips 
 ML 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 Worthman 
 CM 
 
 
 Moyles 
 DL 
 
 
 Tarr 
 JA 
 
 
 Sciarrillo 
 SR 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Healthy adolescents’ neural response to reward: associations with puberty, positive affect, and depressive symptoms. 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 2010 
 49 
 162 
 172 
 20215938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Adolescent development of the reward system. 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 2010 
 4 
 6 
 20179786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Parra 
 CE 
 
 
 Penn 
 J 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Earlier development of the accumbens relative to orbitofrontal cortex might underlie risk-taking behavior in adolescents. 
 J Neurosci 
 2006 
 26 
 6885 
 6892 
 16793895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Risk-taking and the adolescent brain: who is at risk? 
 Dev Sci 
 2007 
 10 
 F8 
 F14 
 17286837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 McGlennen 
 KM 
 
 
 Enhanced striatal sensitivity to aversive reinforcement in adolescents versus adults. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013 
 25 
 284 
 296 
 23163417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geier 
 CF 
 
 
 Terwilliger 
 R 
 
 
 Teslovich 
 T 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Immaturities in reward processing and its influence on inhibitory control in adolescence. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 1613 
 1629 
 19875675 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Vaituzis a 
 C 
 
 
 Hamburger 
 SD 
 
 
 Lange 
 N 
 
 
 Rajapakse 
 JC 
 
 
 Kaysen 
 D 
 
 
 Vauss 
 YC 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 Quantitative MRI of the temporal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus in normal human development: ages 4-18 years. 
 J Comp Neurol 
 1996 
 366 
 223 
 230 
 8698883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goto 
 Y 
 
 
 Grace 
 AA 
 
 
 Dopaminergic modulation of limbic and cortical drive of nucleus accumbens in goal-directed behavior. 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2005 
 8 
 805 
 812 
 15908948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Kourtzi 
 Z 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 The lateral occipital complex and its role in object recognition. 
 Vision Res 
 2001 
 41 
 1409 
 1422 
 11322983 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 The primate basal ganglia: Parallel and integrative networks. 
 J Chem Neuroanat 
 2003 
 26 
 317 
 330 
 14729134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hauser 
 TU 
 
 
 Iannaccone 
 R 
 
 
 Ball 
 J 
 
 
 Mathys 
 C 
 
 
 Brandeis 
 D 
 
 
 Walitza 
 S 
 
 
 Brem 
 S 
 
 
 Role of the medial prefrontal cortex in impaired decision making in juvenile attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
 JAMA psychiatry 
 2014 
 71 
 1165 
 1173 
 25142296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heine 
 L 
 
 
 Soddu 
 A 
 
 
 Gómez 
 F 
 
 
 Vanhaudenhuyse 
 A 
 
 
 Tshibanda 
 L 
 
 
 Thonnard 
 M 
 
 
 Charland-Verville 
 V 
 
 
 Kirsch 
 M 
 
 
 Laureys 
 S 
 
 
 Demertzi 
 A 
 
 
 Resting state networks and consciousness Alterations of multiple resting state network connectivity in physiological, pharmacological, and pathological consciousness states. 
 Front Psychol 
 2012 
 3 
 1 
 12 
 22279440 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hori 
 Y 
 
 
 Minamimoto 
 T 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 Neuronal encoding of reward value and direction of actions in the primate putamen. 
 J Neurophysiol 
 2009 
 102 
 3530 
 3543 
 19812294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ikemoto 
 S 
 
 
 Panksepp 
 J 
 
 
 The role of nucleus accumbens dopamine in motivated behavior: a unifying interpretation with special reference to reward-seeking. 
 Brain Res Rev 
 1999 
 31 
 6 
 41 
 10611493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jarcho 
 JM 
 
 
 Benson 
 BE 
 
 
 Plate 
 RC 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 Detloff 
 AM 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Developmental effects of decision-making on sensitivity to reward: an fMRI study. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2012 
 2 
 437 
 447 
 22591860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 SC 
 
 
 Baxter 
 LC 
 
 
 Wilder 
 LS 
 
 
 Pipe 
 JG 
 
 
 Heiserman 
 JE 
 
 
 Prigatano 
 GP 
 
 
 Neural correlates of self-reflection. 
 Brain 
 2002 
 125 
 1808 
 1814 
 12135971 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelley 
 WM 
 
 
 Macrae 
 CN 
 
 
 Wyland 
 CL 
 
 
 Caglar 
 S 
 
 
 Inati 
 S 
 
 
 Heatherton 
 TF 
 
 
 Finding the Self? An Event-Related fMRI Study. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2002 
 14 
 785 
 794 
 12167262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Fong 
 GW 
 
 
 Adams 
 CM 
 
 
 Varner 
 JL 
 
 
 Hommer 
 D 
 
 
 Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome with event-related fMRI. 
 Neuroreport 
 2001 
 12 
 3683 
 3687 
 11726774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Uecker 
 AM 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 ALE Meta-Analysis : Controlling the False Discovery Rate and Performing Statistical Contrasts. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2005a 
 25 
 155 
 164 
 15846811 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Tordesillas-Gutiérrez 
 D 
 
 
 Martinez 
 M 
 
 
 Salinas 
 F 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Bias between MNI and Talairach coordinates analyzed using the ICBM-152 brain template. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2007 
 28 
 1194 
 1205 
 17266101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leech 
 R 
 
 
 Sharp 
 DJ 
 
 
 The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in cognition and disease. 
 Brain 
 2014 
 137 
 12 
 32 
 23869106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Hairston 
 J 
 
 
 Schrier 
 M 
 
 
 Fan 
 J 
 
 
 Common and distinct networks underlying reward valence and processing stages: a meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2011 
 35 
 1219 
 1236 
 21185861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 X 
 
 
 Powell 
 DK 
 
 
 Wang 
 H 
 
 
 Gold 
 BT 
 
 
 Corbly 
 CR 
 
 
 Joseph 
 JE 
 
 
 Functional dissociation in frontal and striatal areas for processing of positive and negative reward information. 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 4587 
 4597 
 17460071 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lorenz 
 RC 
 
 
 Gleich 
 T 
 
 
 Beck 
 A 
 
 
 Pöhland 
 L 
 
 
 Raufelder 
 D 
 
 
 Sommer 
 W 
 
 
 Rapp 
 M a 
 
 
 Kühn 
 S 
 
 
 Gallinat 
 J 
 
 
 Reward anticipation in the adolescent and aging brain. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2014 
 35 
 5153 
 5165 
 24801222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Adolescent brain development in normality and psychopathology. 
 Dev Psychopathol 
 2013 
 25 
 1325 
 1345 
 24342843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Collins 
 PF 
 
 
 Incentive Motivation, Cognitive Control, and the Adolescent Brain: Is It Time for a Paradigm Shift? 
 Child Dev Perspect 
 2012 
 6 
 392 
 399 
 23543860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Wahlstrom 
 D 
 
 
 Porter 
 JN 
 
 
 Collins 
 PF 
 
 
 Dopaminergic modulation of incentive motivation in adolescence: age-related changes in signaling, individual differences, and implications for the development of self-regulation. 
 Dev Psychol 
 2012 
 48 
 844 
 861 
 22390660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 SM 
 
 
 York 
 MK 
 
 
 Montague 
 PR 
 
 
 The neural substrates of reward processing in humans: the modern role of FMRI. 
 Neuroscientist 
 2004 
 10 
 260 
 268 
 15155064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Developmental pathways to functional brain networks: Emerging principles. 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2013 
 17 
 627 
 640 
 24183779 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function. 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2010 
 214 
 655 
 667 
 20512370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohr 
 PNC 
 
 
 Biele 
 G 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Neural processing of risk. 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 6613 
 6619 
 20463224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muranishi 
 M 
 
 
 Inokawa 
 H 
 
 
 Yamada 
 H 
 
 
 Ueda 
 Y 
 
 
 Matsumoto 
 N 
 
 
 Nakagawa 
 M 
 
 
 Kimura 
 M 
 
 
 Inactivation of the putamen selectively impairs reward history-based action selection. 
 Exp Brain Res 
 2011 
 209 
 235 
 246 
 21298425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Overgaauw 
 S 
 
 
 Güroğlu 
 B 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Testosterone levels correspond with increased ventral striatum activation in response to monetary rewards in adolescents. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 1 
 506 
 516 
 22436568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paloyelis 
 Y 
 
 
 Mehta 
 MA 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Asherson 
 P 
 
 
 Kuntsi 
 J 
 
 
 Striatal sensitivity during reward processing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 2012 
 51 
 722 
 732 
 e9 
 22721595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 Rogalsky 
 C 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Feinstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Stein 
 MB 
 
 
 Increased activation in the right insula during risk-taking decision making is related to harm avoidance and neuroticism. 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 19 
 1439 
 1448 
 12948701 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 Stein 
 MB 
 
 
 An Insular View of Anxiety. 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 2006 
 60 
 383 
 387 
 16780813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pereira 
 TV 
 
 
 Ioannidis 
 JPA 
 
 
 Statistically significant meta-analyses of clinical trials have modest credibility and inflated effects. 
 J Clin Epidemiol 
 2011 
 64 
 1060 
 1069 
 21454050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 How do emotion and motivation direct executive control? 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2009 
 13 
 160 
 166 
 19285913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Region of interest analysis for fMRI. 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2007 
 2 
 67 
 70 
 18985121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Porter 
 JN 
 
 
 Roy 
 AK 
 
 
 Benson 
 B 
 
 
 Carlisi 
 C 
 
 
 Collins 
 PF 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Age-related changes in the intrinsic functional connectivity of the human ventral vs. dorsal striatum from childhood to middle age. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2015 
 11 
 83 
 95 
 25257972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Preuschoff 
 K 
 
 
 Quartz 
 SR 
 
 
 Bossaerts 
 P 
 
 
 Human insula activation reflects risk prediction errors as well as risk. 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 2745 
 2752 
 18337404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 Lane 
 RD 
 
 
 Ahern 
 GL 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 GE 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Yun 
 L-S 
 
 
 Chen 
 K 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical Correlates of Externally and Internally Generated Human Emotion. 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 1997 
 154 
 918 
 925 
 9210741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richards 
 JM 
 
 
 Plate 
 RC 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 A systemic review of fMRI reward paradigms in adolescents versus adults: The impact of task design and implications for understanding neurodevelopment. 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2013 
 37 
 976 
 991 
 23518270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Everitt 
 BJ 
 
 
 Neurobehavioural mechanisms of reward and motivation. 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 1996 
 6 
 228 
 236 
 8725965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robinson 
 TE 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 The neural basis of drug craving: an incentive-sensitization theory of addiction. 
 Brain Res Brain Res Rev 
 1993 
 18 
 247 
 291 
 8401595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlund 
 MW 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Ladouceur 
 CD 
 
 
 Silk 
 JS 
 
 
 Cataldo 
 MF 
 
 
 Forbes 
 EE 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 Ryan 
 ND 
 
 
 Nothing to fear? Neural systems supporting avoidance behavior in healthy youths. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 52 
 710 
 719 
 20430103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schultz 
 W 
 
 
 Multiple reward signals in the brain. 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2000 
 1 
 199 
 207 
 11257908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scott-Van Zeeland 
 AA 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Ghahremani 
 DG 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Reward processing in autism. 
 Autism Res 
 2010 
 3 
 53 
 67 
 20437601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Keller 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 27 
 2349 
 2356 
 17329432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shad 
 MU 
 
 
 Bidesi 
 AP 
 
 
 Chen 
 L-A 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Rao 
 U 
 
 
 Neurobiology of decision-making in depressed adolescents: An fMRI study. 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 2011 
 50 
 612 
 621 
 21621145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sherman 
 LE 
 
 
 Rudie 
 JD 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 McNealy 
 K 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Development of the Default Mode and Central Executive Networks across early adolescence: A longitudinal study. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2014 
 10 
 148 
 159 
 25282602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Preuschoff 
 K 
 
 
 A common role of insula in feelings, empathy and uncertainty. 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2009 
 13 
 334 
 340 
 19643659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 Rewards, aversions and affect in adolescence: Emerging convergences across laboratory animal and human data. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 1 
 390 
 403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 A dual systems model of adolescent risk-taking. 
 Dev Psychobiol 
 2010 
 52 
 216 
 224 
 20213754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sturman 
 DA 
 
 
 Moghaddam 
 B 
 
 
 Striatum processes reward differently in adolescents versus adults. 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2012 
 109 
 1719 
 1724 
 22307637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Meaningful family relationships: neurocognitive buffers of adolescent risk taking. 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2013a 
 25 
 374 
 387 
 23163412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Ventral striatum activation to prosocial rewards predicts longitudinal declines in adolescent risk taking. 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 2013b 
 3 
 45 
 52 
 23245219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 M 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Minimizing within-experiment and within-group effects in Activation Likelihood Estimation meta-analyses. 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2012 
 33 
 1 
 13 
 21305667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Gunther Moor 
 B 
 
 
 Op de Macks 
 ZA 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 PM 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Adolescent risky decision-making: neurocognitive development of reward and control regions. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010a 
 51 
 345 
 355 
 20188198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst 
 L 
 
 
 Zanolie 
 K 
 
 
 Van Meel 
 CS 
 
 
 Westenberg 
 PM 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SA 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 What motivates the adolescent? Brain regions mediating reward sensitivity across adolescence. 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2010b 
 20 
 61 
 69 
 19406906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wahlstrom 
 D 
 
 
 Collins 
 P 
 
 
 White 
 T 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Developmental Changes in Dopamine Neurotransmission in Adolescence: Behavioral Implications and Issues in Assessment. 
 Brain Cogn 
 2010a 
 72 
 146 
 159 
 19944514 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wahlstrom 
 D 
 
 
 White 
 T 
 
 
 Luciana 
 M 
 
 
 Neurobehavioral evidence for changes in dopamine system activity during adolescence. 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2010b 
 34 
 631 
 648 
 20026110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilmouth 
 CE 
 
 
 Spear 
 LP 
 
 
 Hedonic sensitivity in adolescent and adult rats: Taste reactivity and voluntary sucrose consumption. 
 Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
 2009 
 92 
 566 
 573 
 19264093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Lu 
 Z 
 
 
 Levin 
 IP 
 
 
 Bechara 
 A 
 
 
 The impact of prior risk experiences on subsequent risky decision-making: The role of the insula. 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 709 
 716 
 20045470 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Brain regions showing likelihood of brain activation in the overall adolescent ALE (top panel), stage analyses (second and third panels) and valence analyses (fourth and fifth panels). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Brain areas with differential activation likelihoods between valence and stage analyses. For anticipation>outcome one significant cluster was found including regions of the left insula and frontal operculum cortex. Cluster locations for outcome>anticipation included the left amygdala and putamen. Cluster locations for positive>negative included the right posterior cingulate gyrus, NAcc, subcallosal cortex, and lateral occipital cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Brain areas showing increased likelihood for activation in adolescents relative to adults. Cluster locations include subcortical regions such as the ventral and dorsal striatum and the amygdala as well as the anterior and posterior cingulate cortex, the orbital frontal cortex, and the lateral occipital cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Adolescent Reward Processing Studies 
 
 
 
 
 Study 
 fMRI Task 
 No. of Participants 
 Age range (mean) 
 No. of Reward foci 
 Aspect of Reward 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Reward 
 Anticipation 
 Outcome 
 Positive 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bjork et al. (2008) 
 
 MID 
 13 
 12-16 (13.8) 
 22 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Bjork et al. (2010) 
 
 MID 
 24 
 12-17 (14.8) 
 33 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Cohen et al. (2010) 
 
 Probabilistic Learning 
 16 
 14-19 (15.8) 
 5 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Christakou et al. (2011) 
 
 Temporal Discounting 
 18 
 11.9-18 (15.3) 
 6 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crowley et al. (2010) 
 
 Colorado Balloon Game 
 20 
 14-18 (16.5) 
 59 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 Cservenka et al. (2012) 
 Wheel of Fortune 
 13 
 13-15 (14.24) 
 10 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado-Rico et al. (2013) 
 
 Risky-Gains 
 16 
 12-17 (13.88) 
 7 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Ernst et al. (2005) 
 
 Wheel of Fortune 
 16 
 9-17 (13.3) 
 21 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Forbes et al. (2010) 
 
 Guessing with Monetary Rewards 
 26 
 11-13 (11.42) 
 30 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Forbes et al. (2010) 
 
 Guessing with Monetary Rewards 
 51 
 11-13 (12.20) 
 26 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Galvan et al. (2013) 
 Probabilistic Liguid Delivery 
 15 
 13-17 (15.33) 
 12 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Jarcho et al. (2012) 
 
 Reward Processing 
 26 
 8.75-17.17 (14.05) 
 81 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 May et al. (2004) 
 
 Guessing Game 
 12 
 9-16 (13.25) 
 32 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Macks et al. (2011) 
 
 Jackpot Gambling 
 17 
 10-16 (13.5) 
 13 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Macks et al. (2011) 
 
 Jackpot Gambling 
 33 
 10-16 (12.9) 
 27 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Paloyelis et a. (2012) 
 
 Motivated Incidental Learning 
 30 
 (15.42) 
 30 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 Paulsen et al. (2012) 
 Risky Decision-Making 
 17 
 14.2-15.9 (14.8) 
 24 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Ripke et al. (2012) 
 
 Intertemporal Choice 
 195 
 13.7-15.5 (14.6) 
 41 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Scheres et al. (2007) 
 
 MID 
 11 
 12-17 (13.9) 
 19 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Schlund et al. (2010) 
 
 Approach-Avoidance 
 15 
 9-13 (11.1) 
 34 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Scott-Van Zeeland (2010) 
 
 Rewarded Implicit Learning 
 16 
 8-15 (12.3) 
 67 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Telzer et al. (2013a) 
 
 Family Assistance 
 48 
 14-16.5 (15.23) 
 19 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 van Duijvenvoorde et al. (2014) 
 
 Jackpot Gambling 
 31 
 10-16 (13.1); 12-19 (15.3) 
 9 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst et al. (2006) 
 
 Cake Gambling 
 12 
 9-12 (11.3) 
 18 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst et al. (2010) 
 Cake Gambling 
 15 
 12-14 (13.4) 
 23 
 x 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst et al. (2010) 
 Cake Gambling 
 15 
 16-17 (17.1) 
 34 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst et al. (2010b) 
 
 Slot Maching 
 16 
 10-12 (11.6) 
 20 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Van Leijenhorst et al. (2010b) 
 
 Slot Maching 
 16 
 14-15 (15.0) 
 35 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 Verdejo-Garcia et al. (2014) 
 Ultimatum Game 
 44 
 12-18(15.32) 
 28 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 Yaxley et al. (2011) 
 
 Decision-Reward Uncertainty 
 31 
 12.3-17.7 (15.5) 
 63 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 
 Studies are listed that were included in the ALE, as described in the text. The age ranges of participants are in years.  van Duijenvoorde et al. (2014)  employed a longitudinal model in their study; therefore the age range and mean age refer to the ages at time 1 and time 2. “All reward” refers to significant foci collapsed across all domains of a task. Anticipation was defined by any task component when participants deliberated options or waited for outcomes prior to their delivery. Outcome was defined by any task component when participants received feedback about gains or losses. Positive valence refers to when participants won something (such as money, points, encouragement, etc.), received the greater of two gains, or avoided loss. Negative valence refers to when participants lost something, did not win something, won the smaller of two amounts, or received discouraging feedback or images. 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Brain regions commonly activated across adolescent reward processing studies 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Extrema Value 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm^3) 
 Cluster Number 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate 
 L 
 0.082 
 −12 
 8 
 −4 
 9360 
 1 
 
 
 Frontal Operculum Cortex 
 L 
 0.044 
 −34 
 18 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 L 
 0.030 
 −38 
 18 
 −8 
 
 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 L 
 0.028 
 −30 
 16 
 −8 
 
 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 L 
 0.021 
 −18 
 −4 
 −20 
 
 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 R 
 0.068 
 12 
 14 
 −6 
 5544 
 2 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 0.042 
 38 
 20 
 0 
 2328 
 3 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.037 
 0 
 −28 
 30 
 2136 
 4 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 0.035 
 32 
 −60 
 46 
 792 
 5 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 0.028 
 30 
 −68 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.034 
 −4 
 18 
 42 
 552 
 6 
 
 
 Occipital Pole 
 L 
 0.029 
 −26 
 −92 
 2 
 504 
 7 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.025 
 −2 
 34 
 30 
 424 
 8 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 0.025 
 4 
 30 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brain regions are derived from the probabilistic Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical atlases and are reported based on the location of the peak values of significant clusters. The coordinates of the maximum ALE value are expressed in MNI space. 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Brain regions activated by stage (anticipation, outcome) and valence (positive, negative) of reward processing 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Hemisphere 
 ExtremaValue 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm^3) 
 Cluster Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anticipation 
 
 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 L 
 0.038 
 −12 
 8 
 −6 
 2152 
 1 
 
 
 Caudate 
 R 
 0.029 
 10 
 12 
 −2 
 1528 
 2 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 0.028 
 38 
 20 
 2 
 1448 
 3 
 
 
 Frontal Operculum Cortex 
 L 
 0.041 
 −34 
 18 
 6 
 1168 
 4 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Cortex 
 L 
 0.022 
 −2 
 2 
 54 
 512 
 5 
 
 
 
 Outcome 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate 
 L 
 0.046 
 −12 
 10 
 −4 
 7240 
 1 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 0.039 
 −22 
 10 
 −4 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate 
 L 
 0.030 
 −14 
 14 
 12 
 
 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 R 
 0.042 
 10 
 14 
 −6 
 3424 
 2 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.026 
 0 
 −34 
 32 
 1616 
 3 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 L 
 0.024 
 −40 
 18 
 −8 
 544 
 4 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 0.021 
 40 
 14 
 −6 
 496 
 5 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.021 
 −2 
 36 
 28 
 408 
 6 
 
 
 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate 
 L 
 0.065 
 −12 
 10 
 −4 
 6912 
 1 
 
 
 Caudate 
 L 
 0.023 
 −14 
 14 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 R 
 0.058 
 10 
 14 
 −6 
 4376 
 2 
 
 
 Putamen 
 R 
 0.021 
 28 
 4 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.033 
 0 
 −32 
 30 
 2304 
 3 
 
 
 Frontal Operculum Cortex 
 L 
 0.044 
 −34 
 18 
 6 
 1248 
 4 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 0.026 
 38 
 20 
 2 
 936 
 5 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 0.033 
 32 
 −60 
 46 
 896 
 6 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 0.028 
 30 
 −68 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 0.027 
 −4 
 18 
 44 
 400 
 7 
 
 
 Occipital Pole 
 L 
 0.027 
 −26 
 −92 
 0 
 368 
 8 
 
 
 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 0.020 
 −14 
 8 
 −8 
 680 
 1 
 
 
 Thalamus 
 R 
 0.016 
 14 
 −22 
 0 
 608 
 2 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Cortex 
 R 
 0.017 
 4 
 6 
 46 
 464 
 3 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 0.016 
 40 
 12 
 −6 
 424 
 4 
 
 
 Precuneous Cortex 
 L 
 0.016 
 −8 
 −60 
 18 
 368 
 5 
 
 
 Brain Stem 
 L 
 0.015 
 −2 
 −18 
 −8 
 352 
 6 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 R 
 0.016 
 44 
 −12 
 54 
 312 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 Brain regions are derived from the probabilistic Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical atlases and are reported based on the location of the peak values of significant clusters. The coordinates of the maximum ALE value are expressed in MNI space. 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Brain regions differentially activated by stage and valence 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Extrema Value 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm^3) 
 Cluster Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anticipation>Outcome 
 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 L 
 3.036 
 −34.3 
 15.3 
 7.9 
 784 
 1 
 
 
 Frontal Operculum Cortex 
 L 
 2.848 
 −34 
 20 
 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outcome>Anticipation 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 2.878 
 −23 
 12 
 −11 
 520 
 1 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 L 
 2.669 
 −21 
 4 
 −19 
 
 
 
 
 
 Positive>Negative 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 3.156 
 1.5 
 −29.4 
 29.5 
 2072 
 1 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 3.036 
 6 
 −24 
 29 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.989 
 2 
 −23.3 
 34 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.948 
 6 
 −38 
 35 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.911 
 1 
 −33 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.878 
 2 
 −24.7 
 32.7 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.848 
 8 
 −38 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 R 
 3.036 
 12 
 19 
 −6 
 824 
 2 
 
 
 Subcallosal Cortex 
 R 
 2.848 
 4 
 20 
 −2 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 3.540 
 35 
 −59.7 
 44 
 688 
 3 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 3.156 
 30 
 −64 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 2.794 
 28 
 −70 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 Negative>Positive 
 
 
 
 
 None 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brain regions are derived from the probabilistic Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical atlases and are reported based on the location of the peak values of significant clusters. The coordinates of the maximum ALE value are expressed in MNI space. 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Brain regions differentially activated by adolescent and adult populations 
 
 
 
 
 Brain Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Extrema Value 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Volume (mm^3) 
 Cluster Number 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolescent>Adult 
 
 
 
 Subcallosal Cortex 
 R 
 3.719 
 −0.3 
 14.1 
 −1.3 
 24792 
 1 
 
 
 Accumbens 
 L 
 3.540 
 −2.8 
 11.5 
 −2.5 
 
 
 
 
 Insular Cortex 
 R 
 3.353 
 30 
 16 
 0 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 R 
 3.156 
 22 
 12 
 −2 
 
 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 L 
 2.878 
 −18 
 −2 
 −12 
 
 
 
 
 Frontal Orbital Cortex 
 R 
 2.636 
 40 
 24 
 −16 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 3.719 
 2.1 
 −29.1 
 31.1 
 3192 
 2 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 3.719 
 −4.9 
 39.1 
 6.2 
 1504 
 3 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 3.540 
 6 
 32 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.989 
 10 
 42 
 22 
 
 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 3.719 
 −1.3 
 35.3 
 30 
 1376 
 4 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 R 
 2.989 
 4 
 30 
 36 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 3.719 
 30.2 
 −64.6 
 41.7 
 1232 
 5 
 
 
 Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 3.540 
 30.5 
 −61.5 
 48.5 
 
 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 3.719 
 −2 
 16 
 39 
 728 
 6 
 
 
 Paracingulate Gyrus 
 L 
 3.540 
 −5.1 
 18.4 
 42.8 
 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Cortex 
 L 
 3.353 
 −2 
 2 
 56 
 544 
 7 
 
 
 Occipital Pole 
 L 
 3.719 
 −26.1 
 −93.4 
 2 
 504 
 8 
 
 
 Frontal Pole 
 L 
 3.719 
 −35 
 57 
 6 
 488 
 9 
 
 
 Frontal Pole 
 L 
 3.540 
 −32 
 52 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adult>Adolescent 
 
 
 
 
 None 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brain regions are derived from the probabilistic Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical atlases and are reported based on the location of the peak values of significant clusters. The coordinates of the maximum ALE value are expressed in MNI space. The data for the adult ALE used in the contrast analyses is from the extant ALE of adult reward processing ( Liu et al., 2011 ). 
 
 
 
