
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 26282855 
 4780681 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.08.024 
 NIHMS722321 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Multimodal Connectivity of Motor Learning-Related Dorsal Premotor Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 Hardwick 
 Robert M. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Lesage 
 Elise 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 Claudia R 
 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 
 Clos 
 Mareike 
 
 3 
 5 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 Peter 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 Simon B. 
 
 3 
 7 
 * 
 
 
 1 Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University, USA 
 2 Neuroimaging Research Branch, National Institutes of Drug Abuse, Baltimore, USA 
 3 Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Germany 
 4 Dept. of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany 
 5 Department of Systems Neuroscience, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany 
 6 University of Texas, USA 
 7 Institute for Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Germany 
 
 Corresponding Author: Simon B. Eickhoff, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, INM-1, Research Centre Jülich, Leo-Brandt-Straße, D-52428 Jülich, Germany, Phone: +49 2461 611791,  s.eickhoff@fz-juelich.de 
 
 
 14 
 9 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 8 
 2015 
 
 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 01 
 12 
 2016 
 
 123 
 114 
 128 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) is a key region for motor learning and sensorimotor integration, yet we have limited understanding of its functional interactions with other regions. Previous work has started to examine functional connectivity in several brain areas using resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) and meta-analytical connectivity modelling (MACM). More recently, structural covariance (SC) has also been proposed as a technique that may also allow delineation of functional connectivity. Here we applied these three approaches to provide a comprehensive characterization of functional connectivity with a seed in the left dPMC that a previous meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies has identified as playing a key role in motor learning. Using data from two sources (the Rockland sample, containing resting state data and anatomical scans from 132 participants, and the BrainMap database, which contains peak activation foci from over 10,000 experiments), we conducted independent whole-brain functional connectivity mapping analyses of a dPMC seed. RSFC and MACM revealed similar connectivity maps spanning prefrontal, premotor and parietal regions, while the SC map identified more widespread frontal regions. Analyses indicated a relatively consistent pattern of functional connectivity between RSFC and MACM that was distinct from that identified by SC. Notably, results indicate the seed is functionally connected to areas involved in visuomotor control and executive functions, suggesting the dPMC acts as an interface between motor control and cognition. 
 
 
 motor learning 
 functional connectivity 
 resting state 
 resting state functional connectivity 
 meta analytic connectivity modeling 
 structural covariance 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Converging evidence from single cell recordings, human neuroimaging, and neurostimulation paradigms indicate that the dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) plays an important part in sensorimotor integration, response selection, and motor learning. Importantly, single-cell recording studies in non-human primates indicate the dPMC has limited ability to directly contribute to movement execution ( Boudrias et al., 2010 ;  Dum and Strick, 2005 ), but the region contains a high proportion of cells that respond to sensory cues, motor cues, or both ( Weinrich and Wise, 1982 ). Thus, it has been suggested that the dPMC integrates sensory and motor information ( Roland et al., 1980 ;  Weinrich and Wise, 1982 ). Converging evidence from neuroimaging, neurostimulation, and neuropsychology indicates that the dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) has a critical role in response selection ( Bestmann et al., 2008 ;  Halsband et al., 1993 ;  O'Shea et al., 2007 ;  Rushworth et al., 2003 ;  Zhang et al., 2011 ). There is also considerable evidence that the left dPMC in particular plays a dominant role in visuomotor integration processes, while the right dPMC is subservient ( Bestmann et al., 2008 ;  Hardwick et al., 2013 ;  Schubotz and von Cramon, 2002a ,  2002b ). Finally, a recent meta-analysis of human neuroimaging studies has shown the left dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) is consistently activated across a wide range of motor learning paradigms, regardless of movement execution or the hand being used ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). As of yet, however, the functional network of brain areas which interact with the left dPMC is relatively unclear. Identifying the regions that functionally interact with the left dPMC in humans would therefore further our understanding of how this key node in the sensorimotor system contributes to response selection and motor learning. 
 Functional connectivity refers to the temporal coincidence of spatially distant neurophysiological events ( Friston, 1994 ). It is often operationalized as a statistical relationship (usually a correlation) between local neurobiological measures, and can therefore be considered as a broad concept rather than one specific methodology. The advent of multiple connectivity analysis techniques in recent years has led to the possibility to assess different aspects of functional connectivity. Resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) is driven by changes in BOLD activity in the absence of an experimental task (for a review see  Biswal, 2012 ). In seed-based correlation analysis, the timecourse of lower frequencies in the BOLD response extracted from a seed region are then compared with those of all voxels across the rest of the brain, with significant positive correlations implying functional connectivity. RSFC analyses offer the advantage of readily examining whole-brain connectivity without the constraint of a particular task. In comparison, Meta-analytic connectivity modelling (MACM) provides a task based approach to functional connectivity. MACM uses databases of activation peaks from neuroimaging studies to identify consistent co-activations across experiments ( Eickhoff et al., 2010 ). While experiments are retrieved based on activation within a seed region, significant convergence of coordinates outside the seed reflects above-chance co-activation and hence implies functional connectivity. The large scale of the databases from which MACM analyses are derived provide a great strength to the technique (e.g. the BrainMap database contains >10,000 contrasts with >40,000 subjects). Finally, structural covariance (SC) uses the strength of grey matter volume correlations across the brain as an indicator of past co-activity. The underlying notion is that frequent activation leads to plastic changes in grey matter volume ( Draganski et al., 2004 ), and frequently interacting (co- activating) regions thus co-vary in their grey matter densities (see for example  Lerch et al., 2006 ). Thus, while SC uses a structural brain measure (grey matter volume), it crucially hinges upon functional interaction between brain regions following the principle of Hebbian plasticity (Hebb, 1949). Examining relationships in grey matter volume allows assessment of consistent interaction between brain regions throughout development using a clearly defined measure, the physiological basis of which is clearly understood. In that context, it is important to also consider the different scales of integration (cf.  Amunts et al., 2014 ) represented by these different methods: RSFC is a within-subject measure, MACM integrates across group activation findings, and SC is a cross-subjects measure and cannot be determined on a single-subject basis. As previous studies indicate that functional connectivity is associated with correlated gray-matter volumes ( Seeley et al., 2009 ), we therefore regard it as a ‘functional connectivity’ measure (or, more precisely, a proxy for long-term functional connectivity patterns) for the purposes of this paper. While the degree to which SC can be used to infer functional networks has yet to be established ( Clos et al., 2014 ), it provides a further method for investigating coactivity with the seed region. 
 Thus, RSFC, MACM, and SC are well established techniques with the common goal of identifying brain networks interacting with the seed region, and may be used to assess ‘functional connectivity’ in the human brain. Each of these techniques probes ‘functional connectivity’ from a different angle, and has specific strengths and limitations. However, combining these tools provides a means to identify the core network of brain areas that consistently interacts with the chosen seed. To date, however, relatively few studies have yet directly compared results from these differing approaches. Recent papers combined the results of RSFC and MACM analyses have suggested good correspondence between the two methodologies ( Bzdok et al., 2013 ;  Clos et al., 2014 ;  Hoffstaedter et al., 2013a ;  Jakobs et al., 2012 ;  Müller et al., 2013 ;  Rottschy et al., 2013 ). Results from comparisons of RSFC and SC also report correspondence between the two methodological approaches ( Segall et al., 2012 ). While a combination of RSFC, MACM, and SC has previously been implemented as a method for parcellation, ( Kelly et al., 2012 ), only recently has a comparison of seed-based functional connectivity patterns arising from these three techniques been considered ( Clos et al., 2014 ). As all three techniques use different methods to measure the same construct, comparing and contrasting their results provides a more comprehensive overview of ‘functional connectivity’. In particular, a triangulation of their results would provide compelling evidence of the core functional connectivity with the seed region. 
 The importance of the left dPMC as a hub for sensorimotor integration makes it a prime candidate for examination using functional connectivity techniques. A recent meta-analysis has identified an area of the left dPMC that was the only region to consistently show increases in activity across a wide variety of motor learning paradigms ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). This essential role of this region in motor learning has not been recognized in previous models, which have primarily focused on the roles of the primary motor cortex and cerebellum in motor learning (e.g. Krakauer and Mazzoni, 2011). Identifying regions that functionally interact with this seed will therefore further our understanding of the network of areas that may contribute to motor learning. Here we applied RSFC, MACM, and SC connectivity mapping techniques to provide a comprehensive overview of functional connectivity with this left dPMC seed region. 
 
 
 2. Material and Methods 
 
 2.1 Seed Region 
 A seed region in the left dPMC was defined based on the results of a recent meta-analysis of motor learning ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). This 35mm 3  region (peak MNI coordinates -32, -12, 60) survived a series of conjunctions across multiple subanalyses. These subanalyses strictly controlled for potentially confounding activations related to movement execution (i.e. considered only contrasts that compared movement during learning with execution of a similar baseline movement), and controlled for potential laterality effects due to the hand being used to perform the task. This area was therefore consistently activated across a wide variety of motor learning tasks. Data from two sources were utilized to assess functional connectivity with this seed region. 
 
 
 2.2 Data Sources 
 
 2.2.1 The Rockland sample 
 The RSFC and SC analyses used data from the Nathan Kline Institute “Rockland” cohort ( Nooner et al., 2012 ), available online via the International Neuroimaging Data sharing initiative ( http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/pro/nki.html ). The sample used from this cohort consisted of 132 healthy subjects (78M, 54F), aged 18-85 years (mean±SD: 42.3 ± 18.1 years). This sample was chosen as it provides a representative sample, and thus provides results that can be assumed to be representative of the general population. 
 
 
 2.2.2 The BrainMap database 
 The MACM analysis was conducted using the BrainMap database ( Laird et al., 2011 ), using group average peak activation coordinates from neuroimaging studies examining within-subject contrasts in healthy individuals (“normal mapping”, i.e., excluding any interventions such as pharmacological challenges, any longitudinal designs, and patient data, any between-group comparisons to test for differences, e.g., between genders). The BrainMap database was employed to identify task-based co-activation patterns across a large pool of neuroimaging experiments. At the time of processing the database contained stereotaxic peak activation data including approximately 85,000 coordinates (foci) drawn from over 40,000 subjects across more than 10,000 experiments. 
 
 
 
 2.3 Functional Connectivity Analyses 
 
 2.3.1 Seed-based Resting State functional connectivity 
 Images were acquired using a Siemens Tim Trio 3T scanner using blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast (260 whole brain echo-planar imaging (EPI) volumes per subject, gradient-echo EPI pulse sequence, repetition time (TR) = 2.5s, echo time (TE) = 30ms, flip angle = 80°, in-plane resolution = 3 × 3mm 2 , 38 axial slices (3mm thickness)). A Seed-based RSFC analysis compares endogenous fluctuations of BOLD activity in the seed region with that of all other voxels in the brain as a marker of functional connectivity under task-free conditions. Data were analyzed using SPM8 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London). The first four scans were discarded prior to analysis to allow for magnetic field saturation. The images were then corrected for movements by affine registration using a two-pass procedure. In the first step images were aligned to the initial volumes, then subsequently to the mean of all volumes. The mean EPI image for each subject was then spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) single-subject template ( Holmes et al., 1998 ) using the unified segmentation approach ( Ashburner and Friston, 2005 ). The resulting deformation was applied to the individual EPI volumes and images smoothed using a 5-mm full width half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. Spurious correlations for the time-series of each voxel were reduced by regressing out the nuisance variables of 1) the six motion parameters derived from image realignment; 2) their first derivatives; 3) mean GM, WM and CSF intensity. Nuisance variables were entered into the model as first and second order terms (see  Satterthwaite et al., 2013  for an evaluation of this approach). In a final step the data was band-pass filtered with cut-off frequencies of 0.01-0.08Hz. Meaningful resting state correlations occur predominantly within this frequency band due to the low-pass filter like effect of the BOLD signal ( Fox and Raichle, 2007 ;  Power et al., 2012 ). 
 The time course was extracted from the functionally defined left dPMC seed volume for each subject by computing the first eigenvariate of the time-series' of those voxels whose grey-matter probability was above the median across all voxels in the ROI. Linear (Pearson) correlation coefficients were computer between this seed time-series and the time series of all other grey matter voxels in the brain ( Reetz et al., 2012 ;  zu Eulenburg et al., 2012 ). The voxel-wise correlation coefficients were transformed into Fisher's z-scores and tested for consistency across subjects by a second-level ANOVA (including non-sphericity correction). This random effects analysis was family wise error (FWE) corrected with a cluster level threshold of p<0.05 (cluster forming threshold of p<0.001 at voxel level). 
 
 
 2.3.2 Meta-analytic connectivity modelling 
 Meta-analytic connectivity modelling (MACM;  Eickhoff et al., 2010 ;  Robinson, Laird, Glahn, Lovallo, & Fox, 2010 ) assesses connectivity by determining brain areas that co-activate above chance with a seed region across multiple neuroimaging experiments. First, all experiments in the BrainMap database with at least one peak activation coordinate within the functionally defined left dPMC seed region were identified. Custom written MATLAB scripts were then utilized to conduct an Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analysis ( Eickhoff et al., 2012 ,  2009 ;  Turkeltaub et al., 2012 ,  2002 ) across these in order to identify areas of converging activity across these experiments. The ALE algorithm empirically determines whether spatial convergence of foci between studies is greater than expected by chance. The highest convergence between studies evidently occurs within the seed (as all included experiments were selected based upon activity within the seed region). Significant convergence in areas beyond the seed is indicative of consistent co-activation (i.e. functional connectivity) with the seed region. Inference in the MACM analysis was conducted at p<0.05 level (corrected for multiple comparisons using permutation testing, controlling cluster-level FWE at p<0.05). While it is possible to restrict the sample of studies that are examined by MACM analyses, for instance, to examine only studies looking at motor control (cf.  Hoffstaedter et al., 2013 ), we here considered all studies within the BrainMap database. A pre-selection would introduce a bias not present in the RSFC and SC analyses. Selecting studies based on the location of their activations alone, however, provides a purely objective and data-driven approach to the MACM analysis. This allowed for unbiased comparisons between the results of the RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses. 
 
 
 2.3.3 Structural Covariance 
 Structural covariance examines functional connectivity via correlations between regional grey matter properties such as volume or cortical thickness ( Albaugh et al., 2013 ;  He et al., 2007b ;  Lerch et al., 2006 ). Here we used local volume as estimated by Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) on the anatomical T1 weighted MPRAGE scans from the 132 subjects in the Rockland sample to assess structural covariance. Images were acquired using a Siemens Tim Trio 3T scanner as per the Rockland sample protocol (MPRAGE sequence, repetition time (TR) = 2.5s, echo time (TE) 3.5ms, flip angle = 8°, in-plane resolution = 1 × 1mm2, 192 saggital slices (1mm thickness). The anatomical scans were preprocessed using the VBM8 toolbox (dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm) in SPM8 using standard settings (DARTEL normalization, spatially adaptive non-linear means denoising, a Markov random field weighting of 0.15 and bias field modelling with a regularization term of 0.0001 and a 60mm FWHM cutoff). These normalized grey matter segments, modulated only for the non-linear components of the deformations into standard space, were smoothed using an 8mm FWHM Gaussian kernel (this normalization process accounts for differences in grey matter volumes between subjects). Statistical analysis was conducted in FSL1 with non-parametric statistics using the FSL ‘permute’ function ( Jenkinson et al., 2012 ;  Smith et al., 2004 ). The volume for the functionally defined dPMC seed was computed in each subject by integrating the modulated voxel-wise grey matter probabilities under the seed cluster. This subject-specific local volume for the dPMC seed was used as the covariate of interest in the statistical group analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using the standard GLM implementation in FSL testing for each voxel whether the local volume of that particular voxel significantly covaried with the volume of the dPMC. Age was included in the statistical model as a variable of no interest. Inter-individual differences in brain volume were not included in the statistical model, because they were already accounted for in the grey-matter probability maps (grey matter probability maps were modulated by non-linear components, and the analysed voxel values represent the absolute amount of tissue corrected for individual brain size). Significance was assessed at p<0.05 as implemented by FSL (corrected for multiple comparisons using full permutation testing of TFCE images, threshold-free cluster enhancement;  Smith & Nichols, 2009 ). 
 
 
 
 2.4 Difference Analyses 
 Difference analyses identified which brain areas were most strongly associated with each functional connectivity mapping technique ( Jakobs et al., 2012 ). These analyses were conducted in a multi-stage process. First, subtraction analyses were generated to compare the results from each functional connectivity analysis. The results of these subtraction analyses were combined in a conjunction on the minimum value, and masked by the original functional connectivity maps. The resulting image was thresholded to provide a map of regions with significantly higher connectivity values than in the counterpart analyses. For example, to generate the map of areas that were more strongly associated with RSFC, the first step was to compute two subtraction analyses (RSFC minus MACM, RSFC minus SC). These difference analyses were combined in a conjunction, which identified the lowest value from each analysis for each voxel. The resulting voxels thus were significantly stronger connected to the seed in RSFC than in either of the two other techniques. Results were then masked by the original RSFC map (ensuring that regions most strongly associated with the RSFC technique would have to demonstrate significant connectivity during the original RSFC analysis). Finally, the resulting map was thresholded such that only voxels with a z-score greater than 1.96 (i.e. p<0.05) were presented. The resulting map indicates which areas are more strongly associated with one of the examined connectivity mapping techniques compared to the other two methods. 
 
 
 2.5 Conjunction Analyses 
 Conjunction analyses determined areas that were consistently activated across multiple brain connectivity approaches. Pairwise conjunctions were conducted between the three connectivity analyses in order to identify common results across the differing techniques. In addition, a combined analysis was performed across the results of RSFC, SC, and MACM. This combined conjunction thus identified areas with highly consistent functional connectivity to the left dPMC seed region. All conjunctions were computed by taking the minimum statistic ( Jakobs et al., 2012 ;  Nichols et al., 2005 ). Data from MACM were transformed from 2mm 3  MNI space to 1mm 3  for comparison with the RSFC and MACM data. 
 
 
 2.6 Volume Comparisons 
 Previous studies have suggested that the volumes identified by RSFC, MACM, and SC show ‘good convergence’ ( Bzdok et al., 2013 ;  Clos et al., 2014 ;  Hoffstaedter et al., 2013a ;  Jakobs et al., 2012 ;  Müller et al., 2013 ;  Rottschy et al., 2013 ). This has, however, been primarily examined through visual overlay of the identified maps, without further quantification. Here we compared the volumes identified by each analysis, then quantified the volumes that were either uniquely identified by one analysis, or were identified by multiple analyses via conjunction. 
 
 
 2.7 Volume-Matched Analyses 
 Differences in the approaches employed by each of the analyses led to differences in the size of the total volumes of the brain that were identified as having functional connectivity with the motor learning-related seed region. A control analysis therefore aimed to determine whether the different functional connectivity mapping techniques examined identified broadly similar patterns of connectivity that differed mainly due to differences in statistical thresholding, or whether the different techniques identified truly divergent networks. The network with the smallest overall volume was identified (the MACM map, with a volume of 76,749mm 3 ). The thresholds of the RSFC and SC connectivity maps were then iteratively increased until the volumes they identified were approximately equal to that of the MACM network. Further volume comparison analyses were then conducted on the volume-matched maps. 
 
 
 2.8 Labelling 
 Results were anatomically labelled according to their most probable macroanatomical and cytoarchitectonic locations using the SPM Anatomy Toolbox ( Eickhoff et al., 2007 ,  2005 ). Additional labels were derived from a functional meta-analysis of motor cortical regions ( Mayka et al., 2006 ). Peak maxima of the reported coordinates are presented in 1mm 3  MNI space. Only regions with 100 cohesive voxels were reported. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Main analyses 
 
 3.1.1 Resting state Functional Connectivity 
 The RSFC analysis ( Figure 2A ) identified regions where the BOLD timecourse correlated with that in the left dPMC seed volume. This analysis revealed a distributed network that contains large clusters in frontal and parietal regions, and smaller clusters in occipitotemporal cortex, striatum and cerebellum. Connectivity with most regions was bilaterally, but stronger in left supratentorial regions and right cerebellar regions, consistent with its connectivity with left-lateralized seed. Specifically, a widespread frontal cluster spanned premotor regions including the pre-SMA and SMA, ventral and dorsal premotor cortex, and extended into bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, left IFG and the left anterior insula. A second large bilateral parietal cluster spanned left inferior and superior parietal lobules, and the bilateral precuneus. In addition, connectivity was found with the mid-cingulate gyrus, bilateral fusiform gyrus, and bilateral ventral occipitotemporal cortex roughly corresponding with area V5. This analysis was the only one to identify striatal and cerebellar regions. Specifically, RSFC connectivity was found with bilateral thalamus, bilateral dorsal striatum. Cerebellar connectivity was more pronounced in the right cerebellar hemisphere, with a large cluster spanning lobules HVI and HVII (Crus I and II), and a smaller cluster in lobule HVIII. In the left cerebellar hemisphere, smaller clusters were present in lobules HVII (Crus I and II) and HVIII. 
 
 
 3.1.2 Meta-analytical connectivity mapping 
 MACM ( Figure 2B ) provided the most restricted network of all three connectivity mapping techniques examined, revealing a bilateral network of fairly localized premotor and posterior parietal cortical structures (see  Table 2 ). Consistent task based co-activation with the left dPMC seed region was identified in the contralateral dPMC, and bilateral vPMC, SMA and IFG, extending into the anterior insula. Additional connectivity was found in localized clusters in the left ventral occipitotemporal cortex, bilateral precuneus and intraparietal cortex, along with smaller clusters in the right angular gyrus and superior parietal lobule. The MACM analysis was unique in identifying connectivity with the left anterior insula. The MACM analysis did not reveal connectivity with subcortical regions. 
 
 
 3.1.3 Structural covariance 
 The SC analysis ( figure 2C ) revealed areas where the grey matter volume correlates with the grey matter volume in the left dPMC seed region. This analysis yielded large areas spanning most of the frontal lobe, from the primary motor cortex to the orbitofrontal cortex. Smaller clusters were identified in the temporal and parietal lobes (see  Table 3 ). The pattern was largely bilateral but stronger on the left, consistent with a left-lateralized seed. Frontal significant grey matter correlations were found bilaterally with the dPMC, IFG, SMA, and primary sensory and motor cortex. Unique to the SC analysis, connectivity was also identified with mid-cingulate cortex, left middle temporal gyrus, right temporal pole, bilateral cuneus and occipital gyrus. Notably, no clusters were identified in the parietal cortex, or in any subcortical regions. 
 
 
 
 3.2 Difference Analyses 
 
 3.2.1 Resting State Functional Connectivity > (Meta-Analytic Connectivity Modelling & Structural Covariance) 
 Consistent with the very robust pattern of activation revealed by the RSFC analysis, the pattern of regions more strongly associated with this analysis ( Figure 3A ) is very similar to that identified in the main analysis ( Figure 2A ). The clusters most strongly associated with RSFC spanned bilateral premotor and supplementary motor regions stretching into dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior insula, as well as large areas of bilateral precuneus, superior and inferior parietal lobules, fusiform gyrus and ventral occipitotemporal cortex. As the cluster in the left thalamus, bilateral putamen and bilateral cerebellar regions were only identified as having connectivity with the seed by the RSFC analysis, the same pattern of subcortical activity were evidently more strongly associated with RSFC than the other techniques examined. Thus, most regions identified by the RSFC analysis, were more strongly identified with this method than with the either structural covariance modelling or meta-analytic connectivity modelling. 
 
 
 3.2.2 Meta-Analytic Connectivity Modelling > (Resting State Functional Connectivity & Structural Covariance) 
 Areas in which MACM was stronger than RSFC and SC were relatively small in volume. These areas included the bilateral anterior insula, left dPMC (slightly dorsal from the seed region) and right vPMC, as well as small clusters in the left inferior occipital gyrus and the superior parietal lobule (see  Figure 3B ). Of these regions, the right ventral prefrontal cortex and right anterior cingulate cortex were solely identified in the MACM analysis. In the parietal and occipital brain areas, RSFC and MACM overlapped substantially, but small clusters were more strongly present in the MACM. 
 
 
 3.2.3 Structural Covariance > (Resting State Functional Connectivity & Meta-Analytic Connectivity modelling) 
 Structural covariance yielded the strongest connectivity measures bilaterally across large areas of the frontal lobe and medial wall (see  Figure 3C ). In the majority of these areas, the correlation of the grey matter volume between the dPMC seed with the grey matter volume in these regions, while the other two methods did not reveal significant connectivity with dPMC. Particularly striking are the robust bilateral clusters in the primary motor cortex, as well as the spread of the prefrontal cluster which extended into bilateral orbitofrontal gyrus and right frontal and temporal pole (see  Figure 3B ). In addition, smaller clusters were found in the left superior temporal gyrus, left precuneus and bilateral cuneus. 
 
 
 
 3.3 Conjunction Analyses 
 Several conjunction analyses were carried out to shed light on regions commonly identified by the different connectivity analyses. The areas commonly identified in the RSFC and MACM analyses were fairly localized bilateral clusters in frontal and parietal lobes, with larger clusters ipsilateral to the left dPMC seed region (see  Figure 4A ). These clusters were present in the right dorsal and ventral premotor cortex, supplementary motor cortex, and the left ventral premotor cortex extending into dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and inferior frontal gyrus. Bilateral parietal clusters were present in the intraparietal sulcus and superior parietal lobule. The conjunction of analyses based on the Rockland sample (i.e. RSFC and SC analyses) revealed a widespread network spanning bilateral prefrontal and motor cortex, along with a few much smaller clusters in the superior parietal lobule and precuneus (see  Figure 4B ). Only a small number of regions were commonly identified by SC and MACM analyses; these were in left vPMC, SMA and right dPMC. (see  Figure 4C ). Finally, the combined conjunction of all three connectivity analyses (i.e. RSFC, MACM, and SC; see  Figure 4D ) was very similar to the conjunction of the MACM and SC analyses. Specifically, these areas were left vPMC, right dPMC, and the SMA. 
 
 
 3.4 Volume Quantification 
 We quantified the volumes identified in each analysis to further investigate the differences and similarities between RSFC, MACM, and SC. We first quantified the total volumes identified by the RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses ( Figure 5A ). RSFC identified the largest overall volume with functional connectivity with the seed (381,166mm 3 ). The RSFC network was more than double the size of the SC network (179,839mm 3 ), while the SC network was in turn more than double the size of the MACM network (76,749mm 3 ). 
 We then compared the convergence and divergence of the networks as examined in the conjunction analyses. Overlaying the RSFC and MACM networks ( Figure 5B ) revealed that 81% was unique to the RSFC analysis, while only 3% was unique to the MACM analysis. The remaining 16% of the overall volume was identified as surviving the conjunction of RSFC and MACM. Due to the disparity of their sizes, this meant that the majority of the volume identified in the MACM analysis was also identified by the RSFC analysis (see Venn diagram illustrating overlap,  Figure 5B ). Pairwise comparisons indicated that 17% of the volume identified by RSFC analysis survived conjunction with the MACM map (see  Figure 5F ), while 83% of the MACM map survived conjunction with the RSFC map (see  Figure 5G ). Overlaying the RSFC and SC networks ( Figure 5C ) revealed that 64% of the total volume identified was unique to RSFC, while 24% was unique to SC. Thus, 12% of the total volume identified in both analyses was shown to be commonly found in both techniques. Pairwise comparisons of these maps revealed that 16% of the RSFC map survived conjunction with the SC map (see  Figure 5H ), while 34% of the SC map survived conjunction with the RSFC map (see  Figure 5I ). Overlaying the MACM and SC networks ( Figure 5D ) showed that 67% of the total network was unique to the SC analysis, while 23% was unique to the MACM analysis, and 10% was commonly identified in both maps. Pairwise comparisons showed that 29% of the MACM map survived conjunction with the SC map (see  Figure 5J ), while 12% of the SC map survived conjunction with the MACM map 2(see  Figure 5K ). 
 Finally, we considered the divergence and convergence between the RSFC, MACM and SC maps in a combined analysis, overlaying all three functional connectivity maps. The majority of the volume identified by all three mapping techniques was unique to RSFC (54%) or the SC analysis (23%). A relatively small volume was identified only by MACM (2%). Conjunctions indicated similar overall volumes were identified by both RSFC and MACM but not SC (8%), or RSFC and SC but not MACM (9%). In comparison, the volume identified by both MACM and SC but not RSFC was extremely small (1%). Considered relative to the total volume identified by all three analyses, only a small volume was identified in the combined conjunction of the RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses (4%). 
 
 
 3.5 Volume-Matched Analyses 
 Results of the volume matched control analysis were similar to those of the main analyses: RS and MACM identified relatively consistent networks of frontal, premotor and parietal regions. In comparison, SC revealed a network of areas more local to the seed, consisting mainly of prefrontal and premotor regions. 
 
 
 3.6 Volume-Matched Analyses: Volume Comparisons 
 Volume-matched analyses controlled for potential differences in the maps identified by each network arising from differences in the sizes of the volumes they identified. The volume-matched analysis iteratively increased the threshold of the RS and SC maps, reducing their volumes until they were approximately equal to that of the MACM analysis (See  Figure 7A ). Overlaying the maps identified by the RSFC and MACM analyses showed that 24% of this volume was common to both analyses. 39% of the volume of the volume-matched RSFC map survived conjunction with the MACM map, and (due to the volume matching approach), 39% of the MACM map survived conjunction with the RSFC map (see  Figure 7F-G ). Overlaying the volume-matched RSFC analysis with the volume-matched SC analysis identified an 8% overlap ( Figure 7C ). Of the volume-matched RSFC map, 15% survived conjunction with the volume-matched SC map, and vice versa ( figure 7H-I ). Overlaying the MACM map on the volume-matched SC map identified that 10% of the maps overlapped ( Figure 7D ). For the MACM map, 18% survived conjunction with the volume-matched SC map, and vice versa ( Figure 7J-K ). A combined overlay analysis of all three maps also identified that the volume-matched SC analysis had the least overlap with other networks, consistent with the main analysis ( Figure 7E ). 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 The dPMC plays an essential role in integrating sensory and motor information ( Roland et al., 1980 ;  Weinrich and Wise, 1982 ), and the left dPMC in particular is consistently activated during a wide range of motor learning tasks ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). Despite the importance of the dPMC for sensorimotor integration and motor learning, there is limited understanding of the areas that functionally interact with it. The present study therefore examined regions that have functional connectivity with a left dPMC region key to motor learning ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). We employed resting state functional connectivity, (RSFC), Meta-Analytic Connectivity Mapping (MACM), and Structural Covariance (SC), comparing and combining their results to provide a comprehensive overview of connectivity with the seed. The maps resulting from the RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses identified networks of varying size and topography. Notably, the maps from the RSFC and MACM analyses were qualitatively similar, primarily spanning premotor and parietal regions. In comparison, the SC map identified predominantly frontal and temporal regions. 
 The differences between the maps for RSFC, MACM, and SC may be attributed to the methodological approaches employed by the three techniques. RSFC networks are based on “spontaneous”, task-free fluctuations in the BOLD signal, while MACM is based upon convergence of peak co-activity between task based fMRI and PET experiments. Thus, the signals from RSFC and MACM are similar in that they both primarily encapsulate short term blood utilization in brain tissue. Note, however, that the RSFC analysis used only data from fMRI, while the MACM analysis amalgamated data from both fMRI and PET; these different modalities are known to influence activation profiles (Veltman et al., 2000), which could contribute to the differences seen between the RSFC and MACM analyses. In comparison, SC identifies correlations in grey matter volume between brain regions, and as such has less in common with RSFC and MACM. In addition, RSFC and MACM relate to comparatively short time spans, considering functional connectivity at rest (RSFC) or during the performance of specific tasks (MACM). The time span for SC is much longer, assessing differences in grey matter volume that have arisen throughout life thus far. An additional consideration is that the present study aimed to gain a comprehensive overview of functional connectivity with the dPMC seed region by examining  typical  applications of RSFC, MACM and SC. As such there are methodological differences between implementations, as is the case when each technique is used individually in the present literature. While it could be argued that standardizing these approaches may have reduced between-technique noise, such an approach would lead to questionable methodological choices; for instance, it is not feasible to assess VBM data (as used in SC) using cluster-level inference, which is standard in RSFC and MACM. Furthermore, attempting to rigidly match these procedures may artificially promote homogeneity of the results. The present approach therefore allows further generalization of the results, allowing comparison of each individual analysis with those presently found in the literature. 
 A further consideration is that none of these techniques can perfectly capture functional connectivity, as each are subject to different sources of inherent noise. The spontaneous BOLD signal from which RSFC is derived is thought to be particularly susceptible to artefacts from preprocessing and physiological noise ( Chang and Glover, 2009 ;  Power et al., 2012 ). MACM is derived from peak coordinates from task-based fMRI and PET studies, and is thus constrained by the tasks possible to be performed in the scanner and the inherent spatial uncertainty of neuroimaging results ( Eickhoff et al., 2009 ;  Rottschy et al., 2012 ). Finally, as well as representing experiences such as repeated practice of motor tasks (e.g.  Gaser and Schlaug, 2003 ), differences in brain structure detected by SC are influenced by both environmental and hereditary factors throughout development ( Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013 ). 
 To date, relatively few studies have compared results from all three of these techniques; most have compared RSFC with either MACM or SC ( Bzdok et al., 2013 ;  Jakobs et al., 2012 ;  Rottschy et al., 2013 ;  Segall et al., 2012 ). These investigations have generally reported that the two techniques they have examined provide qualitatively similar results. Here we extended this work by quantifying the volumes identified by each analysis and their conjunctions, which further illustrated the relative similarities between the RSFC and MACM networks in comparison to the results of the SC analysis. Notably, RSFC and MACM are well established methods for mapping functional connectivity ( Biswal, 2012 ;  Robinson et al., 2010 ), while the degree to which anatomical covariance networks as identified by SC are representative of functional connectivity is debatable ( Clos et al., 2014 ). As a result we first discuss the common functional connectivity network as identified by RSFC and MACM, then consider the added benefit and potential problems to consider when comparing their results to SC. 
 
 4.1 Areas with consistent functional connectivity: Networks for Motor Learning Identified by RSFC and MACM 
 As noted above, visualization of connectivity maps and volume quantifications indicated considerable convergence between the RSFC and MACM maps. Conjunction of these maps identified a consistent network of brain regions with functional connectivity to the motor learning releated seedregion, including the right dPMC, bilateral ventral premotor cortex (vPMC), bilateral supplementary motor area (SMA), left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), bilateral posterior parietal cortex, and left a V5/MT. This network is consistent with the role of the left dPMC as a central hub for sensorimotor integration and motor learning. 
 Interhemispheric dPMC interactions are well documented in motor control. Simple unilateral movements are typically associated with increases in bilateral dPMC activity in both non-human primates ( Cisek et al., 2003 ;  Tanji et al., 1988 ) and humans ( Ward and Frackowiak, 2003 ). The left dPMC is dominant in action selection ( Bestmann et al., 2008 ), though the right dPMC can assume this role if the left dPMC is compromised ( O'Shea et al., 2007 ). Studies of sequence learning have also identified increased right dPMC activity for the perceptual elements of sequences ( Schubotz and von Cramon, 2002a ,  2002b ). The dPMC therefore appears to play a key role in volitional movement preparation, with the left dPMC being dominant for action selection and initiation, and the right dPMC playing a supportive role in acquisition and retrieval. Bihemispheric recruitment of the vPMC is also frequently observed in motor control ( Binkofski et al., 1999 ;  Davare et al., 2006 ;  Ehrsson et al., 2001 ,  2000 ). The vPMC is specifically involved in the sensory guidance of hand movement ( Binkofski et al., 1999 ), especially in hand shaping for precision grasp ( Davare et al., 2006 ). 
 The SMA and left dPMC were also not only identified as having consistent connectivity across the RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses here, but were also consistently linked with activation during motor learning in our previous meta-analysis ( Hardwick et al., 2013 )Moreover, consecutive days of motor training lead to parallel increases in their grey matter volumes ( Hamzei et al., 2012 ). As both are active in motor learning tasks that control for simple motor activity ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ), they therefore appear to play a role in motor learning beyond movement execution itself. Both have been linked with movement sequences; the SMA being more closely associated with those that have been learned extensively ( Wymbs and Grafton, 2013 ). The SMA has also classically been linked with the self-initiation of voluntary movements ( Deecke and Kornhuber, 1978 ;  Hoffstaedter et al., 2013b ) and in switching between ongoing movement tasks ( Nachev et al., 2008 ;  Obeso et al., 2013 ). Increases in pre-SMA activity have frequently been associated with successful response inhibition (see  Obeso et al., 2013 ; but also  Criaud & Boulinguez, 2013 ). The SMA therefore likely interacts with the dPMC in order to store movement sequences, and to initiate, modify and possibly inhibit (or coordinate the inhibition of) actions. 
 Lesion studies in non-human primates indicate the DLPFC plays an important role in rule driven action selection ( Wise and Murray, 2000 ). Similarly in humans, the DLPFC is associated with a role for rule representation within the working memory network ( Nee et al., 2013 ). The DLPFC may therefore contribute to motor learning through providing declarative knowledge to be applied to motor output. Interestingly, interfering with the normal function of the DLPFC through theta-burst stimulation or cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation reduces declarative knowledge, but improves motor performance, presumably through placing an increased emphasis on implicit aspects of performance ( Galea et al., 2010 ;  Zhu et al., 2015 ). The DLPFC could therefore interact with the dPMC by providing declarative knowledge and relevant rules to guide motor output (see  Wise and Murray, 2000 ). 
 The posterior parietal cortex receives multisensory inputs (see  Grefkes and Fink, 2005 ), and is involved in weighting their evidence in order to produce appropriate motor output ( Block et al., 2013 ). Notably, the regions demonstrating parietal connectivity in the conjunction of the RSFC and MACM maps included the superior parietal lobule (SPL), which was also found to be commonly activated in our recent meta-analysis of 70 motor learning experiments ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ; see  supplementary methods  for comparison). The SPL has known physiological connectivity with the primate dPMC ( Matelli et al., 1998 ), and their interaction is important for visuomotor control ( Wise et al., 1997 ). Thus, multisensory input from the parietal lobe is thought to be processed to become motor output via an SPL-dPMC pathway ( Cieslik et al., 2011 ;  Johnson et al., 1996 ,  1993 ). 
 The inferior temporal cortex (ITC) is considered to be part of the ventral visual stream (Gross, 2008). ITC neurons respond only to visual stimuli ( Gross et al., 1972 ,  1967 ), and are specialized for recognition of shapes regardless of size, color, contrast, or location within the visual field (Schwartz et al., 1983; Rolls and Baylis, 1986). In humans, lesions of ITC lead to visual agnosia, characterized by an inability to recognize visual stimuli ( Bauer, 2006 ). Association of a ventral stream area with motor control may seem surprising, as the dorsal visual stream is classically associated with movement ( Goodale and Milner, 1992 ). However, functional connectivity with a region specialized in shape recognition is consistent with the essential role of the dPMC plays in producing motor responses to arbitrary visual stimuli ( Wise and Murray, 2000 ). 
 Notable for a network involving motor control, the primary motor cortex (M1) was not identified as being functionally connected with the seed in the combined RSFC and MACM conjunction. M1 was also absent in the liberal analysis that removed thresholding from the MACM network (see  supplementary results ). This may seem surprising as there are known physiological connections between dPMC and M1 shown ( Dum and Strick, 2005 ) and as dPMC excitability can affect M1 excitability in humans ( Davare et al., 2009 ). However, RSFC connectivity does not always map onto anatomical connections ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ;  Kelly et al., 2010 ;  Uddin et al., 2008 ;  Vincent et al., 2007 ), and a previous study based on 1,000 subjects that parcellated the brain into RSFC networks did not show functional connectivity between M1 and premotor regions such as dPMC ( Yeo et al., 2011 ). In addition, the absence of M1 from the MACM analysis may in large part be explained by the contrasts present in the Brainmap database. Most neuroimaging studies include controls for simple motor execution (see for examples ( Daselaar et al., 2003 ;  Inoue et al., 2000 ). Importantly, our previous finding that such contrasts remove M1 activation but still show dPMC activation ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ) highlight the importance of the dPMC in higher-order motor processing. 
 Connectivity with the cerebellum was present in the RSFC analysis. In the right cerebellum, connectivity included regions associated with the lower hand representation in lobule HVIII ( Thickbroom et al., 2003 ;  Yeo et al., 2011 ), consistent with the importance of the cerebellum in motor control ( Hardwick et al., 2014 ,  2013 ). Bilateral connectivity was also identified with lobules HVII (Crus I and II), which are involved in cognitive and linguistic processes ( Lesage et al., 2012 ;  Stoodley and Schmahmann, 2009 ), and are functionally connected to DLPFC and PPC ( Buckner et al., 2011 ;  O'Reilly et al., 2010 ). Given the importance of the cerebellum in motor control and learning, and the presence of cerebellar clusters of connectivity with the dPMC in the RSFC analysis, the absence of cerebellar clusters in the MACM analysis is perhaps surprising (though the MACM analysis did not identify the cerebellum as having functional connectivity with the dPMC, further analysis did identify multiple subthreshold clusters of cerebellar connectivity - see  supplementary results ). This difference can likely be attributed to the focus that many functional imaging studies place on imaging the cerebral cortex; the standard normalization process conducted in neuroimaging studies is not optimized for the cerebellum (Diedrichsen, 2006). Furthermore, inferior portions of the cerebellum are sometimes not covered by the field of view in many whole- brain fMRI studies, and when these regions are acquired the default bounding box for normalization in certain software analysis packages do not include the entire cerebellum. This would lead to the absence of and greater variability in cerebellar coordinates than those in the cerebral cortex for many of the studies included in the BrainMap database, and may explain why the MACM analysis detected clusters in the cerebellum that did not survive thresholding. 
 
 
 4.2 Functional connectivity and Structural covariance 
 As considered above, RSFC and MACM are previously established methods for identifying functional connectivity with a seed region, while the degree to which SC can determine functional connectivity is currently a subject of ongoing debate ( Clos et al., 2014 ). Notably, while RSFC and MACM identified a similar network of frontal, premotor and parietal regions, SC identified a network of mainly frontal regions that was more widespread than that revealed by the other two methods. This is consistent with findings from graph-theoretical SC analyses that report predominantly local connectivity ( He et al., 2007a ), and with data from seed-based SC analyses that identify regions largely limited to the lobe in which of the seed is defined ( Clos et al., 2014 ;  Seeley et al., 2009 ;  Zielinski et al., 2010 ). SC is thought to represent a combination of developmental coordination or synchronized maturation between brain areas ( Alexander-Bloch et al., 2013 ). The SC network identified here is consistent with both of these properties; the prefrontal, premotor, and motor regions identified by SC are highly interconnected via anatomical fiber tracts ( Bürgel et al., 2006 ,  1999 ;  Carmichael and Price, 1995 ;  Dum and Strick, 2005 ), and develop concurrently ( Giedd et al., 1999 ). 
 
 
 4.3 The Rockland Sample and the BrainMap Database 
 The RSFC and SC analyses in the present study used whole brain neuroimaging data from the Rockland sample. As data from the same subjects were used in both the RSFC and SC analyses, these analyses are therefore matched for factors such as age and gender. In contrast, the MACM analysis was based on data from the BrainMap database, which reports stereotaxic peak activation coordinates from published neuroimaging studies. Using peak coordinates leads to the loss of spatial information, but provides a pragmatic solution to the problems associated with sharing large datasets (current technical and practical limitations prevent the storage of whole brain data from the 10,000+ neuroimaging studies included in the BrainMap database). Moreover, in spite of beginning data-sharing efforts, integrating published maxima coordinates are currently the only approach that allows summarization of the entire current literature. This loss of spatial information may account for the relatively small size of the volume identified by the MACM analysis in comparison to the RSFC and SC analyses. However, while these coordinates present a relatively sparse representation of the original activation maps they encapsulate, they also represent the most probable locations of activity from the activation maps they encapsulate, and thus provide a highly reliable source of data. Differences in sampling demographics may also influence the connectivity maps identified by each technique. The Rockland sample aims to produce a representative sample of individual subjects from the general population; in contrast, the BrainMap database stores average information from groups of subjects, and the papers from which this information is drawn to not always report demographic information in a uniform manner (e.g. some papers report mean subject ages, some report only age ranges, etc). Similarly, it may be expected that the corpus of studies and contrast types contained within the BrainMap database could influence the results it provides; for example, as most studies require participants to visual stimuli (vs other modalities), there may be a bias toward finding activity in visual regions. However, sample bias effects appear unlikely given the high level of consistency between the MACM and RSFC maps (the latter of which by definition is not affected by task demands). Furthermore, it is notable that this study and others have identified similar results using RSFC and MACM ( Bzdok et al., 2013 ;  Clos et al., 2014 ; Hoffstaedter et al., 2013a;  Jakobs et al., 2012 ;  Müller et al., 2013 ;  Rottschy et al., 2013 ). The consistency between results from RSFC and MACM illustrate that harnessing the large and varied sample from the BrainMap database can provide a powerful approach to functional connectivity. 
 
 
 
 5. Conclusions 
 Here we employed multiple connectivity modelling techniques to identify areas functionally interacting with a left dPMC regionidentified as key for motor learning. RSFC, MACM, and SC offer different methodological and conceptual approaches to identifying functional connectivity with a seed region, and were used here to provide a comprehensive assessment of functional connectivity with the dPMC (cf.  Clos et al., 2014 ;  Reid et al., 2015 ). Each approach identified networks with clear differences in both their size and topography. However, further analyses indicated that RSFC and MACM revealed a relatively consistent network of prefrontal, premotor, and parietal regions, while the SC map consisted mainly of widespread frontal regions. All techniques identified a consistent ‘core’ network of functional connectivity with the left vPMC, right dPMC, and the SMA, all of which play important roles in the motor control and learning ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ). Most notably, conjunction of the RSFC and MACM networks identified a consistent functional network consisting of the bilateral dPMC, vPMC, SMA, and PPC, as well as left hemisphere connectivity with the DLPFC and ITC. This network is consistent with the established role of the dPMC in response selection, suggesting it supports motor learning by acting as an interface between higher cognitive functions and visuomotor control. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 supplement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albaugh 
 MD 
 
 
 Ducharme 
 S 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Botteron 
 KN 
 
 
 Althoff 
 RR 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Karama 
 S 
 
 
 Hudziak 
 JJ 
 
 
 2013 
 Evidence for a cerebral cortical thickness network anti-correlated with amygdalar volume in healthy youths: implications for the neural substrates of emotion regulation 
 Neuroimage 
 71 
 42 
 9 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.12.071 
 23313419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alexander-Bloch 
 A 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Imaging structural co-variance between human brain regions 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 14 
 322 
 36 
 10.1038/nrn3465 
 23531697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Hawrylycz 
 MJ 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Van Horn 
 JD 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 De Martino 
 F 
 
 
 Bjaalie 
 JG 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Valdes-Sosa 
 P 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Hill 
 SL 
 
 
 Abrams 
 MB 
 
 
 Tass 
 PA 
 
 
 Vanduffel 
 W 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2014 
 Interoperable atlases of the human brain 
 Neuroimage 
 99 
 525 
 32 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.010 
 24936682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2005 
 Unified segmentation 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 839 
 51 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.02.018 
 15955494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bauer 
 RM 
 
 
 2006 
 The Agnosias 
 
 
 Snyder 
 PJ 
 
 
 Nussbaum 
 PD 
 
 
 R 
 DL 
 
 
 Clinical Neuropsychology: A Pocket Handbook for Assessment 
 American Psychological Association 
 Washington, DC 
 508 
 533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bestmann 
 S 
 
 
 Swayne 
 O 
 
 
 Blankenburg 
 F 
 
 
 Ruff 
 CC 
 
 
 Haggard 
 P 
 
 
 Weiskopf 
 N 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Driver 
 J 
 
 
 Rothwell 
 JC 
 
 
 Ward 
 NS 
 
 
 2008 
 Dorsal premotor cortex exerts state-dependent causal influences on activity in contralateral primary motor and dorsal premotor cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1281 
 91 
 10.1093/cercor/bhm159 
 17965128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Buccino 
 G 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KM 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Seitz 
 RJ 
 
 
 Freund 
 HJ 
 
 
 1999 
 A parieto-premotor network for object manipulation: evidence from neuroimaging 
 Exp brain Res 
 128 
 210 
 3 
 10473761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 2012 
 Resting state fMRI: a personal history 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 938 
 44 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.090 
 22326802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Block 
 H 
 
 
 Bastian 
 A 
 
 
 Celnik 
 P 
 
 
 2013 
 Virtual lesion of angular gyrus disrupts the relationship between visuoproprioceptive weighting and realignment 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 25 
 636 
 48 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00340 
 23249345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boudrias 
 MH 
 
 
 McPherson 
 RL 
 
 
 Frost 
 SB 
 
 
 Cheney 
 PD 
 
 
 2010 
 Output properties and organization of the forelimb representation of motor areas on the lateral aspect of the hemisphere in rhesus macaques 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 169 
 86 
 10.1093/cercor/bhp084 
 19561063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 A 
 
 
 Diaz 
 JC 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 2011 
 The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 106 
 2322 
 45 
 10.1152/jn.00339.2011 
 21795627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bürgel 
 U 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Hoemke 
 L 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Gilsbach 
 JM 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 2006 
 White matter fiber tracts of the human brain: three-dimensional mapping at microscopic resolution, topography and intersubject variability 
 Neuroimage 
 29 
 1092 
 105 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.08.040 
 16236527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bürgel 
 U 
 
 
 Schormann 
 T 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 1999 
 Mapping of histologically identified long fiber tracts in human cerebral hemispheres to the MRI volume of a reference brain: position and spatial variability of the optic radiation 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 489 
 99 
 10.1006/nimg.1999.0497 
 10547327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Schilbach 
 L 
 
 
 Jakobs 
 O 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013 
 Characterization of the temporo-parietal junction by combining data-driven parcellation, complementary connectivity analyses, and functional decoding 
 Neuroimage 
 81 
 381 
 92 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.046 
 23689016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carmichael 
 ST 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 1995 
 Sensory and premotor connections of the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex of macaque monkeys 
 J Comp Neurol 
 363 
 642 
 664 
 10.1002/cne.903630409 
 8847422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 2009 
 Effects of model-based physiological noise correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations 
 Neuroimage 
 47 
 1448 
 59 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.012 
 19446646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cieslik 
 EC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2011 
 Dynamic interactions in the fronto-parietal network during a manual stimulus-response compatibility task 
 Neuroimage 
 58 
 860 
 9 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.089 
 21708271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cisek 
 P 
 
 
 Crammond 
 DJ 
 
 
 Kalaska 
 JF 
 
 
 2003 
 Neural activity in primary motor and dorsal premotor cortex in reaching tasks with the contralateral versus ipsilateral arm 
 J Neurophysiol 
 89 
 922 
 42 
 10.1152/jn.00607.2002 
 12574469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clos 
 M 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2014 
 Comparison of structural covariance with functional connectivity approaches exemplified by an investigation of the left anterior insula 
 Neuroimage 
 99 
 269 
 80 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.030 
 24844743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Criaud 
 M 
 
 
 Boulinguez 
 P 
 
 
 2013 
 Have we been asking the right questions when assessing response inhibition in go/no-go tasks with fMRI? A meta-analysis and critical review 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 37 
 11 
 23 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.11.003 
 23164813 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Rombouts 
 SARB 
 
 
 Veltman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Raaijmakers 
 JGW 
 
 
 Jonker 
 C 
 
 
 2003 
 Similar network activated by young and old adults during the acquisition of a motor sequence 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 24 
 1013 
 9 
 12928061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davare 
 M 
 
 
 Andres 
 M 
 
 
 Cosnard 
 G 
 
 
 Thonnard 
 JL 
 
 
 Olivier 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 Dissociating the role of ventral and dorsal premotor cortex in precision grasping 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 2260 
 8 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3386-05.2006 
 16495453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davare 
 M 
 
 
 Montague 
 K 
 
 
 Olivier 
 E 
 
 
 Rothwell 
 JC 
 
 
 Lemon 
 RN 
 
 
 2009 
 Ventral premotor to primary motor cortical interactions during object-driven grasp in humans 
 Cortex 
 45 
 1050 
 7 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2009.02.011 
 19345344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deecke 
 L 
 
 
 Kornhuber 
 HH 
 
 
 1978 
 An electrical sign of participation of the mesial “supplementary” motor cortex in human voluntary finger movement 
 Brain Res 
 159 
 473 
 6 
 728816 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 a 
 
 
 Scheres 
 a 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 aMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Walters 
 JR 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 2735 
 47 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn041 
 18400794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Draganski 
 B 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Busch 
 V 
 
 
 Schuierer 
 G 
 
 
 Bogdahn 
 U 
 
 
 May 
 A 
 
 
 2004 
 Neuroplasticity: changes in grey matter induced by training 
 Nature 
 427 
 311 
 2 
 10.1038/427311a 
 14737157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dum 
 RP 
 
 
 Strick 
 PL 
 
 
 2005 
 Frontal lobe inputs to the digit representations of the motor areas on the lateral surface of the hemisphere 
 J Neurosci 
 25 
 1375 
 86 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3902-04.2005 
 15703391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ehrsson 
 HH 
 
 
 Fagergren 
 A 
 
 
 Jonsson 
 T 
 
 
 Westling 
 G 
 
 
 Johansson 
 RS 
 
 
 Forssberg 
 H 
 
 
 2000 
 Cortical activity in precision- versus power-grip tasks: an fMRI study 
 J Neurophysiol 
 83 
 528 
 36 
 10634893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ehrsson 
 HH 
 
 
 Fagergren 
 E 
 
 
 Forssberg 
 H 
 
 
 2001 
 Differential fronto-parietal activation depending on force used in a precision grip task: an fMRI study 
 J Neurophysiol 
 85 
 2613 
 23 
 11387405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Kurth 
 F 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2012 
 Activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 2349 
 61 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.017 
 21963913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Anatomical and functional connectivity of cytoarchitectonic areas within the human parietal operculum 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 6409 
 21 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5664-09.2010 
 20445067 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Wang 
 LE 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2009 
 Coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: a random-effects approach based on empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 2907 
 26 
 10.1002/hbm.20718 
 19172646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Grosbras 
 MH 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 2007 
 Assignment of functional activations to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 36 
 511 
 21 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.03.060 
 17499520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 2005 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 1325 
 35 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.034 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2007 
 Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 700 
 11 
 10.1038/nrn2201 
 17704812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1994 
 Functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging: A synthesis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2 
 56 
 78 
 10.1002/hbm.460020107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galea 
 JM 
 
 
 Albert 
 NB 
 
 
 Ditye 
 T 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 2010 
 Disruption of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex facilitates the consolidation of procedural skills 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 22 
 1158 
 64 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21259 
 19413472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Schlaug 
 G 
 
 
 2003 
 Brain structures differ between musicians and non-musicians 
 J Neurosci 
 23 
 9240 
 5 
 14534258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Blumenthal 
 J 
 
 
 Jeffries 
 NO 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 1999 
 Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI study 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2 
 861 
 3 
 10.1038/13158 
 10491603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goodale 
 MA 
 
 
 Milner 
 AD 
 
 
 1992 
 Separate visual pathways for perception and action 
 Trends Neurosci 
 15 
 20 
 5 
 1374953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 2005 
 The functional organization of the intraparietal sulcus in humans and monkeys 
 J Anat 
 207 
 3 
 17 
 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2005.00426.x 
 16011542 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gross 
 CG 
 
 
 Rocha-Miranda 
 CE 
 
 
 Bender 
 DB 
 
 
 1972 
 Visual properties of neurons in inferotemporal cortex of the Macaque 
 J Neurophysiol 
 35 
 96 
 111 
 4621506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gross 
 CG 
 
 
 Schiller 
 PH 
 
 
 Wells 
 C 
 
 
 Gerstein 
 GL 
 
 
 1967 
 Single-unit activity in temporal association cortex of the monkey 
 J Neurophysiol 
 30 
 833 
 43 
 4962340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Halsband 
 U 
 
 
 Ito 
 N 
 
 
 Tanji 
 J 
 
 
 Freund 
 HJ 
 
 
 1993 
 The role of premotor cortex and the supplementary motor area in the temporal control of movement in man 
 Brain 
 116 
 Pt 1 
 243 
 66 
 8453461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamzei 
 F 
 
 
 Glauche 
 V 
 
 
 Schwarzwald 
 R 
 
 
 May 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Dynamic gray matter changes within cortex and striatum after short motor skill training are associated with their increased functional interaction 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 3364 
 72 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.089 
 22108643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hardwick 
 RM 
 
 
 Lesage 
 E 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 2014 
 Cerebellar transcranial magnetic stimulation: the role of coil geometry and tissue depth 
 Brain Stimul 
 10.1016/j.brs.2014.04.009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hardwick 
 RM 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013 
 A quantitative meta-analysis and review of motor learning in the human brain 
 Neuroimage 
 67 
 283 
 97 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.020 
 23194819 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Chen 
 ZJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 2007a 
 Small-world anatomical networks in the human brain revealed by cortical thickness from MRI 
 Cereb Cortex 
 17 
 2407 
 19 
 10.1093/cercor/bhl149 
 17204824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Zang 
 Y 
 
 
 Tian 
 L 
 
 
 Zhang 
 X 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Jiang 
 T 
 
 
 2007b 
 Regional coherence changes in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease: a combined structural and resting-state functional MRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 35 
 488 
 500 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.11.042 
 17254803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 F 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013a 
 The role of anterior midcingulate cortex in cognitive motor control: Evidence from functional connectivity analyses 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 10.1002/hbm.22363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 F 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013b 
 The “what” and “when” of self-initiated movements 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 520 
 30 
 10.1093/cercor/bhr391 
 22414772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holmes 
 CJ 
 
 
 Hoge 
 R 
 
 
 Collins 
 L 
 
 
 Woods 
 R 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 1998 
 Enhancement of MR images using registration for signal averaging 
 J Comput Assist Tomogr 
 22 
 324 
 33 
 9530404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inoue 
 K 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Satoh 
 K 
 
 
 Kinomura 
 S 
 
 
 Sugiura 
 M 
 
 
 Goto 
 R 
 
 
 Ito 
 M 
 
 
 Fukuda 
 H 
 
 
 2000 
 A PET study of visuomotor learning under optical rotation 
 Neuroimage 
 11 
 505 
 16 
 10.1006/nimg.2000.0554 
 10806036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jakobs 
 O 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Cieslik 
 EC 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2012 
 Across-study and within-subject functional connectivity of a right temporo-parietal junction subregion involved in stimulus-context integration 
 Neuroimage 
 60 
 2389 
 98 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.037 
 22387170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 2012 
 FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 782 
 90 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.015 
 21979382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 PB 
 
 
 Ferraina 
 S 
 
 
 Bianchi 
 L 
 
 
 Caminiti 
 R 
 
 
 1996 
 Cortical networks for visual reaching: physiological and anatomical organization of frontal and parietal lobe arm regions 
 Cereb Cortex 
 6 
 102 
 19 
 8670643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 PB 
 
 
 Ferraina 
 S 
 
 
 Caminiti 
 R 
 
 
 1993 
 Cortical networks for visual reaching 
 Exp brain Res 
 97 
 361 
 5 
 7512050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Toro 
 R 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Cox 
 CL 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 A convergent functional architecture of the insula emerges across imaging modalities 
 Neuroimage 
 61 
 1129 
 42 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.021 
 22440648 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Broca's region: linking human brain functional connectivity data and non-human primate tracing anatomy studies 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 32 
 383 
 98 
 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07279.x 
 20662902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Uecker 
 AM 
 
 
 Ray 
 KL 
 
 
 Saenz 
 JJ 
 
 
 McKay 
 DR 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Laird 
 RW 
 
 
 Robinson 
 JL 
 
 
 Turner 
 JA 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2011 
 The BrainMap strategy for standardization, sharing, and meta-analysis of neuroimaging data 
 BMC Res Notes 
 4 
 349 
 10.1186/1756-0500-4-349 
 21906305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Worsley 
 K 
 
 
 Shaw 
 WP 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 DK 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 2006 
 Mapping anatomical correlations across cerebral cortex (MACACC) using cortical thickness from MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 993 
 1003 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.042 
 16624590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lesage 
 E 
 
 
 Morgan 
 BE 
 
 
 Olson 
 AC 
 
 
 Meyer 
 AS 
 
 
 Miall 
 RC 
 
 
 2012 
 Cerebellar rTMS disrupts predictive language processing 
 Curr Biol 
 22 
 R794 
 5 
 10.1016/j.cub.2012.07.006 
 23017990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matelli 
 M 
 
 
 Govoni 
 P 
 
 
 Galletti 
 C 
 
 
 Kutz 
 DF 
 
 
 Luppino 
 G 
 
 
 1998 
 Superior area 6 afferents from the superior parietal lobule in the macaque monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 402 
 327 
 52 
 9853903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayka 
 MA 
 
 
 Corcos 
 DM 
 
 
 Leurgans 
 SE 
 
 
 Vaillancourt 
 DE 
 
 
 2006 
 Three-dimensional locations and boundaries of motor and premotor cortices as defined by functional brain imaging: a meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 1453 
 74 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.02.004 
 16571375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Müller 
 VI 
 
 
 Cieslik 
 EC 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013 
 Dysregulated left inferior parietal activity in schizophrenia and depression: functional connectivity and characterization 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 7 
 268 
 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00268 
 23781190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nachev 
 P 
 
 
 Kennard 
 C 
 
 
 Husain 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional role of the supplementary and pre-supplementary motor areas 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 856 
 69 
 10.1038/nrn2478 
 18843271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Brown 
 JW 
 
 
 Askren 
 MK 
 
 
 Berman 
 MG 
 
 
 Demiralp 
 E 
 
 
 Krawitz 
 A 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 A meta-analysis of executive components of working memory 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 264 
 82 
 10.1093/cercor/bhs007 
 22314046 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Andersson 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 2005 
 Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic 
 Neuroimage 
 25 
 653 
 60 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.005 
 15808966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nooner 
 KB 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 SJ 
 
 
 Tobe 
 RH 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Benedict 
 MM 
 
 
 Moreno 
 AL 
 
 
 Panek 
 LJ 
 
 
 Brown 
 S 
 
 
 Zavitz 
 ST 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Sikka 
 S 
 
 
 Gutman 
 D 
 
 
 Bangaru 
 S 
 
 
 Schlachter 
 RT 
 
 
 Kamiel 
 SM 
 
 
 Anwar 
 AR 
 
 
 Hinz 
 CM 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 MS 
 
 
 Rachlin 
 AB 
 
 
 Adelsberg 
 S 
 
 
 Cheung 
 B 
 
 
 Khanuja 
 R 
 
 
 Yan 
 C 
 
 
 Craddock 
 CC 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 V 
 
 
 Courtney 
 W 
 
 
 King 
 M 
 
 
 Wood 
 D 
 
 
 Cox 
 CL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Duan 
 N 
 
 
 Thomsen 
 D 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Coffey 
 B 
 
 
 Hoptman 
 MJ 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Pomara 
 N 
 
 
 Sidtis 
 JJ 
 
 
 Koplewicz 
 HS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Leventhal 
 BL 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2012 
 The NKI-Rockland Sample: A Model for Accelerating the Pace of Discovery Science in Psychiatry 
 Front Neurosci 
 6 
 152 
 10.3389/fnins.2012.00152 
 23087608 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Reilly 
 JX 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Tomassini 
 V 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 2010 
 Distinct and overlapping functional zones in the cerebellum defined by resting state functional connectivity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 20 
 953 
 65 
 10.1093/cercor/bhp157 
 19684249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Shea 
 J 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Trief 
 D 
 
 
 Göbel 
 S 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 2007 
 Functionally specific reorganization in human premotor cortex 
 Neuron 
 54 
 479 
 90 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.04.021 
 17481399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Obeso 
 I 
 
 
 Cho 
 SS 
 
 
 Antonelli 
 F 
 
 
 Houle 
 S 
 
 
 Jahanshahi 
 M 
 
 
 Ko 
 JH 
 
 
 Strafella 
 AP 
 
 
 2013 
 Stimulation of the pre-SMA influences cerebral blood flow in frontal areas involved with inhibitory control of action 
 Brain Stimul 
 6 
 769 
 76 
 10.1016/j.brs.2013.02.002 
 23545472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2012 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 2142 
 54 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.018 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reetz 
 K 
 
 
 Dogan 
 I 
 
 
 Rolfs 
 A 
 
 
 Binkofski 
 F 
 
 
 Schulz 
 JB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2012 
 Investigating function and connectivity of morphometric findings--exemplified on cerebellar atrophy in spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 1354 
 66 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.05.058 
 22659444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 CR 
 
 
 2015 
 Multimodal connectivity mapping of the human left anterior and posterior lateral prefrontal cortex 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 10.1007/s00429-015-1060-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robinson 
 JL 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Lovallo 
 WR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2010 
 Metaanalytic connectivity modeling: delineating the functional connectivity of the human amygdala 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 31 
 173 
 84 
 10.1002/hbm.20854 
 19603407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 Skinhøj 
 E 
 
 
 Lassen 
 NA 
 
 
 Larsen 
 B 
 
 
 1980 
 Different cortical areas in man in organization of voluntary movements in extrapersonal space 
 J Neurophysiol 
 43 
 137 
 50 
 7351548 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Reetz 
 K 
 
 
 Dogan 
 I 
 
 
 Schulz 
 JB 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2013 
 Differentiated parietal connectivity of frontal regions for “what” and “where” memory 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 218 
 1551 
 67 
 10.1007/s00429-012-0476-4 
 23143344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Dogan 
 I 
 
 
 Reetz 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Schulz 
 JB 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2012 
 Modelling neural correlates of working memory: a coordinate-based meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 60 
 830 
 46 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.050 
 22178808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Göbel 
 SM 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 2003 
 The left parietal and premotor cortices: motor attention and selection 
 Neuroimage 
 20 
 Suppl 1 
 S89 
 100 
 14597301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Elliott 
 MA 
 
 
 Gerraty 
 RT 
 
 
 Ruparel 
 K 
 
 
 Loughead 
 J 
 
 
 Calkins 
 ME 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Hakonarson 
 H 
 
 
 Gur 
 RC 
 
 
 Gur 
 RE 
 
 
 Wolf 
 DH 
 
 
 2013 
 An improved framework for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data 
 Neuroimage 
 64 
 240 
 56 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.052 
 22926292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2002a 
 Predicting perceptual events activates corresponding motor schemes in lateral premotor cortex: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 787 
 96 
 10.1006/nimg.2001.1043 
 11906220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2002b 
 A blueprint for target motion: fMRI reveals perceived sequential complexity to modulate premotor cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 920 
 35 
 12202080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Crawford 
 RK 
 
 
 Zhou 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 BL 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 2009 
 Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks 
 Neuron 
 62 
 42 
 52 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.024 
 19376066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Segall 
 JM 
 
 
 Allen 
 EA 
 
 
 Jung 
 RE 
 
 
 Erhardt 
 EB 
 
 
 Arja 
 SK 
 
 
 Kiehl 
 K 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 VD 
 
 
 2012 
 Correspondence between structure and function in the human brain at rest 
 Front Neuroinform 
 6 
 10 
 10.3389/fninf.2012.00010 
 22470337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Drobnjak 
 I 
 
 
 Flitney 
 DE 
 
 
 Niazy 
 RK 
 
 
 Saunders 
 J 
 
 
 Vickers 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 Suppl 1 
 S208 
 19 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051 
 15501092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 2009 
 Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster inference 
 Neuroimage 
 44 
 83 
 98 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.03.061 
 18501637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoodley 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schmahmann 
 JD 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional topography in the human cerebellum: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies 
 Neuroimage 
 44 
 489 
 501 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.08.039 
 18835452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanji 
 J 
 
 
 Okano 
 K 
 
 
 Sato 
 KC 
 
 
 1988 
 Neuronal activity in cortical motor areas related to ipsilateral, contralateral, and bilateral digit movements of the monkey 
 J Neurophysiol 
 60 
 325 
 43 
 3404223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thickbroom 
 GW 
 
 
 Byrnes 
 ML 
 
 
 Mastaglia 
 FL 
 
 
 2003 
 Dual representation of the hand in the cerebellum: activation with voluntary and passive finger movement 
 Neuroimage 
 18 
 670 
 4 
 12667844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 Jones 
 KM 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 2002 
 Meta-analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of single-word reading: method and validation 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 765 
 80 
 12169260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 M 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Minimizing within-experiment and within-group effects in Activation Likelihood Estimation meta-analyses 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 33 
 1 
 13 
 10.1002/hbm.21186 
 21305667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Shaw 
 D 
 
 
 Ghaffari 
 M 
 
 
 Rotrosen 
 J 
 
 
 Adler 
 LA 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Network homogeneity reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD 
 J Neurosci Methods 
 169 
 249 
 54 
 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.11.031 
 18190970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Patel 
 GH 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Baker 
 JT 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Zempel 
 JM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 LH 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 2007 
 Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain 
 Nature 
 447 
 83 
 6 
 10.1038/nature05758 
 17476267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ward 
 NS 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Age-related changes in the neural correlates of motor performance 
 Brain 
 126 
 873 
 88 
 12615645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weinrich 
 M 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 1982 
 The premotor cortex of the monkey 
 J Neurosci 
 2 
 1329 
 45 
 7119878 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 Boussaoud 
 D 
 
 
 Johnson 
 PB 
 
 
 Caminiti 
 R 
 
 
 1997 
 Premotor and parietal cortex: corticocortical connectivity and combinatorial computations 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 20 
 25 
 42 
 10.1146/annurev.neuro.20.1.25 
 9056706 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 SP 
 
 
 Murray 
 EA 
 
 
 2000 
 Arbitrary associations between antecedents and actions 
 Trends Neurosci 
 23 
 271 
 6 
 10838597 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wymbs 
 NF 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2013 
 Contributions from the left PMd and the SMA during sequence retrieval as determined by depth of training 
 Exp brain Res 
 224 
 49 
 58 
 10.1007/s00221-012-3287-1 
 23283418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Hollinshead 
 M 
 
 
 Roffman 
 JL 
 
 
 Smoller 
 JW 
 
 
 Zöllei 
 L 
 
 
 Polimeni 
 JR 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2011 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 J Neurophysiol 
 106 
 1125 
 65 
 10.1152/jn.00338.2011 
 21653723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 X 
 
 
 de Beukelaar 
 TT 
 
 
 Possel 
 J 
 
 
 Olaerts 
 M 
 
 
 Swinnen 
 SP 
 
 
 Woolley 
 DG 
 
 
 Wenderoth 
 N 
 
 
 2011 
 Movement Observation Improves Early Consolidation of Motor Memory 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 11515 
 11520 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6759-10.2011 
 21832181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 F 
 
 
 Yeung 
 A 
 
 
 Poolton 
 J 
 
 
 Lee 
 T 
 
 
 Leung 
 G 
 
 
 Masters 
 R 
 
 
 2015 
 Cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation over left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex area promotes implicit motor learning in a golf putting task 
 Brain Stimul 
 10.1016/j.brs.2015.02.005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zielinski 
 BA 
 
 
 Gennatas 
 ED 
 
 
 Zhou 
 J 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 2010 
 Network-level structural covariance in the developing brain 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 107 
 18191 
 6 
 10.1073/pnas.1003109107 
 20921389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 zu Eulenburg 
 P 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2012 
 Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 60 
 162 
 9 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.032 
 22209784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 The left dPMC seed region. A previous meta-analysis of motor learning ( Hardwick et al., 2013 ) identified this seed as a key area for motor learning. The seed region was the sole area surviving multiple analyses that strictly controlled for both movement execution and hand use. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Results of the connectivity analyses. 2A) The resting state analysis (red) revealed the largest functional connectivity network, including frontal-premotor, and parietal cortex, as well as the thalamus, putamen, and cerebellar regions. 2B) Meta-analytical connectivity modelling (green) gave relatively focal results with a bilateral network of premotor and parietal cortical structures. 2C) The structural covariance analysis (blue) identified a large functional connectivity network, with widespread clusters, predominantly in prefrontal and motor/premotor areas. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Difference analyses presenting regions where one of the connectivity analyses provided significantly stronger scores than its counterparts. 3A) Results more strongly associated with RSFC, shown with red clusters. 3B) Results more strongly associated with MACM, shown with green clusters. 3C) Results more strongly associated with SC, shown with blue clusters. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Results of the conjunction analyses. A) Conjunction of the RSFC and MACM analyses. B) Conjunction of the RSFC and SC analyses. C) Conjunction of the MACM and SC analyses. D) A combined conjunction from all three analyses (RSFC, MACM, and SC), identifying a consistent ‘core’ network common to all connectivity mapping techniques considered. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Volume comparisons of the total volumes identified by the analyses, and their unique contributions and overlap. A) Total volumes identified by the RSFC, MACM and SC analyses. Further sections of the figure illustrate the overlap and disparity between total volumes identified by B) the RSFC and MACM analyses, C) the RSFC and SC analyses, D) the SC and MACM analyses, E) The RSFC, MACM, and SC analyses. F-K) pairwise comparisons illustrating the degree of overlap for each combination of analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Results of the conservatively thresholded RS and SC analyses in comparison to the results of the MACM analysis 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Volume comparisons for the volume-matched analyses 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Resting state functional connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 # 
 Vol (mm 3 ) 
 Macro 
 Cyto 
 t-score 
 MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 172,308 
 L dPMC 
 
 56.21 
 -26 
 4 
 60 
 
 
 
 
 R dPMC 
 
 27.62 
 26 
 8 
 56 
 
 
 
 
 L SMA 
 
 14.91 
 -4 
 22 
 42 
 
 
 
 
 L vPMC 
 Area 44 
 12.82 
 -46 
 6 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 Area 45 
 12.54 
 -48 
 36 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 L Putamen 
 
 7.45 
 -16 
 8 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 LThalamus 
 Th-Temporal 
 7.37 
 -6 
 -14 
 12 
 
 
 
 
 R Thalamus 
 Th-Temporal 
 7.15 
 8 
 -20 
 12 
 
 
 
 
 R vPMC 
 Area 44 
 5.96 
 50 
 6 
 26 
 
 
 2 
 151,208 
 L Precuneus 
 SPL (7A) 
 18.68 
 -6 
 -64 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP2 
 16.92 
 -52 
 -42 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 L Precuneus 
 SPL (7P) 
 16.50 
 -8 
 -72 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 R Precuneus 
 SPL (7P) 
 16.29 
 8 
 -70 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 IPC (PF) 
 15.53 
 -52 
 -34 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP2 
 15.46 
 -38 
 -48 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP1 
 15.25 
 -36 
 -48 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 L Superior Parietal Lobule 
 SPL (7P) 
 14.74 
 -16 
 -74 
 54 
 
 
 3 
 24,072 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIa Crus I (Hem) 
 12.31 
 36 
 -64 
 -32 
 
 
 
 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule VI (Hem) 
 11.71 
 30 
 -62 
 -32 
 
 
 
 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIa Crus II (Hem) 
 8.78 
 38 
 -68 
 -52 
 
 
 
 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIb (Hem) 
 8.69 
 30 
 -70 
 -50 
 
 
 4 
 12,071 
 L Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 14.95 
 -58 
 -58 
 -14 
 
 
 5 
 4,405 
 R Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 7.58 
 64 
 -58 
 -12 
 
 
 6 
 4,205 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule IX (Hem) 
 9.67 
 14 
 -52 
 -48 
 
 
 
 
 R Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIIb (Hem) 
 4.60 
 12 
 -62 
 -62 
 
 
 7 
 4,063 
 L Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIa Crus I (Hem) 
 7.51 
 -32 
 -62 
 -34 
 
 
 
 
 L Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIa Crus II (Hem) 
 3.24 
 -48 
 -48 
 -50 
 
 
 8 
 3,529 
 L Fusiform Gyrus 
 
 9.51 
 -34 
 -38 
 -18 
 
 
 9 
 2,013 
 L Cerebellum 
 Lobule IX (Hem) 
 7.99 
 -12 
 -52 
 -50 
 
 
 10 
 1,977 
 R Fusiform Gyrus 
 
 6.04 
 34 
 -34 
 -20 
 
 
 11 
 1,315 
 L Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIa Crus II (Hem) 
 5.75 
 -38 
 -70 
 -54 
 
 
 
 
 L Cerebellum 
 Lobule VIIb (Hem) 
 3.22 
 -24 
 -72 
 -52 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Meta-analytical connectivity modelling 
 
 
 
 
 # 
 Vol (mm 3 ) 
 Macro 
 Cyto 
 z-score 
 MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 22,522 
 L dPMC 
 
 8.57 
 -26 
 4 
 60 
 
 
 
 
 L SMA 
 Area 6 
 7.89 
 -2 
 12 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 R SMA 
 
 7.51 
 6 
 22 
 46 
 
 
 2 
 12,497 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP3 
 7.30 
 -30 
 -56 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 L Precuneus 
 SPL (7P) 
 5.57 
 -12 
 -72 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP2 
 4.26 
 -46 
 -36 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 Area 2 
 4.25 
 -44 
 -34 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP1 
 3.56 
 -38 
 -44 
 44 
 
 
 3 
 12,293 
 L vPMC 
 Area 44 
 6.27 
 -52 
 10 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 
 5.26 
 -44 
 32 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 Area 45 
 4.80 
 -46 
 28 
 28 
 
 
 4 
 6,813 
 R Angular Gyrus 
 
 6.41 
 34 
 -62 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 
 5.51 
 32 
 -76 
 34 
 
 
 
 
 R Superior Parietal Lobule 
 SPL (7P) 
 4.56 
 16 
 -68 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 R Precuneus 
 SPL (7A) 
 4.16 
 8 
 -60 
 50 
 
 
 5 
 6,307 
 L Insula Lobe 
 
 6.95 
 -34 
 22 
 -4 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 Area 44 
 4.03 
 -48 
 16 
 4 
 
 
 6 
 5,707 
 R dPMC 
 
 6.03 
 28 
 2 
 54 
 
 
 7 
 4,101 
 R vPMC 
 
 4.99 
 48 
 14 
 30 
 
 
 8 
 3,025 
 Right Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Orbitalis) 
 
 5.29 
 34 
 24 
 -10 
 
 
 9 
 1,745 
 Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 hIP2 
 4.56 
 42 
 -42 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 IPC (PF) 
 3.75 
 48 
 -40 
 48 
 
 
 
 
 Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 IPC (PFt) 
 3.67 
 50 
 -38 
 50 
 
 
 10 
 1,739 
 Left Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 5.43 
 -48 
 -62 
 -10 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Structural covariance connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 # 
 Vol (mm 3 ) 
 Macro 
 Cyto 
 t-score 
 MNI Coordinates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 162,399 
 L dPMC 
 
 3.54 
 -47 
 9 
 32 
 
 
 
 
 R dPMC 
 
 3.52 
 27 
 2 
 61 
 
 
 
 
 R dPMC 
 Area 6 
 3.35 
 24 
 -12 
 63 
 
 
 
 
 L SMA 
 Area 6 
 3.29 
 -1 
 -3 
 67 
 
 
 
 
 R Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Triangularis) 
 
 3.24 
 48 
 36 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (p. Opercularis) 
 
 3.21 
 -43 
 21 
 33 
 
 
 
 
 R Middle Cingulate 
 
 3.16 
 3 
 -9 
 35 
 
 
 2 
 10,584 
 R Cuneus 
 Area 18 
 2.29 
 6 
 -79 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 L Cuneus 
 
 2.11 
 3 
 -78 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 L Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 SPL (7P) 
 1.91 
 -9 
 -81 
 41 
 
 
 
 
 L Cuneus 
 Area 17 
 1.90 
 -3 
 -84 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 L Cuneus 
 Area 18 
 1.90 
 -1 
 -81 
 18 
 
 
 3 
 4,569 
 L Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 
 2.05 
 -57 
 -28 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 L Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 OP 4 
 2.00 
 -60 
 -19 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 L Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 TE 3 
 1.98 
 -61 
 -31 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 1.94 
 -66 
 -42 
 8 
 
 
 4 
 1,190 
 R S1 
 Area 3b 
 1.75 
 30 
 -37 
 57 
 
 
 
 
 R S1 
 Area 2 
 1.73 
 30 
 -42 
 57 
 
 
 5 
 1,000 
 R Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 
 1.69 
 25 
 -88 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 
 1.68 
 30 
 -87 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
