
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9419065 
 21028 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 
 Human brain mapping 
 
 1065-9471 
 1097-0193 
 
 
 26526072 
 4734135 
 10.1002/hbm.23041 
 NIHMS732873 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Differences in Neural Activity when Processing Emotional Arousal and Valence in Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 
 
 
 
 Tseng 
 Angela 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 Zhishun 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Huo 
 Yuankai 
 
 M.S. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Goh 
 Suzanne 
 
 M.D. 
 1 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 James A. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 2 
 
 
 
 Peterson 
 Bradley S. 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and New York State Psychiatric Institute 
 2 Department of Psychology, Boston College 
 3 Children’s Hospital Los Angeles and the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California 
 
 Corresponding Author: Angela Tseng, Ph.D. has moved to the Institute for Translational Research in Children’s Mental Health, University of Minnesota, 1100 Washington Ave S, Minneapolis, MN 55415, ( atseng@umn.edu ) 
 
 
 19 
 1 
 2016 
 
 
 03 
 11 
 2015 
 
 
 2 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 2 
 2017 
 
 37 
 2 
 443 
 461 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) often have difficulty recognizing and interpreting facial expressions of emotion, which may impair their ability to navigate and communicate successfully in their social, interpersonal environments. Characterizing specific differences between individuals with ASD and their typically-developing (TD) counterparts in the neural activity subserving their experience of emotional faces may provide distinct targets for ASD interventions. Thus we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a parametric experimental design to identify brain regions in which neural activity correlated with ratings of arousal and valence for a broad range of emotional faces. Participants (51 ASD, 84 TD) were group-matched by age, sex, IQ, race, and socioeconomic status. 
 Using task-related change in blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI signal as a measure, and covarying for age, sex, FSIQ, and ADOS scores, we detected significant differences across diagnostic groups in the neural activity subserving the dimension of arousal but not valence. BOLD-signal in TD participants correlated inversely with ratings of arousal in regions associated primarily with attentional functions, whereas BOLD-signal in ASD participants correlated positively with arousal ratings in regions commonly associated with impulse control and default-mode activity. Only minor differences were detected between groups in the BOLD signal correlates of valence ratings. Our findings provide unique insight into the emotional experiences of individuals with ASD. Although behavioral responses to face-stimuli were comparable across diagnostic groups, the corresponding neural activity for our ASD and TD groups differed dramatically. The near absence of group differences for valence correlates and the presence of strong group differences for arousal correlates suggest that individuals with ASD are not atypical in all aspects of emotion-processing. Studying these similarities and differences may help us to understand the origins of divergent interpersonal emotional experience in persons with ASD. 
 
 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Arousal 
 Valence 
 Facial Emotion 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a set of complex neurodevelopmental disabilities that cause lifelong impairments in social ability, communication, and behavioral flexibility ( American Psychiatric Association, 2000 ). Individuals with ASD often have difficulty recognizing and interpreting facial expressions of emotions, which may impair their ability to understand the intentionality and minds of others, a capacity needed for successful social communication ( Golan et al., 2006 ;  Grelotti et al., 2002 ). Despite having a general consensus that persons with ASD are atypical in their processing of human faces and emotional expressions ( Harms et al., 2010 ;  Sasson, 2006 ), researchers do not agree on the underlying brain and behavioral mechanisms through which individuals with ASD decode emotional faces. Some prior research suggests that individuals with ASD rely more on cognitive-perceptual systems involving explicit cognitive or verbally mediated processes to interpret facial expressions of emotions, in contrast to neurotypical individuals who process emotions more automatically ( Harms et al., 2010 ;  Pelphrey et al., 2007 ). 
 Although ASD is generally considered to involve deficits in emotion recognition, prior studies have provided only inconsistent evidence for those deficits. For example, several studies have reported that adults and children with ASD have more difficulty recognizing, responding to, and expressing emotions than typically developing (TD) individuals ( Ashwin et al., 2006 ;  Tantam et al., 1989 ;  Uljarevic and Hamilton, 2013 ) and more than persons with other neurodevelopmental disorders ( Celani et al., 1999 ;  Riby et al., 2008 ). However, other studies have reported typical levels of facial emotion recognition in persons with ASD ( Castelli, 2005 ;  Harms et al., 2010 ;  Ozonoff et al., 1990 ;  Tseng et al., 2014 ). 
 Disparities in findings for the recognition and understanding of emotions in individuals with ASD may, to some extent, be due to fundamental differences in the underlying model of emotion implicitly assumed when designing those studies. That underlying model has most often been the Theory of Basic Emotions ( Ekman, 1992 ;  Panksepp, 1992 ), which posits that each member of a core set of discrete, or “basic”, emotions (e.g., anger, sadness, or happiness) are subserved by its own distinct and independent neural system ( Ekman, 1992 ;  Panksepp, 1992 ). Earlier reviews have documented the limitations and inconsistencies of this theory, including the absence of one-to-one mappings of individual emotions with specific facial expressions, motor behaviors, and autonomic responses, as well as the absence of evidence for a core set of emotions from which other emotions derive ( Hamann, 2012 ;  Posner et al., 2005 ;  Russell, 1980 ;  Vytal and Hamann, 2010 ). Moreover, interpreting findings from neuroimaging studies based on the theory of basic emotions is complicated by the subtraction method employed in most functional imaging designs, in which brain activity is measured by comparing two tasks or stimuli that are assumed to differ only in the cognitive process of interest. Most functional imaging studies based on the theory of basic emotions have contrasted neural responses to individual emotions with neural responses to stimuli intended to be emotion-neutral. Unfortunately, the use of ‘neutral’ faces as control stimuli is an inherent confound in emotion research because of the difficulties involved in in creating truly ‘neutral’ stimuli (( Killgore and Yurgelun-Todd, 2004 ;  Klein et al., 2015 ;  Posner et al., 2005 ;  Thomas et al., 2001 ). 
 Additionally, most imaging studies of the basic emotions theory have focused only on a small number of emotions, generally those of high arousal and negative valence (e.g., fear and anger), low arousal and negative valence (e.g., sadness), or moderate arousal and positive valence (e.g., happy). Consequently, researchers have had trouble disentangling the differing contributions of arousal and valence to the neural correlates of emotions. For example, “happy” stimuli are often the only positive valence emotions included in study designs. Comparing them to stimuli that are putatively neutral or even negatively-valenced confounds the positive arousal component with the positive valence of the happy stimulus. In effect, even when comparing happy with putatively neutral faces, both of these types of stimuli have not only a valence, but also an arousal component that is never considered as contributing to the reported fMRI activation ( Fusar-Poli et al., 2009 ;  Harms et al., 2010 ;  Murphy et al., 2003 ). 
 An alternative theoretical framework to the theory of basic emotions is the “Circumplex Model of Affect,” which holds that the subjective experience of all emotions arises from the linear combination of two independent neurophysiological systems, valence and arousal. Valence refers to hedonic tone, or the degree to which an emotion is pleasant or unpleasant, whereas arousal represents the degree to which an emotion is associated with high or low energy. Under this model, a ‘happy’ response to a stimulus arises from relatively intense activation of the neural system associated with positive valence and moderate activation of the neural system associated with positive arousal. Other emotional states thus arise from the same two underlying neurophysiological systems but differ in degree of activation of each. Because all emotions can be represented as a linear combination of the dimensions of arousal and valence, emotions shade imperceptibly from one into another along the contour of the two-dimensional circumplex ( Posner et al., 2005 ). The subjective experience of the neurophysiological signals for valence and arousal is determined by interpretations of the signals in relation to the experiential context of the stimuli and memories of prior experiences of similar sensations ( Posner et al., 2005 ;  Russell, 2003 ). Thus the labeling of our subjective experience as one emotion rather than another nearby emotion is the consequence, in part, of cognitive interpretation of the neurophysiological experiences of arousal and valence within the situational context ( Russell, 2005 ). 
 Several studies have provided evidence for the existence of distinct neural systems that subserve the experience of emotional valence and arousal ( Colibazzi et al., 2010 ;  Gerber et al., 2008 ;  Posner et al., 2009 ). However, to our knowledge, no other studies have examined whether neural activity in circuits that subserve processing of the two dimensions of facial emotions differ between individuals with ASD and their TD counterparts. A prior publication from our laboratory reported that, in the same sample, the ASD group performed nearly as well as, and in a similar pattern to, the TD group when participants were asked to rate emotional faces for arousal and valence ( Tseng et al., 2014 ). However, without corresponding data on brain activity, determining whether the TD and ASD groups recruited the same neural systems to appraise emotional stimuli is impossible. Typical-level behavioral performance on emotion-processing tasks does not exclude the possibility of atypical neurocognitive processing of emotional information. Rather, abnormalities in emotion-processing might be obscured in some individuals because they have developed compensatory strategies that yield ‘typical’ levels of behavioral performance. Indeed, higher-functioning individuals with ASD might capitalize on their cognitive resources to identify facial expressions. For example, studies employing emotion-matching paradigms ( Piggot et al., 2004 ;  Rump et al., 2009 ) are more likely than emotion-labeling paradigms ( Katsyri et al., 2008 ;  Piggot et al., 2004 ;  Rutherford and Towns, 2008 ) to reveal differences in behavioral performance between TD and higher-functioning ASD groups. For some individuals with ASD, the use of emotion labels in a task may facilitate recognition of facial expressions of emotions, especially when they are trained to identify emotions as part of an intervention program ( Tanaka et al., 2010 ). 
 Although functional imaging studies of emotion-processing in ASD have yielded inconsistent findings, several have reported hypofunctioning in ASD in regions associated with socio-emotional processing (e.g.,INS, AMYG) ( Di Martino et al., 2009 ), in extrastriate cortices ( Deeley et al., 2007 ), ventral PFC ( Ashwin et al., 2007 ;  Hadjikhani et al., 2006 ), medial-frontal and orbito-frontal cortices ( Bachevalier and Loveland, 2006 ;  Loveland et al., 2008 ;  Ogai et al., 2003 ), ACC and FG ( Hall et al., 2003 ), striatum and IFG ( Dapretto et al., 2006 ) compared to TD controls. Conversely, studies have found increased activity for ASD compared to TD groups in STS, ACC ( Ashwin et al., 2007 ;  Hall et al., 2003 ;  Pelphrey et al., 2007 ), and parieto-occipital regions ( Dapretto et al., 2006 ;  Hubl et al., 2003 ;  Wang et al., 2004 ) when viewing facial emotions. These increases in neural activity may derive from increased visual and motor attention ( Dapretto et al., 2006 ), more effortful processing of specific facial features within the given social contexts ( Ashwin et al., 2007 ), and increased attentional load ( Wang et al., 2004 ), supporting the possibility that emotional processing is more effortful and less automatic in individuals with ASD than in their TD counterparts. 
 In order to address whether neural activity in circuits that subserve processing of arousal and valence differ between individuals with ASD and TD individuals, we applied a parametric experimental design to identify brain regions in which neural activity correlated with arousal and valence ratings for a broad range of facial emotions. The use of a parametric design allows us to compare emotional stimuli across multiple levels or through incremental changes along the affective dimensions of arousal and valence. For example, parametric manipulation of emotional stimuli that change incrementally in the degree of arousal or valence that they generate can be mapped against concomitant variations in neural activity. Accordingly, activity in neural structures or pathways that correlate with the degree of emotional arousal or valence induced by the emotional probes can be assessed in individual participants ( Posner et al., 2005 ). In the present study, we used BOLD-signal intensity to index neural activity as participants viewed photographs depicting emotional faces. We identified brain regions in which BOLD-signal systematically covaried with ratings of arousal or valence in ASD and TD groups, and we determined the areas in which these correlations differed statistically across emotional dimensions and diagnostic groups, indicating the differential associations of these regions with processing arousal or valence within each group. We sought in to identify similarities and differences in neural activity when ASD and TD participants view and rate these experiences of facial emotions ( Gerber et al., 2008 ;  Russell et al., 1989 ). Given the socio-emotional deficits associated with ASD, we hypothesize that the ASD group will show abnormal patterns of brain activation when compared to controls, particularly in brain regions associated with processing of emotional stimuli in persons with ASD, including AMY, INS, CN, PFC, OFC, and ACC. 
 
 
 MATERIALS & METHODS 
 Study procedures were approved by New York State Psychiatric Institute’s Institutional Review Board. All participants provided informed written consent or assent and received payment for participating (SM for detailed consent procedures). 
 
 Participants 
 We recruited 51 individuals with ASD (6F, Ages: 7–60yrs, Mean: 27.5±13.1yrs) and 84 TD individuals (22F, Ages: 7–60yrs, Mean: 24.0±11.4yrs) from the New York City area. A wide age-range was included in our sample in order to understand better the developmental trajectory of emotional processing in this under-studied group. For example, if the child participants with ASD performed similarly to our adult participants with ASD, then we might infer that any emotional deficits founds are likely a static, trait-like disturbance. We also hoped to use cross-sectional data from this investigation to generate hypotheses for future longitudinal research. Participants were group-matched by age, sex, IQ (Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence) ( Wechsler, 1999 ), handedness (Edinburgh Handedness Inventory) ( Oldfield, 1971 ), race, and socioeconomic status (Hollingshead Index of Social Status) ( Hollingshead, 1975 ). Mean full scale IQ (FSIQ) was 109.2±19.4 for the ASD group and 115.9±12.4 for the TD group. Mean verbal IQ (VIQ) and mean performance IQ (PIQ) for both groups did not differ significantly so we opted to conduct further analyses of IQ using only FSIQ as a covariate ( Table 1 ). 
 Additional individuals participated (N=4ASD; N=1TD) but were not included in the final sample due to excessive head motion in the scanner. 
 TD participants were excluded if they met DSM-IV-TR criteria for a current Axis-I-disorder, or had lifetime history of developmental delay or other indicators of ASD, psychosis, substance abuse disorder, head trauma, seizure disorder, or other neurological illness. None of the TD participants were taking prescription or over-the-counter medications; however, the use of dietary supplements was not assessed. 
 Participants with ASD were evaluated by an expert clinician and met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR)( American Psychiatric Association, 2000 ) criteria for autistic disorder, Asperger syndrome, or pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specified. Diagnoses were confirmed with the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised ( Lord et al., 1994 )and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) ( Lord et al., 1989 ). A detailed list of current medications was recorded for every participant (available on request). 
 At the beginning of each study session, an experienced member of the study team explained verbally the nature of the research protocol, including potential risks and benefits, to all potential participants and (in the case of a minor) to their parents. For participants 8 to <18 years old, assent was discussed and obtained. For adult participants (>18 years), the study member obtaining consent explained the protocol and associated risks to the prospective participant before asking participants to sign the consent form. For all adult participants with ASD, an independent assessment of capacity to consent was conducted by a clinical monitor who was independent of the study team. When the clinical monitor determined that the participant lacked the capacity to consent (i.e., the participant did not demonstrate an understanding of the procedures, alternatives, and potential risks and benefits of the study, and that participation was voluntary), an authorized legal representative was designated to provide informed consent. 
 
 
 Emotion Paradigm 
 We used a parametric experimental design to identify brain regions in which neural activity correlated with participant ratings of arousal or valence ( Fig. 1 ). 
 Neural activity was indexed using BOLD-signal intensity as participants viewed photographs of emotional faces. After viewing each face, participants rated arousal and valence simultaneously by selecting an individual box on a 9 × 9 two-dimensional grid. Location on the x-axis indicated the participant’s rating of valence (left = negative valence, right = positive valence), and location on the y-axis indicated the rating of arousal (top = high arousal, bottom = low arousal). We recorded the selected box as two integer scores, each ranging from −4 to +4, representing valence and arousal. 
 Each trial consisted of 3 sequential epochs: (1) Visual presentation of a photograph of a human face for 18 s. The photographs were copied, with permission, from the 20 distinct stimuli used by  Russell and Bullock (1985)  for their studies of the affective circumplex. Thirteen of these 20 images were taken from  Ekman and Friesen’s (1976)  “Pictures of Facial Affect” and depicted expressions of a number of emotions (two pictures each of emotional faces commonly classified as expressing happiness, surprise, fear, anger, disgust, or sadness, and one commonly classified as neutral). Russell and Bullock supplemented this set to represent better portions of the circumplex that the Ekman series under-sampled (emotions associated with low arousal but positive or neutral valence). These included 2 photographs each of actors and actresses expressing boredom, contentment, and sleepiness, as well as one expressing excitement. (2) Visual presentation of a 2-dimensional grid on which participants indicated their ratings of arousal and valence for each stimulus by moving an arrow controlled by an MRI-compatible computer mouse. This screen remained visible until the participant clicked the mouse button, up to a maximum of 20s. (3) Visual presentation of a fixation point (+) at the center of the participant’s visual field. The fixation point was displayed immediately following the rating of valence and arousal. The durations of rating and gaze fixation were each variable, but when summed together always equaled 20s. One imaging run consisted of 20 trials presented in a pseudorandom order (but uniform from participant to participant). 
 Visual stimuli were presented to each participant via MRI-compatible LCD goggles (Resonance Technology, Northridge, CA) using E-Prime software, version 1.138 running on a Dell IBM-compatible computer. Measures of stimulus durations and reaction times were accurate to 20ms. Stimuli were presented at the center of the participant’s visual field, subtending 19° of vertical and 15° of horizontal visual field. 
 Prior to the study session, all participants were given a practice session with the task so they could familiarize themselves with task instructions, the types of stimuli they would be seeing (practice stimuli were not shown during the study session), the grid on which they would be rating arousal and valence, and the computer mouse they would be clicking to indicate their ratings. Researchers were available to review the practice responses in detail, to explain the instructions further, or to answer any questions about the task during this practice round to ensure full comprehension. Each participant was told, “You will be shown a face that expresses a certain feeling. You will be asked to assess the feeling on the chart shown below…. On the chart, the vertical dimension represents degree of arousal. Arousal has to do with how awake, alert, or energetic a person is…. The right half of the chart represents pleasant feelings—the farther to the right, the more pleasant. The left half represents unpleasant feelings—the farther to the left, the more unpleasant…. During the experiment, you will first be shown a face. This will appear on the screen for 18s. Then you will be shown the grid. When the grid appears, you will click on the area you think best describes the face…Try to think about the feeling expressed by the face during the 18s shown. It will not be on the screen when you are shown the grid.” At the time of instruction and during the experiment itself, the words “High Pleasure” appeared to the right of the grid, and “High Energy” above the grid. The shortened practice version consisted of three faces—one each expressing sadness, happiness, and anger. To minimize the possibility of habituation, none of the practice faces were identical to actual experimental stimuli. During the scan, researchers monitored on-line behavioral responses in real-time so that we could ensure attention to the task. 
 
 
 Behavioral Data Analyses 
 Behavioral data gathered from the present study were analyzed and reported in detail in a prior publication from our laboratory ( Tseng et al., 2014 ). The participants were identical across the two studies, with the exception that several participants were eliminated from fMRI analysis because of excessive head motion in the scanner. In addition, we collected data for an additional 3 TD adults, 1 TD child, and 4ASD adults after the publication of our prior study. We did not find any significant differences between our findings with or without the additional 8 participants, so we included them in our fMRI sample. As described in our previous report, we divided participants into four groups by diagnosis and age to compare behavioral performances across groups: Adult ASD (N=39, 5F, Ages:18–61yrs, Mean:31.9±11.8yrs), Adult TD (N=53, 8F, Ages:18–60yrs, Mean:30.1±10.2yrs), Child ASD (N=12, 1F, Ages:7–17yrs, Mean:13.2±3.1yrs), and Child TD (N=31,14F, Ages:7–17yrs, Mean:13.7±2.7yrs). Mean FSIQ scores in these groups were: Adult ASD (110.2±18.4), Adult TD (116.42±1.9), Child ASD (105.6±22.2), and Child TD (115.0±13.4). We also divided participants by diagnosis alone to compare the entire ASD and TD groups. 
 Multivariate ANCOVAs were conducted with arousal and valence ratings as dependent variables, group as the independent variable, and age and gender as covariates to assess emotion-specific differences between groups. These analyses were also conducted with ASD subtype (PDD-NOS, Asperger’s Syndrome, Autistic Disorder) as the independent variable to determine whether participant responses varied according to specific diagnosis. We used hierarchical multiple regressions for ASD and TD groups (controlling for age and sex) with arousal and valence ratings as dependent variables and FSIQ scores as the independent variable to assess whether IQ was significantly correlated with how participants rated each emotion-type. Similar analyses were conducted with total ADOS scores (Social Affect (SA) + Restrictive, Repetitive Behaviors (RRB), Mean=10.9±3.1 ( Gotham et al., 2007 ). CSS conversion algorithms are not available for participants over the age of 16 or who were assessed with module 4 of the ADOS. 
 To assess whether severity of diagnosis significantly correlated with how participants rated each emotion-type, we used hierarchical multiple regressions for analyses in the ASD group (controlling for age and sex) in which arousal or valence ratings were entered separately as the dependent variable and total ADOS score was the independent variable. These regressions were applied separately to each facial stimulus. We also conducted these analyses with only the social affect scores from the ADOS as the independent variable, because we expected the social affect measure alone might correlate more strongly with how participants with ASD rated these affective stimuli. 
 Finally, we conducted multivariate ANCOVAs with arousal or valence ratings entered separately as the dependent variable, ASD subtype (PDD-NOS, Asperger’s Syndrome, Autistic Disorder) entered as the independent variable, and age and gender entered as covariates to assess whether participant responses varied according to specific by ASD subtype. 
 
 
 Task Performance 
 So that we could be as confident as possible that all participants were performing the task as instructed and to ensure the face validity of their responses, we first visually compared each individual’s arousal and valence ratings qualitatively against the canonical circumplex to ensure that the responses seemed reasonable. Then, assuming that the responses of the healthy adults represent the end product of development, we used the arousal and valence scores from typically-developing adults reported by  Russell and Bullock (1985)  as reference ratings for “correct” performance by assessing quantitatively the correlations of each individual participant’s data with the reference ratings. Our rationale was that an individual responding at random to the stimuli or who was not understanding or following instructions would be unlikely to produce a similar response pattern to the reference ratings. Then, as a subset analysis, we removed participants (N=13: 4 Child ASD, 4 Adult ASD, 5 Child TD) whose correlations between arousal or valence ratings with the reference values were significant at p < 0.2 (corresponding to a Pearson’s r < 0.42). Similar to findings from our original analysis with the entire sample (N=135), we detected with this smaller sample (N=122) a main effect of diagnosis (p<0.05). Thus, although we were unable to measure task comprehension directly during the scan, the use of pre-scan practice trials and the similarity of results in our subset analysis with those of the original analysis show that the vast majority of our participants were able to understand and perform the task as instructed. 
 
 
 Image Acquisition 
 Imaging was performed on a GE Signa 3T whole body scanner (Milwaukee, WI) using a GE single channel quadrature head-coil. A 3-D spoiled gradient recall (SPGR) image was acquired for coregistration with axial functional images and for coregistration with a standard reference image (Montreal Neurological Institute). Functional images were acquired using a single shot gradient echo planar (EPI) pulse sequence in groups of 43 axial slices per volume and 273 volumes per run (preceded by 6 “dummy” volumes to ensure scanner stability). Parameters for the EPI images were: Repetition Time=2800ms, Echo Time=25 ms, flip angle=90°, acquisition matrix=64×64, field of view=24cm×24cm, slice thickness=3mm, skip=0.5 mm, receiver bandwidth=62.5 kHz, in-plane resolution=3.75mm×3.75mm. Each run lasted 13min 1sec, for a total EPI scan time of 39min 3sec. 
 
 
 Image Preprocessing 
 Prior to statistical analyses, we used SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ , run under MATLAB2009b) to preprocess the fMRI data. Slice timing was corrected using the middle slice (22 of 43) as the timing reference. Slice timing corrected functional images were then realigned to the middle image of the middle run for motion correction for three translational directions and rotations. Images with motion greater than one voxel were excluded from all subsequent analyses. Motion corrected images of each participant were co-registered to the corresponding T1-weighted high-resolution anatomical image, which in turn was spatially normalized to the standard MNI template with voxel dimensions of 3mm 3 . These participant-specific normalization parameters were then used to warp the functional images into the same MNI template. A spatial smoother with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm Full Width at Half Maximum was applied to the functional images, which were then temporally filtered using a Discrete Cosine Transform high-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 1/128Hz to remove low frequency noise such as scanner drift. 
 We then assessed data quality by plotting motion parameters and mean intensity values for raw, normalized, and smoothed images for each run in each participant. Visual inspection allowed us to identify scans for which average intensity values across voxels were significantly outside the mean and which occurred at the same moment as a large head movement. We also used histogram plots for each contrast image in each participant to help identify outliers for mean intensity that might have been missed by the batch preprocessing procedure. We used the ArtRepair algorithm ( http://cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/human-brain-project/artrepair-software.html ) to detect and repair those image volumes that were contaminated by spiking motion artifacts and outliers ( Mazaika et al., 2009 ). Volumes with motion larger than 1mm were repaired. Participants for whom motion affected more than 15% of their data (>41/273 volumes per run) were excluded from further analyses; based on this criterion, we eliminated from our final analysis 1 TD and 4 ASD participants (from the original 140 participants). 
 
 
 Statistical Analyses 
 We analyzed fMRI data at the individual (first) level using a general linear model (GLM) to detect BOLD-signal correlates of arousal or valence within each individual participant and at the group (second) level using Bayesian posterior inference ( Neumann and Lohmann, 2003 ) at a posterior probability threshold of 98.75%, to detect random effects of arousal or valence correlates within and between diagnostic groups. We covaried for age and sex of the participants. We also conducted additional analyses covarying for FSIQ in all participants and for ADOS scores in the ASD group. We assessed the  main effects  of arousal and valence ratings on BOLD-signal for each diagnostic group (TD, ASD). We also assessed BOLD-signal correlates with quadratics of arousal and valence ratings, allowing us to assess at each voxel whether the correlation of ratings with BOLD-signal had a significant curvilinear component. We included simultaneously in our model the main effects and quadratic values of arousal and valence ratings (including them separately yielded identical findings). Finally, we assessed whether the within-group valence and arousal correlates differed significantly across ASD and TD participants by assessing the  interactions  of the correlations with diagnostic group. We included simultaneously in our model the main effects and their interactions with diagnostic group to ensure that the models were hierarchically well formulated. We plotted the scatters for the linear and quadratic associations of BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal and valence to assess the distribution of data around the regressions and to determine the group contributions to significant interactions. 
 
 First-Level Analysis 
 We used GLM in SPM8 for the analyses of data at the individual level. We modeled preprocessed BOLD time series data at each voxel, using 8 independent functions (Fn) or regressors that consisted of:
 Fn(1): the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) convolved with a box car function (BCF) derived from the onsets and durations of the presentation of facial stimuli Fn(2): Fn(1)  modulated by the linear arousal rating for each stimulus Fn(3): Fn(1)  modulated by the linear valence rating for each stimulus Fn(4): Fn(1)  modulated by the quadratic arousal rating for each stimulus Fn(5): Fn(1)  modulated by the quadratic valence rating for each stimulus Fn(6): the canonical HRF convolved with a BCF indexing the manual responses of each participant to the task stimuli Fn(7): the canonical HRF convolved with a BCF indexing the presentation of a fixation cross Fn(8): a constant 
 Our model, which included the main effects and quadratic values of arousal and valence ratings on a −4 to 4 scale for each participant, was estimated using the Restricted Maximum Likelihood (ReML) algorithm. Task-related T-contrast images were generated using SPM8 contrast manager. We ran our models for valence and arousal separately (i.e., with functions 1,2,4,6,7, and 8 for arousal and with functions 1,3,5,7, and 8 for valence) and both with and without the quadratic terms (functions 4 and 5) to ensure that the model was not over-specified; the findings for the linear arousal and valence terms in these reduced models were unchanged from findings for the model that included all 8 functions. We thus elected to present findings for the full model so that we could account every event that occurs during the task, allowing us to control for signal variability in each trial. Also, by including both linear and quadratic components we were able to assess whether the response is truly linear across the range of ratings or whether it is curvilinear ( Acton and Friston, 1998 ;  Buchel et al., 1996 ;  Buchel et al., 1998 ;  Frackowiak, 2004 ). We also ran our model using both the SPM default that orthogonalizes parametric variables, as well as without orthogonalization, because we were concerned that if our regressors were inter-correlated and we did orthogonalize our modulators, then the explained variance in BOLD-signal would not be assigned to any of the regressors and our power would be reduced for statistical testing. We also wanted to ensure that our findings were robust with respect to orthogonalization. Our findings were nearly identical with or without orthogonalization, so we elected to present our findings using the orthogonalized analyses. Finally, we also ran the GLMs with motion parameters as regressors and found that they had no significant effect on our findings, so we elected to present our findings without motion regressors in the model. 
 
 
 Second-Level Analysis 
 We used Bayesian inference to detect random effects by assessing the posterior probability of detecting within or between group difference, β, given the activation map that we attained in a particular contrast. We used a posterior probability of greater than 98.75% as the threshold for statistical significance in each of the contrast maps and, in addition, required a spatial extent of at least 8 contiguous voxels to further strengthen the biological validity of our findings. Unlike a more conventional second-level analysis that uses classical parametric inference to detect a group effect in a statistical parametric map by disproving the null hypothesis (β = 0) at each voxel of the image, a group effect using the Bayesian method infers the posterior probability of detecting the observed group effects (β ≠ 0), given the data in a posterior probability map ( Neumann and Lohmann, 2003 ). Whereas the voxelwise tests in a statistical parametric map require correction for the number of statistical comparisons performed, the Bayesian method, because it infers posterior probability, by definition, does not generate false positives and does not require adjustment of its P values based on stringent P value thresholding (a feature of these analyses that has been confirmed in numerous simulations and empirical studies) ( Friston et al., 2002 ;  Friston and Penny, 2003 ). 
 
 
 
 Post-Hoc  Analyses 
 Several additional analyses ensured that possible confounding effects did not unduly influence our findings. We conducted post-hoc analyses while covarying for FSIQ in all participants and ADOS scores in analyses involving only participants with ASD. Results did not differ significantly when we covaried for age, sex, FSIQ, or ADOS scores in participants with ASD. Additionally, we assessed the Age-by-Diagnosis interaction but found none; restricting our ASD sample to participants who were older than 18-years did not change our findings from those for our overall sample (ASD: 24% of group (12/51) and TD: 37% of group (31/84)). Additionally, we analyzed our dataset with only male participants (45ASD, 62TD) and found the patterns of activation to be similar to those for our main model ( Fig. S4 ). We also assessed age correlations within each group and detected none that were significant for valence or arousal, Finally, restricting analyses to participants who were medication-naïve (ASD: 68% (34/51) yielded the same results as for our overall sample. 
 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 
 Behavioral Data 
 On the whole, our behavioral findings suggest that while participants in the ASD group rated arousal and valence for a wide range of emotions similar to individuals in the TD group, emotion ratings for the ASD groups along both valence and arousal dimensions were somewhat constricted in their ranges relative to those of the TD groups. These findings did not change when we covaried for overall intelligence. Also, for the ASD group, correlations of ADOS scores with arousal and valence yielded only one marginally significant finding: ADOS scores correlated with valence ratings for surprise faces (β=0.32, t 42 =2.1, p=.05). Results did not vary by ASD subtype. 
 
 
 Emotion-Specific Analyses 
 Given that emotional processing in typically-developing adults is presumably the desired outcome of emotional processing in typical and atypical development, we used our average Adult TD data as a point of reference for visually comparing data from the other 3 groups, even though our primary analyses of the behavioral data treated age as a continuous variable. We report subtle but significant differences between groups for specific emotions, although the overall assignment of valence and arousal scores across the all emotion-types were similar for the ASD and TD groups ( Fig. 2 ). 
 Ratings for both valence and arousal dimensions of emotions in the Child ASD group were somewhat constricted in their ranges relative to those of the Adult TD group: the Child ASD group reported significantly lower arousal ratings for high arousal emotions such as Excited ( F 3,63 =3.53,  p =.0008) and Surprised ( F 3,63 =3.38,  p =.0013), and higher arousal ratings for Sleepy, a low arousal emotion, ( F 3,63 =2.02,  p =.048). They also reported significantly less negative valence ratings for negatively-valenced emotions, including Disgusted ( F 3,63 =2.01,  p =.049) and Sad ( F 3,63 =2.83,  p =.006), and a trend for less positive valence ratings than the Adult TD group for the positively-valenced Excited ( F 3,63 =1.96,  p =.055) and Happy ( F 3,63 =1.90,  p =.061) ( Fig. 2A ). 
 Emotions for the Adult ASD group relative to the Adult TD group also showed a trend for constriction in their ranges; they reported significantly less negative valence ratings for the negatively-valenced Sad faces ( F 3,90 =2.33,  p =.022) ( Fig. 2B ). 
 No significant age differences were detected within the ASD groups. However, adult TD participants did report higher arousal ratings than Child TD participants for the negatively-valenced Angry ( F 3,82 =2.64,  p =.01), Disgusted ( F 3,82 =2.46,  p =.016), Sad ( F 3,82 =2.82,  p =.006), and Scared faces ( F 3,82 =2.14,  p =.036) and less positive valence ratings for Excited faces ( F 3,47 =2.818,  p =.045) ( Fig. 2C ). 
 
 
 fMRI Data 
 
 Main Effects 
 
 Linear and Quadratic Correlates of Arousal 
 These analyses revealed significant inverse linear and quadratic correlations of BOLD-signal with arousal ratings for our TD participants in ILPFC and DLPFC, dorsal ACC, inferoposterior PC, dorsal PC, CN, and PUT. For ASD participants, we detected significant positive linear associations of BOLD-signal with arousal ratings in the posterior temporal/inferior PC, mesial wall (pregenual and dorsal portions of SFG and ACC), premotor and supplementary motor regions, Cu and PCu, subcortical regions (all basal ganglia nuclei, THAL), and dorsal Cb ( Fig. 3 ,  Tables 2A ,  2C ). 
 Conjunction maps of the linear and quadratic effects of arousal in each group show regions where both linear and quadratic effects were detected (e.g., Cb, Broca’s, CN, DLPFC, PCu), and scatterplots show the combined effect of the linear and curvilinear components of the correlation ( Fig.4 ;  Fig. S-2 ,  Tables S-1A, S-1C ). 
 
 
 Linear and Quadratic Correlates of Valence 
 BOLD-signal correlated with ratings of linear valence and quadratic valence similarly for both diagnostic groups. In both TD and ASD participants, valence ratings correlated  positively  with BOLD-signal in ACC, FG, and, and  inversely  with BOLD-signal in posterior PC, S1, M1 and SMA. We did find regions where the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD-signal differed significantly across the ASD and TD groups but they were very small in spatial extent and of questionable biological significance ( Fig. 5 ,  Tables 2B , 2D ;  Tables S-1B, S-1D, S-3 ). 
 
 
 
 Interactions 
 
 Diagnosis-by-Arousal 
 Our analyses revealed significant differences in the correlation of arousal ratings with BOLD-signal across ASD and TD participants (ASD>TD) in AMYG, HIPP, CN, ACC, and SFG ( Fig. 3 ,  Table 3A ). 
 
 
 Diagnosis-by-Valence 
 We did not detect significant differences across groups in the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD-signal, suggesting that brain activity in individuals with ASD is typical for some components of emotion-processing ( Fig. 5 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 DISCUSSION 
 Our goal was to assess whether activity in neural systems underlying the processing of arousal and valence of facial emotions in individuals with ASD differ from their TD counterparts. Although participants from both diagnostic groups performed with a comparable level of accuracy on the emotion-rating task ( Tseng et al., 2014 ), we detected dramatic differences across diagnostic groups in the neural activity subserving the dimensions of emotion, particularly arousal. BOLD-signal correlated linearly with ratings of emotional arousal, but in opposite directions and in differing locations for the two groups. BOLD-signal in TD participants correlated inversely with ratings of arousal in regions associated primarily with attentional functions, whereas BOLD-signal in ASD participants correlated positively with arousal ratings in regions most commonly associated with impulse control and with default-mode activity. In contrast, we found that BOLD-signal correlated with ratings of valence similarly across the TD and ASD groups, positively in regions associated previously with processing of emotional faces, and inversely in sensorimotor regions. Nowhere did the correlation of BOLD-signal with valence ratings differ significantly across groups. 
 
 Arousal-Related Activity in TD Participants 
 Brain regions that correlated inversely with ratings of arousal in our TD group included the ILPFC, DLPFC, dorsal ACC, and inferoposterior and dorsal PC, as well as CN and PUT, regions thought to support attentional functions ( Petersen and Posner, 2012 ). Attention is the means by which brains optimize the flexible use of limited cognitive resources to process prioritized stimuli (i.e., to select task-relevant and ignore task-irrelevant information) ( Mansouri et al., 2009 ), plan for future contingencies, inhibit competing responses, and pursue long-term goals ( Pennington and Ozonoff, 1996 ). The neural substrates of attention are generally thought to include ACC, inferolateral and prefrontal cortices, and basal ganglia ( Fan et al., 2005 ;  Raz and Buhle, 2006 ), regions that correlated inversely with arousal ratings in the TD group. 
 The inverse linear correlations of arousal ratings with BOLD-signal in attentional networks suggests that TD participants may have had to allocate progressively more attentional resources to processing incrementally less-arousing face-stimuli. Numerous studies have reported that TD participants view low-arousal faces as ambiguous – i.e., as stimuli that may be construed in more than one way, or whose content requires greater examination of contextual cues to decipher ( Kryklywy et al., 2013 ;  Rosen and Donley, 2006 ). Although earlier studies of ambiguity in emotional faces focused on fear-related, high-arousal stimuli (such as a fearful face signaling potential threat in the environment) ( Adolphs, 2010 ;  Whalen, 1998 ;  Whalen et al., 2001 ), more recent studies have highlighted the inherent ambiguity in many low-arousal faces (e.g., faces with neutral, bored, or calm expressions) ( Thomas et al., 2001 ;  Tottenham et al., 2013 ). These low-arousal faces provide neither clear safety nor danger signals about the immediate vicinity and so individuals must allocate more attentional resources to gauge the potential danger of the faces ( Adolphs, 2010 ). Thus, we posit that TD participants enlisted more attentional resources when viewing low-arousal faces because they were attempting to assess and classify low-arousal, ambiguous stimuli ( Petersen and Posner, 2012 ;  Posner and Petersen, 1990 ;  Reiman et al., 1997 ). Consistent with this interpretation, prior studies have reported that attentional networks activate more strongly when processing ambiguous stimuli ( Mushtaq et al., 2011 ;  Raz et al., 2007 ;  Volz et al., 2004 ). 
 
 
 Stimulus Specificity in Activating Attention Networks During Emotional Tasks 
 Our current findings and their interpretations, when combined with those in our prior studies using differing types of emotional stimuli, suggest that the allocation of attentional resources may depend critically upon the nature of the emotional stimulus ( Colibazzi et al., 2010 ;  Gerber et al., 2008 ;  Landa et al., 2013 ;  Posner et al., 2009 ). In the present study, for example, we found that neural activity within attention networks of the TD group correlated inversely with ratings of arousal in emotional faces. Yet in our prior study using a mood-induction task, neural activity in attention networks of a different TD group correlated inversely with ratings of emotional  valence , not arousal ( Colibazzi et al., 2010 ;  Landa et al., 2013 ) (i.e., neural activity during mood-induction increased in attention networks as the valence of mood-inducing stimuli became more unpleasant and aversive). Moreover, these correlations during mood-induction were significantly stronger for interpersonal than for non-interpersonal stimuli ( Landa et al., 2013 ). The inherently interpersonal nature of faces may account for the similar neural responses of potentially threatening faces with aversive interpersonal, mood-inducing situations. 
 The differential activation of attention circuits in response to differing stimuli (emotional faces or induced mood) suggests that we cannot easily distinguish or disentangle the allocation of attentional resources from the two major dimensions of emotion, valence and arousal. It also demonstrates that instead of identifying neural activity that subserves or produces the arousal and valence components of emotional experience, our fMRI paradigm may be detecting varying activity in attention circuits associated with varying individual experiences of emotion. Our findings show that attention-related activation can dominate overall neural activity during emotional tasks, overwhelming the variance in neural activity that produces arousal and valence. 
 
 
 Arousal in Participants with ASD 
 Regions where BOLD-signal correlated positively with arousal ratings in the ASD group included posterior temporal and inferior PC, the mesial wall (pregenual and dorsal portions of the superior frontal and anterior cingulate gyri), PreMC and supplementary motor cortices, Cu and PCu, all basal ganglia nuclei, THAL, and dorsal Cb. Much of the pattern of neural activity associated with arousal in participants with ASD was similar to the pattern of regional activation in tasks that require suppression of an automatic response ( Peterson et al., 2002 ;  Viviani, 2013 ) and in preparing for action. The function of arousal is to prepare an organism for action, and the restraint of that motor preparedness from execution during the fMRI experiment would require activation of an inhibitory response. Alternatively, participants with ASD may find more-arousing faces to be aversive, thereby requiring activation of control networks to suppress their motoric urge to withdraw from the putatively noxious stimulus ( Peterson, 2003 ;  Tabu et al., 2012 ). Consistent with both interpretations, children with ASD reportedly have a stronger skin conductance response, and therefore are more aroused, when viewing faces with a direct compared with averted gaze, and compared to TD children in either condition ( Kylliainen et al., 2012 ). Also consistent with both interpretations are the maps of curvilinear (quadratic) responses of neural activity related to arousal ratings, which showed disproportionately stronger BOLD responses to more arousing stimuli in regions that support inhibitory responses, including dorsal frontal, ACC, and basal ganglia regions ( Fig. 4 ). 
 Several regions that correlated positively with arousal ratings in the ASD group, including medial prefrontal, anterior cingulate, posterior cingulate, and precuneus cortices, are also components of the default mode network (DMN). Activity in the DMN is greatest at rest and declines during cognitively demanding tasks ( Raichle et al., 2001 ). In TD individuals, the DMN activates during performance of various social, emotional, and introspective tasks ( Gusnard et al., 2001 ;  Raichle et al., 2001 ). Prior studies suggest that persons with ASD may not deactivate the DMN sufficiently when performing cognitively-demanding tasks ( Kennedy and Courchesne, 2008 ). In participants with ASD, however, we found proportionately greater neural activity in DMN regions, presumably representing a more strongly felt social and emotional experience with progressively more-arousing faces. 
 
 
 Group Similarities and Differences in Arousal Correlates 
 We were surprised to find the strikingly different patterns of activation to arousal ratings across the TD and ASD groups. Participants in our TD group increased neural activity in their attention networks when rating less-arousing faces, a pattern absent in the ASD group. These strong inverse correlations of BOLD signal with arousal ratings in attentional networks of the TD group is counter to the more intuitive expectation that highly arousing or emotionally engaging stimuli would be more attention-grabbing than less arousing and less emotionally engaging stimuli. 
 In contrast, individuals in the ASD group demonstrated strong positive correlations with arousal ratings in regulatory systems (IPC, SFG, THAL, CN, Cu) and the DMN (ACC, PCC), a pattern similar to that shown in TD controls in a prior mood-induction study from our laboratory ( Colibazzi et al., 2010 ). This similarity suggests that ASD participants more than the TD controls may have been increasingly immersed in the emotions expressed by the more arousing face stimuli of the present study. In other words, activation of the regulatory systems and DMN may require the absorbing, vitalizing experience of interpersonal stimuli, whether they are more highly arousing faces for persons with ASD in the present study or more arousing interpersonal moods for TD individuals in our prior study. 
 Thus TD participants in the present study may have instead approached the rating of facial emotions (as opposed to the mood induction task of our prior study) as more of a cognitive than a mood-inducing task, with the rating of progressively less arousing, more ambiguous, and potentially threatening faces requiring a progressively greater allocation of attentional resources. Individuals with ASD, in contrast, seem either not to have experienced low-arousal faces as threatening, or they found those faces less salient and less attention-grabbing than did the TD controls. 
 
 
 Valence 
 Only minor differences were detected between diagnostic groups in the BOLD signal correlates of valence ratings. In ASD and TD groups, BOLD-signal correlated positively with valence ratings in ACC, FG, and OFC, regions implicated in facial emotion processing. Studies of adults suggest, for example, that FG supports the perceptual identification of faces( Haxby et al., 2000 )and more specifically the coding of fearful (high-arousal, high-valence) faces ( Pessoa et al., 2002 ;  Vuilleumier et al., 2001 ). The near absence of significant group differences suggests that individuals with ASD do not activate the brain atypically for all components of emotion-processing. 
 
 
 Limitations 
 One prominent limitation is the absence of eye-tracking data during participants’ viewing of emotional faces. Prior studies have shown that individuals with ASD do not spontaneously attend to, and they may even avoid, the eyes of face-stimuli, even though the eyes are a rich source of information about emotional states ( Klin et al., 2002 ). Although less attention to the eyes of our face-stimuli could have impaired the ability of participants with ASD to recognize and rate accurately both valence and arousal ( Kliemann et al., 2010 ), if participants with ASD had not attended to task-stimuli, their valence and arousal ratings would have differed from the ratings of TD participants ( Tseng et al., 2014 ). Nevertheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that subtle group differences in attention to specific facial features influenced our findings. 
 Additionally, as is often the case in research on ASD, we struggled when designing our experiment with the trade-offs between task difficulty, selection of a task that can provide scientifically important information, and the generalizability of the study and its findings to the entire autism spectrum. We considered multiple issues simultaneously. In particular, we needed to include in our study individuals who would and did understand a task that addressed meaningfully our fundamental research questions. Nonverbal individuals, for example, would unlikely to understand or perform our task adequately. Also, if we had included lower functioning persons with ASD (i.e., those with lower IQs), we would have had to include control participants with comparable levels of intelligence, which in turn would introduce a host of confounding variables and sample heterogeneity that would make interpretation of findings difficult. We were careful to also covary for full-scale IQ, as well as for age and sex, and detected no significant differences in our findings for diagnosis. Additionally, the individuals with ASD in our sample ranged in ASD diagnosis from PDD-NOS to Asperger’s to Autism (Mean ADOS Score = 10.9 ± 3.1), suggesting that we can extrapolate our findings to individuals with moderate to high-functioning ASD. 
 
 
 
 CONCLUSIONS 
 Our findings provide unique insight into the emotional experiences of individuals with ASD. Although behavioral responses to face-stimuli were similar across diagnostic groups, the corresponding neural activity of the behavioral responses for arousal differed prominently across groups. TD individuals and persons with ASD seem to find differing aspects of emotional stimuli to be salient and relevant. Studying these differences may help us to understand the origins of atypical interpersonal emotional experiences in individuals with ASD. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supp MaterialS1 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding/Support:  This work was supported in part by NIMH grants R01 MH089582 (BSP) and 5 T32 MH016434 (BSP). 
 
 
 Abbreviations 
 
 
 ACC 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 
 
 
 AMYG 
 
 Amygdala 
 
 
 
 BOLD 
 
 Blood Oxygen Level Dependent 
 
 
 
 Broca 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 
 
 
 Cb 
 
 Cerebellum 
 
 
 
 CN 
 
 Caudate Nucleus 
 
 
 
 Cu 
 
 Cuneus 
 
 
 
 DLPFC 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 FG 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 
 
 
 HIPP 
 
 Hippocampus 
 
 
 
 ILPFC 
 
 Inferolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 INS 
 
 Insula 
 
 
 
 IPC 
 
 Inferior Parietal Cortex 
 
 
 
 IPS 
 
 Intraparietal Sulcus 
 
 
 
 M1 
 
 Primary Motor Cortex 
 
 
 
 MCC 
 
 Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 
 
 
 MFG 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 MOG 
 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 
 
 
 MTG 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 OFC 
 
 Orbitofrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 PC 
 
 Parietal Cortex 
 
 
 
 PCC 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 
 
 
 PCu 
 
 Precuneus 
 
 
 
 PreMC 
 
 Premotor Cortex 
 
 
 
 PrG 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 
 
 
 PUT 
 
 Putamen 
 
 
 
 S1 
 
 Primary Somatosensory Cortex 
 
 
 
 S2 
 
 Secondary Somatosensory Cortex 
 
 
 
 SFG 
 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 SMA 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area 
 
 
 
 SPL 
 
 Superior Parietal Lobule 
 
 
 
 STS 
 
 Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 
 
 
 THAL 
 
 Thalamus 
 
 
 
 V1 
 
 Primary Visual Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acton 
 PD 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Statistical parametric mapping in functional neuroimaging: beyond PET and fMRI activation studies 
 Eur J Nucl Med 
 25 
 663 
 7 
 9741993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 What does the amygdala contribute to social cognition? 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1191 
 42 
 61 
 20392275 
 
 
 
 
 American Psychiatric Association 
 2000 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-IV-TR 
 Vol., ed.ˆeds. 
 American Psychiatric Publishing, Incorporated 
 Arlington 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashwin 
 C 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Impaired recognition of negative basic emotions in autism: a test of the amygdala theory 
 Soc Neurosci 
 1 
 349 
 63 
 18633799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashwin 
 C 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Differential activation of the amygdala and the ‘social brain’ during fearful face-processing in Asperger Syndrome 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2 
 14 
 16806312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bachevalier 
 J 
 
 
 Loveland 
 KA 
 
 
 2006 
 The orbitofrontal-amygdala circuit and self-regulation of social-emotional behavior in autism 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 30 
 97 
 117 
 16157377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 
 1996 
 Nonlinear regression in parametric activation studies 
 Neuroimage 
 4 
 60 
 6 
 9345497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchel 
 C 
 
 
 
 1998 
 Characterizing stimulus-response functions using nonlinear regressors in parametric fMRI experiments 
 Neuroimage 
 8 
 140 
 8 
 9740757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Castelli 
 F 
 
 
 2005 
 Understanding emotions from standardized facial expressions in autism and normal development 
 Autism 
 9 
 428 
 49 
 16155058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Celani 
 G 
 
 
 Battacchi 
 MW 
 
 
 Arcidiacono 
 L 
 
 
 1999 
 The understanding of the emotional meaning of facial expressions in people with autism 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 29 
 57 
 66 
 10097995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Colibazzi 
 T 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural systems subserving valence and arousal during the experience of induced emotions 
 Emotion 
 10 
 377 
 89 
 20515226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Understanding emotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum disorders 
 Nat Neurosci 
 9 
 28 
 30 
 16327784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deeley 
 Q 
 
 
 
 2007 
 An event related functional magnetic resonance imaging study of facial emotion processing in Asperger syndrome 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 62 
 207 
 17 
 17400195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional brain correlates of social and nonsocial processes in autism spectrum disorders: an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 65 
 63 
 74 
 18996505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ekman 
 P 
 
 
 Friesen 
 WV 
 
 
 1976 
 Pictures of Facial Affect 
 Consulting Psychologists Press 
 Palo Alto, CA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ekman 
 P 
 
 
 1992 
 Are there basic emotions? 
 Psychol Rev 
 99 
 550 
 3 
 1344638 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fan 
 J 
 
 
 
 2005 
 The activation of attentional networks 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 471 
 9 
 15907304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Human brain function 
 Vol. 
 Elsevier Academic Press 
 Amsterdam; Boston 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Classical and Bayesian inference in neuroimaging: applications 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 484 
 512 
 12030833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Penny 
 W 
 
 
 2003 
 Posterior probability maps and SPMs 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 1240 
 9 
 12880849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fusar-Poli 
 P 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional atlas of emotional faces processing: a voxel-based meta-analysis of 105 functional magnetic resonance imaging studies 
 J Psychiatry Neurosci 
 34 
 418 
 32 
 19949718 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gerber 
 AJ 
 
 
 
 2008 
 An affective circumplex model of neural systems subserving valence, arousal, and cognitive overlay during the appraisal of emotional faces 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 2129 
 39 
 18440572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Golan 
 O 
 
 
 Baron-Cohen 
 S 
 
 
 Hill 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 The Cambridge Mindreading (CAM) Face-Voice Battery: Testing complex emotion recognition in adults with and without Asperger syndrome 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 36 
 169 
 83 
 16477515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotham 
 K 
 
 
 
 2007 
 The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule: revised algorithms for improved diagnostic validity 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 37 
 613 
 27 
 17180459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grelotti 
 DJ 
 
 
 Gauthier 
 I 
 
 
 Schultz 
 RT 
 
 
 2002 
 Social interest and the development of cortical face specialization: what autism teaches us about face processing 
 Dev Psychobiol 
 40 
 213 
 25 
 11891634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 98 
 4259 
 64 
 11259662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hadjikhani 
 N 
 
 
 
 2006 
 Anatomical differences in the mirror neuron system and social cognition network in autism 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 16 
 1276 
 82 
 16306324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hall 
 GB 
 
 
 Szechtman 
 H 
 
 
 Nahmias 
 C 
 
 
 2003 
 Enhanced salience and emotion recognition in Autism: a PET study 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 160 
 1439 
 41 
 12900306 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 2012 
 Mapping discrete and dimensional emotions onto the brain: controversies and consensus 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 16 
 458 
 66 
 22890089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harms 
 MB 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Wallace 
 GL 
 
 
 2010 
 Facial emotion recognition in autism spectrum disorders: a review of behavioral and neuroimaging studies 
 Neuropsychol Rev 
 20 
 290 
 322 
 20809200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 EA 
 
 
 Gobbini 
 MI 
 
 
 2000 
 The distributed human neural system for face perception 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 4 
 223 
 233 
 10827445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hollingshead 
 A 
 
 
 1975 
 Four-factor index of social status 
 Vol. 
 Yale University Press 
 New Haven, CT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hubl 
 D 
 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional imbalance of visual pathways indicates alternative face processing strategies in autism 
 Neurology 
 61 
 1232 
 7 
 14610126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Katsyri 
 J 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Impaired recognition of facial emotions from low-spatial frequencies in Asperger syndrome 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 1888 
 97 
 18314147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DP 
 
 
 Courchesne 
 E 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional abnormalities of the default network during self- and other-reflection in autism 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 3 
 177 
 90 
 19015108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Killgore 
 WD 
 
 
 Yurgelun-Todd 
 DA 
 
 
 2004 
 Activation of the amygdala and anterior cingulate during nonconscious processing of sad versus happy faces 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 1215 
 23 
 15050549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klein 
 F 
 
 
 
 2015 
 This person is saying bad things about you: The influence of physically and socially threatening context information on the processing of inherently neutral faces 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kliemann 
 D 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Atypical reflexive gaze patterns on emotional faces in autism spectrum disorders 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 12281 
 7 
 20844124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klin 
 A 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Visual fixation patterns during viewing of naturalistic social situations as predictors of social competence in individuals with autism 
 Arch Gen Psychiatry 
 59 
 809 
 16 
 12215080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kryklywy 
 JH 
 
 
 Nantes 
 SG 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 DG 
 
 
 2013 
 The amygdala encodes level of perceived fear but not emotional ambiguity in visual scenes 
 Behav Brain Res 
 252 
 396 
 404 
 23769997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kylliainen 
 A 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Affective-motivational brain responses to direct gaze in children with autism spectrum disorder 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 53 
 790 
 7 
 22276654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landa 
 A 
 
 
 
 2013 
 Distinct neural circuits subserve interpersonal and non-interpersonal emotions 
 Soc Neurosci 
 8 
 474 
 88 
 24028312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lord 
 C 
 
 
 
 1989 
 Autism diagnostic observation schedule: a standardized observation of communicative and social behavior 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 19 
 185 
 212 
 2745388 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lord 
 C 
 
 
 Rutter 
 M 
 
 
 Le Couteur 
 A 
 
 
 1994 
 Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised: a revised version of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive developmental disorders 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 24 
 659 
 85 
 7814313 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loveland 
 KA 
 
 
 
 2008 
 Judgments of auditory-visual affective congruence in adolescents with and without autism: a pilot study of a new task using fMRI 
 Percept Mot Skills 
 107 
 557 
 75 
 19093617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mansouri 
 FA 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 K 
 
 
 Buckley 
 MJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Conflict-induced behavioural adjustment: a clue to the executive functions of the prefrontal cortex 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 10 
 141 
 52 
 19153577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazaika 
 P 
 
 
 
 2009 
 Methods and Software for fMRI Analysis for Clinical Subjects 
 Vol., ed.ˆeds. 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 FC 
 
 
 Nimmo-Smith 
 I 
 
 
 Lawrence 
 AD 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotions: a meta-analysis 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 3 
 207 
 33 
 14672157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mushtaq 
 F 
 
 
 Bland 
 AR 
 
 
 Schaefer 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Uncertainty and cognitive control 
 Front Psychol 
 2 
 249 
 22007181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 2003 
 Bayesian second-level analysis of functional magnetic resonance images 
 Neuroimage 
 20 
 1346 
 55 
 14568503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ogai 
 M 
 
 
 
 2003 
 fMRI study of recognition of facial expressions in high-functioning autistic patients 
 Neuroreport 
 14 
 559 
 63 
 12657885 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 1971 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ozonoff 
 S 
 
 
 Pennington 
 BF 
 
 
 Rogers 
 SJ 
 
 
 1990 
 Are there emotion perception deficits in young autistic children? 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 31 
 343 
 61 
 2318918 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panksepp 
 J 
 
 
 1992 
 A critical role for “affective neuroscience” in resolving what is basic about basic emotions 
 Psychol Rev 
 99 
 554 
 60 
 1502276 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Perception of dynamic changes in facial affect and identity in autism 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 2 
 140 
 9 
 18174910 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pennington 
 BF 
 
 
 Ozonoff 
 S 
 
 
 1996 
 Executive functions and developmental psychopathology 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 37 
 51 
 87 
 8655658 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 
 2002 
 Neural processing of emotional faces requires attention 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 99 
 11458 
 63 
 12177449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 2012 
 The attention system of the human brain: 20 years after 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 35 
 73 
 89 
 22524787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 
 2002 
 An event-related functional MRI study comparing interference effects in the Simon and Stroop tasks 
 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 
 13 
 427 
 40 
 11919006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 2003 
 Conceptual, methodological, and statistical challenges in brain imaging studies of developmentally based psychopathologies 
 Dev Psychopathol 
 15 
 811 
 32 
 14582941 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Piggot 
 J 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Emotional attribution in high-functioning individuals with autistic spectrum disorder: a functional imaging study 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 43 
 473 
 80 
 15187808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 J 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 2005 
 The circumplex model of affect: an integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology 
 Dev Psychopathol 
 17 
 715 
 34 
 16262989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 J 
 
 
 
 2009 
 The neurophysiological bases of emotion: An fMRI study of the affective circumplex using emotion-denoting words 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 883 
 95 
 18344175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posner 
 MI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 1990 
 The attention system of the human brain 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 13 
 25 
 42 
 2183676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 
 2001 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 98 
 676 
 82 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 A 
 
 
 Buhle 
 J 
 
 
 2006 
 Typologies of attentional networks 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 7 
 367 
 79 
 16760917 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 A 
 
 
 
 2007 
 Selective biasing of a specific bistable-figure percept involves fMRI signal changes in frontostriatal circuits: a step toward unlocking the neural correlates of top-down control and self-regulation 
 Am J Clin Hypn 
 50 
 137 
 56 
 18030926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reiman 
 EM 
 
 
 
 1997 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of externally and internally generated human emotion 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 154 
 918 
 25 
 9210741 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Riby 
 DM 
 
 
 Doherty-Sneddon 
 G 
 
 
 Bruce 
 V 
 
 
 2008 
 Exploring face perception in disorders of development: evidence from Williams syndrome and autism 
 J Neuropsychol 
 2 
 47 
 64 
 19334304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rosen 
 JB 
 
 
 Donley 
 MP 
 
 
 2006 
 Animal studies of amygdala function in fear and uncertainty: relevance to human research 
 Biol Psychol 
 73 
 49 
 60 
 16500019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rump 
 KM 
 
 
 
 2009 
 The development of emotion recognition in individuals with autism 
 Child Dev 
 80 
 1434 
 47 
 19765010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 J 
 
 
 Bullock 
 M 
 
 
 1985 
 Multidimensional scaling of emotional facial expressions: Similarity from preschoolers to adults 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 48 
 1290 
 1298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 J 
 
 
 Weiss 
 A 
 
 
 Mendelsohn 
 GA 
 
 
 1989 
 Affect grid: A single-item scale of pleasure and arousal 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 57 
 493 
 502 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 1980 
 A Circumplex Model of Affect 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 39 
 1161 
 1178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 2003 
 Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion 
 Psychol Rev 
 110 
 145 
 72 
 12529060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Russell 
 JA 
 
 
 2005 
 Emotion in Human Consciousness Is Built on Core Affect 
 Journal of Consciousness Studies 
 12 
 26 
 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rutherford 
 MD 
 
 
 Towns 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 Scan path differences and similarities during emotion perception in those with and without autism spectrum disorders 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 38 
 1371 
 81 
 18297386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sasson 
 NJ 
 
 
 2006 
 The development of face processing in autism 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 36 
 381 
 94 
 16572261 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabu 
 H 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Common inhibitory prefrontal activation during inhibition of hand and foot responses 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 3373 
 8 
 22079449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 JW 
 
 
 
 2010 
 Using computerized games to teach face recognition skills to children with autism spectrum disorder: the Let’s Face It! program 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 51 
 944 
 52 
 20646129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tantam 
 D 
 
 
 
 1989 
 Autistic children’s ability to interpret faces: a research note 
 J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
 30 
 623 
 30 
 2768363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thomas 
 KM 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Amygdala response to facial expressions in children and adults 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 49 
 309 
 16 
 11239901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 
 2013 
 A negativity bias for ambiguous facial-expression valence during childhood: converging evidence from behavior and facial corrugator muscle responses 
 Emotion 
 13 
 92 
 103 
 22906084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tseng 
 A 
 
 
 
 2014 
 Using the circumplex model of affect to study valence and arousal ratings of emotional faces by children and adults with autism spectrum disorders 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
 44 
 1332 
 46 
 24234677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uljarevic 
 M 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 Recognition of emotions in autism: a formal meta-analysis 
 J Autism Dev Disord 
 43 
 1517 
 26 
 23114566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viviani 
 R 
 
 
 2013 
 Emotion regulation, attention to emotion, and the ventral attentional network 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 7 
 746 
 24223546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volz 
 KG 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2004 
 Why am I unsure? Internal and external attributions of uncertainty dissociated by fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 848 
 57 
 15006651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 
 2001 
 Effects of attention and emotion on face processing in the human brain: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuron 
 30 
 829 
 41 
 11430815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vytal 
 K 
 
 
 Hamann 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 Neuroimaging support for discrete neural correlates of basic emotions: a voxel-based meta-analysis 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 22 
 2864 
 85 
 19929758 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 AT 
 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural correlates of facial affect processing in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder 
 J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
 43 
 481 
 90 
 15187809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 1999 
 Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) 
 Vol., ed.ˆeds 
 Harcourt Assessment 
 San Antonio, TX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Fear, vigilance and ambiguity: initial neuroimaging studies of the human amygdala 
 Curr Dir Psychol Sci 
 7 
 177 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 
 2001 
 A functional MRI study of human amygdala responses to facial expressions of fear versus anger 
 Emotion 
 1 
 70 
 83 
 12894812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Emotion Task 
 Each trial consisted of 3 components presented in succession: (1) Visual presentation of an emotional face for 18 seconds; (2) Visual presentation of a 2-D grid on which participants indicated their ratings of arousal and valence for each face by moving an arrow controlled by a computer mouse. This screen remained visible until the participant clicked the mouse button, up to a maximum of 20 seconds; (3) Visual presentation of a fixation cross (+) at the center of the participant’s visual field. The fixation point was displayed immediately following the rating of valence and arousal. The durations of rating and gaze fixation were each variable, but when summed together always equaled 20 seconds. Each run consisted of 20 trials presented in a pseudorandom order (but uniform from subject to subject), and we acquired 3 runs (totaling 60 stimulus trials) for each person. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Emotion-Specific Group Comparisons 
 Points represent averaged individual arousal and valence ratings for each emotion-type for each group. Horizontal arrows depict significant differences between groups on the valence dimension and vertical arrows depict significant differences between groups on the arousal dimension. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Arousal Correlates 
 (A) Regions of significant correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for TD participants. (Positive correlations are coded in red to yellow, and inverse correlations are coded in green to blue.) 
 (B) Scatterplots of correlations for BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for TD participants (green) or participants with ASD (purple). 
 (C) Regions of significant correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for participants with ASD 
 (D) The regions where the correlation of arousal ratings with BOLD-signal for participants with ASD differs significantly from the correlation of arousal ratings with BOLD-signal for TD participants. (ASD > TD coded in red to yellow, TD >ASD coded in blue to green) 
 (E) Scatterplots of correlations for BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for TD participants (green) and participants with ASD (purple) in regions where the correlation of arousal ratings with BOLD for participants with ASD differs significantly from the correlation of arousal ratings with BOLD for TD participants. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Linear and Quadratic Correlations of Arousal with BOLD-Signal in ASD 
 (A) Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for participants with ASD. (Positive correlations are coded in red to yellow, and inverse correlations are coded in green to blue.) 
 (B) Scatterplots of linear correlations for BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal for participants with ASD (orange). 
 (C) Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of arousal combined with regions of significant quadratic correlations of arousal ratings for participants with ASD. Positive linear correlations with arousal are shown alone (orange), quadratic correlations with arousal alone (fuschia), and linear+quadratic correlations with arousal (red). 
 (D) Scatterplots of correlations between BOLD-signal change and ratings of linear+quadratic correlations with arousal for participants with ASD (red) in regions where BOLD correlated positively for both linear and quadratic correlations with arousal ratings. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Valence Correlates 
 (A) Regions of significant correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of valence for TD participants. (Positive correlations are coded in red to yellow, and inverse correlations are coded in green to blue.) 
 (B) Scatterplots of correlations for BOLD-signal with ratings of valence for TD participants (green) or participants with ASD (purple). 
 (C) Regions of significant correlations of BOLD-signal with ratings of valence for participants with ASD 
 (D) The regions where the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD for participants with ASD differs significantly from the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD for TD participants. (ASD > TD coded in red to yellow, TD >ASD coded in blue to green) 
 (E) Scatterplots of correlations for BOLD-signal with ratings of valence for TD participants (green) and participants with ASD (purple) in regions where the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD for participants with ASD differs significantly from the correlation of valence ratings with BOLD for TD participants. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participant Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 ASD 
 TD 
 
 
 
 
 Participants (N) 
 51 
 84 
 
 
  ASD Subtype: 
 
 
 
 
   PDD-NOS 
 9 
 – 
 
 
   Asperger’s Syndrome 
 24 
 – 
 
 
   Autistic Disorder 
 18 
 – 
 
 
 Mean Age (yrs) 
 27.5 ± 13.1 
 24.0 ± 11.4 
 
 
 Children (<18yrs) (N/%) 
 12 (24%) 
 31 (37%) 
 
 
 Males (N/%) 
 45 (88%) 
 62 (74%) 
 
 
 Caucasian (N, %) 
 40 (78%) 
 60 (71%) 
 
 
 Mean SES a 
 50 
 53 
 
 
 Mean FSIQ b 
 109.2 ± 19.4 
 115.9 ± 12.4 
 
 
   Mean VIQ 
 110.9 ± 20.9 
 115.7 ± 13.2 
 
 
   Mean PIQ Mean ADOS (Social Affect + Restrictive, Repetitive Behaviors) c 
 105.0 ± 17.6 10.9 ± 3.1 
 112.9 ± 11.8 – 
 
 
 Mean ADOS - Calibrated Severity Scores (Modules 2 and 3) d 
 7.5 ± 1.8 
 – 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 SES scores for 7 TD and 14 ASD participants were unavailable. 
 
 
 b 
 FSIQ scores for 1 TD participant and 1 ASD participant were unavailable. 
 
 
 c 
 ADOS scores for 4 ASD participants were unavailable. 
 
 
 d 
 ADOS CSS scores were calculated for participants tested using Modules 2 and 3 (N=10) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2A 
 
 Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD signal with ratings of AROUSAL for participants with ASD 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Regions * 
 Location 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Z 
 
 
 
 Side 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Correlation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linear Arousal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Premotor Cortex 
 R 
 6, 1 
 39 
 −28 
 67 
 8.21 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 8 
 −6 
 47 
 25 
 8.13 
 Positive 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 L 
 
 −6 
 −61 
 −20 
 8.04 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 9 
 −21 
 20 
 58 
 7.97 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 21 
 41 
 49 
 7.66 
 Positive 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 L 
 
 −51 
 20 
 13 
 4.23 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Regions were significant at p<0.001 or Posterior Probability > 99.0%. 
 
 
 (All of the other tables in this document show significance at p<0.0125 or Posterior Probability > 98.75%) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2B 
 
 Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD signal with ratings of VALENCE for participants with ASD 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Regions 
 Location
 
 MNI Coordinates
 
 Z 
 Correlation 
 
 
 Side 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Linear Valence 
 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 L 
 
 −3 
 −52 
 −38 
 4.94 
 Positive 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 R 
 
 9 
 −55 
 −38 
 4.69 
 Positive 
 
 
 Primary Visual Cortex 
 R 
 17/18 
 30 
 −58 
 4 
 4.58 
 Positive 
 
 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 R 
 18 
 12 
 −88 
 −5 
 4.28 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −18 
 62 
 10 
 4.01 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 24 
 62 
 10 
 3.97 
 Positive 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 R 
 
 24 
 −16 
 −14 
 3.79 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 15 
 53 
 1 
 3.79 
 Positive 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 R 
 
 39 
 −22 
 −23 
 3.75 
 Positive 
 
 
 Primary Visual Cortex 
 L 
 18 
 −15 
 −55 
 10 
 3.74 
 Positive 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 L 
 
 −9 
 35 
 −5 
 3.55 
 Positive 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 R 
 
 27 
 −40 
 1 
 3.54 
 Positive 
 
 
 Inferotemporal Visual Area 
 L 
 
 −39 
 −31 
 −14 
 3.29 
 Positive 
 
 
 Caudate Nucleus 
 L 
 
 −3 
 20 
 −2 
 3.2 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 30 
 44 
 46 
 3.2 
 Positive 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 27 
 32 
 −11 
 3.04 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 L 
 44 
 −54 
 20 
 13 
 6.93 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Somatosensory Cortex 
 L 
 3b 
 −60 
 −4 
 19 
 6 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Motor Cortex 
 L 
 
 −54 
 5 
 28 
 5.93 
 Negative 
 
 
 Secondary Somatosensory Cortex 
 L 
 
 −60 
 −7 
 13 
 5.7 
 Negative 
 
 
 Insula 
 L 
 
 −33 
 23 
 10 
 5.33 
 Negative 
 
 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex 
 R 
 
 24 
 −70 
 49 
 5.28 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Temporal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −48 
 −40 
 43 
 4.85 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Somatosensory Cortex 
 R 
 1 
 63 
 −13 
 31 
 4.85 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 27 
 5 
 55 
 4.58 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −36 
 53 
 13 
 4.56 
 Negative 
 
 
 Visual Association Cortex 
 R 
 
 36 
 −82 
 34 
 4.52 
 Negative 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area 
 R 
 6 
 12 
 11 
 46 
 4.48 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Temporal Cortex 
 R 
 
 45 
 −40 
 40 
 4.45 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 44 
 39 
 5 
 43 
 4.39 
 Negative 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 R 
 44 
 45 
 14 
 34 
 4.23 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 0 
 29 
 43 
 4.18 
 Negative 
 
 
 Inferotemporal Visual Area 
 R 
 
 54 
 −67 
 −8 
 4.14 
 Negative 
 
 
 Inferotemporal Visual Area 
 R 
 
 63 
 −55 
 −2 
 3.77 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Visual Cortex 
 L 
 18 
 −9 
 −88 
 −8 
 3.2 
 Negative 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 R 
 45 
 54 
 20 
 1 
 3.09 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2C 
 
 Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD signal with ratings of AROUSAL for TD participants 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Regions 
 Location
 
 MNI Coordinates
 
 Z 
 Correlation 
 
 
 Side 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Linear Arousal 
 
 
 
 Inferolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 27 
 62 
 19 
 7.29 
 Negative 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 R 
 
 51 
 41 
 16 
 6.96 
 Negative 
 
 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex 
 R 
 
 30 
 −76 
 52 
 6.8 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 39 
 56 
 4 
 6.74 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Motor Cortex 
 R 
 
 57 
 11 
 34 
 6.74 
 Negative 
 
 
 Intraparietal Sulcus 
 L 
 
 −44 
 −46 
 48 
 6.73 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Occipital-Temporal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −42 
 −55 
 61 
 6.73 
 Negative 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 R 
 
 12 
 −70 
 64 
 6.34 
 Negative 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 R 
 
 21 
 −85 
 46 
 6.31 
 Negative 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 R 
 
 48 
 20 
 34 
 5.69 
 Negative 
 
 
 Insula 
 L 
 
 −39 
 −13 
 10 
 5.04 
 Negative 
 
 
 Insula 
 R 
 
 36 
 26 
 −2 
 4.53 
 Negative 
 
 
 Caudate Nucleus 
 R 
 
 15 
 8 
 16 
 4.3 
 Negative 
 
 
 Visual Association Cortex 
 L 
 
 −3 
 −88 
 −5 
 4.21 
 Negative 
 
 
 Visual Association Cortex 
 L 
 
 −60 
 −10 
 −17 
 4.09 
 Negative 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 R 
 
 18 
 −34 
 10 
 4.09 
 Negative 
 
 
 Putamen 
 L 
 
 −21 
 2 
 7 
 4.03 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2D 
 
 Regions of significant linear correlations of BOLD signal with ratings of VALENCE for TD participants 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Regions 
 Location
 
 MNI Coordinates
 
 Z 
 Correlation 
 
 
 Side 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Linear Valence 
 
 
 
 Primary Visual Cortex 
 R 
 17 
 12 
 −97 
 4 
 7.87 
 Positive 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 R 
 18 
 21 
 −100 
 10 
 6.44 
 Positive 
 
 
 Orbitofrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 0 
 56 
 −8 
 4.65 
 Positive 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 L 
 
 0 
 −58 
 19 
 3.42 
 Positive 
 
 
 Visual Association Cortex 
 L 
 18 
 −15 
 −103 
 1 
 3.23 
 Positive 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 3 
 59 
 10 
 3.2 
 Positive 
 
 
 Inferotemporal Visual Area 
 R 
 
 45 
 −73 
 −5 
 3.15 
 Positive 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 L 
 
 −3 
 26 
 −11 
 3.05 
 Positive 
 
 
 Visual Association Cortex 
 L 
 
 −42 
 −73 
 −5 
 2.91 
 Positive 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 L 
 
 −30 
 −31 
 −26 
 2.89 
 Positive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Posterior Parietal Cortex 
 R 
 
 18 
 −76 
 58 
 4.51 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Temporal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −45 
 −55 
 58 
 4.25 
 Negative 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area 
 L 
 
 0 
 20 
 58 
 4.16 
 Negative 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 R 
 
 9 
 −61 
 49 
 4.11 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 18 
 8 
 70 
 3.98 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Occipital-Temporal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −30 
 −52 
 37 
 3.97 
 Negative 
 
 
 Rolandic Operculum 
 R 
 
 39 
 −19 
 22 
 3.95 
 Negative 
 
 
 Parietal-Temporal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −51 
 −49 
 55 
 3.85 
 Negative 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 L 
 
 −6 
 −79 
 43 
 3.84 
 Negative 
 
 
 Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 L 
 
 −9 
 11 
 40 
 3.72 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Motor Cortex 
 R 
 6 
 51 
 −10 
 52 
 3.68 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Somatosensory Cortex 
 R 
 6 
 30 
 −31 
 67 
 3.67 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −6 
 17 
 43 
 3.6 
 Negative 
 
 
 Lingual Gyrus 
 L 
 
 −15 
 −85 
 −8 
 3.57 
 Negative 
 
 
 Inferotemporal Visual Area 
 R 
 
 63 
 −55 
 7 
 3.56 
 Negative 
 
 
 Cuneus 
 L 
 
 −6 
 −85 
 34 
 3.54 
 Negative 
 
 
 Primary Motor Cortex 
 L 
 
 −39 
 5 
 37 
 3.51 
 Negative 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 L 
 
 −48 
 41 
 1 
 3.33 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 
 −36 
 44 
 28 
 3.23 
 Negative 
 
 
 Auditory Association Cortex 
 R 
 
 54 
 −40 
 13 
 3.23 
 Negative 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 
 36 
 35 
 22 
 3.03 
 Negative 
 
 
 Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 L 
 
 −6 
 −19 
 34 
 2.93 
 Negative 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 L 
 
 −9 
 26 
 28 
 2.72 
 Negative 
 
 
 Middle Cingulate Cortex 
 R 
 
 12 
 −22 
 34 
 2.6 
 Negative 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Centers of activation in regions where the linear correlation of BOLD signal intensity with ratings of AROUSAL for participants with ASD differs significantly from the linear correlation of BOLD with ratings of AROUSAL for TD participants. 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Regions * 
 Location 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Z 
 
 
 
 Side 
 BA 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Correlation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linear Arousal 
 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 L 
 45 
 −48 
 41 
 −5 
 5.68 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 L 
 9 
 −24 
 38 
 46 
 5.12 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 R 
 8 
 12 
 50 
 49 
 5.09 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Broca’s Area 
 R 
 45 
 57 
 26 
 16 
 4.95 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Caudate Nucleus 
 R 
 
 18 
 14 
 13 
 4.68 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 R 
 
 21 
 −28 
 −5 
 4.56 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 R 
 
 27 
 −1 
 −17 
 4.41 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 R 
 32 
 12 
 44 
 16 
 4.19 
 ASD>TD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Regions were significant at p<0.001 or Posterior Probability > 99.0%. 
 
 
 (All of the other tables in this document show significance at p<0.0125 or Posterior Probability > 98.75%) 
 
 
 
 
