
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 26666896 
 4755877 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.069 
 NIHMS743144 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Syntactic processing is distributed across the language system 
 
 
 
 
 Blank 
 Idan 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Balewski 
 Zuzanna 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Mahowald 
 Kyle 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 Evelina 
 
 c 
 
 
 a Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
 b McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
 c Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, East 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA 
 
 Corresponding authors:  Idan Blank:  iblank@mit.edu ; MIT, Brain & Cognitive Sciences Department, 46-4141f, 43 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, Ev Fedorenko:  evelina.fedorenko@mgh.harvard.edu ; MGH, Psychiatry Department, Building 149, Room 2624, East 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA 
 
 
 29 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 05 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2016 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2017 
 
 127 
 307 
 323 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Language comprehension recruits an extended set of regions in the human brain. Is syntactic processing localized to a particular region or regions within this system, or is it distributed across the entire ensemble of brain regions that support high-level linguistic processing? Evidence from aphasic patients is more consistent with the latter possibility: damage to many different language regions and to white-matter tracts connecting them has been shown to lead to similar syntactic comprehension deficits. However, brain imaging investigations of syntactic processing continue to focus on particular regions within the language system, often parts of Broca’s area and regions in the posterior temporal cortex. We hypothesized that, whereas the entire language system is in fact sensitive to syntactic complexity, the effects in some regions may be difficult to detect because of the overall lower response to language stimuli. Using an individual-subjects approach to localizing the language system, shown in prior work to be more sensitive than traditional group analyses, we indeed find responses to syntactic complexity throughout this system, consistent with the findings from the neuropsychological patient literature. We speculate that such distributed nature of syntactic processing could perhaps imply that syntax is inseparable from other aspects of language comprehension (e.g., lexico-semantic processing), in line with current linguistic and psycholinguistic theories and evidence. Neuroimaging investigations of syntactic processing thus need to expand their scope to include the entire system of high-level language processing regions in order to fully understand how syntax is instantiated in the human brain. 
 
 
 Graphical abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 functional MRI 
 language 
 syntactic processing 
 syntactic complexity 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Language processing is supported by an extended system of brain regions, primarily in the left frontal and temporal lobes (e.g.,  Binder  et al. , 1997 ;  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ). Whereas evidence from both the patient and neuroimaging literatures strongly suggests that this system is selectively engaged in linguistic processes and not in other cognitive processes (e.g.,  Dronkers, Ludy & Redfern, 1998 ;  Varley, Klessinger, Romanowski, & Siegal, 2005 ;  Fedorenko, Behr, & Kanwisher, 2011 ;  Willems, Benn, Hagoort, Toni, & Varley, 2011 ;  Fedorenko, Duncan, & Kanwisher, 2012a ;  Monti, Parsons, & Osherson, 2012 ), the division of linguistic labor among its constituent regions is still heavily debated. A key question for understanding the internal structure of the language system is to what extent different aspects of language comprehension are localized to particular regions within the system versus distributed across the entire system. The answer to this question will reveal which functions are implemented in distinct neural circuits and which functions share neural resources. These organizational principles of neural architecture might, in turn, illuminate the cognitive architecture of the human language faculty (for similar inferences from neural to cognitive architectures in perception, see e.g.,  Kanwisher, 2010 ). In the current paper, we specifically focus on syntactic processing: is it localized or distributed across the language system? 
 Prior literature addressing this issue provides conflicting evidence, such that neuropsychological evidence – on the whole – supports a distributed view of syntactic processing whereas neuroimaging evidence appears to support a more localized view. On the one hand, investigations of patients with brain damage have revealed that lesions to many different parts of the language system can cause similar syntactic comprehension difficulties. Such regions include Broca’s region in the inferior frontal gyrus (e.g.,  Caramazza & Zurif, 1976 ;  Schwartz, Saffran, & Marin, 1980 ;  Caplan & Futter, 1986 ;  Zurif, Swinney, Prather, Solomon, & Bushell, 1993 ;  Grodzinsky, 2000 ), the arcuate fasciculus and/or the extreme capsule (e.g.,  Caramazza & Zurif, 1976 ;  Papoutsi, Stamatakis, Griffiths, Marslen-Wilson, & Tyler, 2011 ;  Rolheiser, Stamatakis, & Tyler, 2011 ;  Tyler  et al. , 2011 ;  Wilson  et al. , 2011 ), posterior temporal regions (e.g.,  Samuels & Benson, 1979 ;  Selnes, Knopman, Niccum, Rubens, & Larson, 1983 ;  Basso, Lecours, Moraschini, & Vanier, 1985 ;  Tramo, Baynes, & Volpe, 1988 ;  Caplan  et al. , 1996 ;  Bastiaanse & Edwards, 2004 ;  Wilson & Saygin, 2004 ;  Amici  et al. , 2007 ;  Tyler  et al. , 2011 ;  Thothathiri, Kimberg, & Schwartz, 2012 ), and anterior temporal regions (e.g.,  Dronkers, Wilkins, Van Valin, Redfern, & Jaeger, 1994 ;  Dronkers, Wilkins, Van Valin, Redfern, & Jaeger, 2004 ;  Magnusdottir  et al. , 2013 ). For instance, lesions in all of these regions can impair the interpretation of semantically reversible sentences, such as  The boy is chased by the girl , whose meanings (who did what to whom) depend on their syntactic form (i.e., word order, function words, and functional morphology). Consequently, some have argued that syntactic processing is supported by the language system as a whole (e.g.,  Caplan  et al. , 1996 ;  Dick  et al. , 2001 ;  Wilson & Saygin, 2004 ;  Mesulam, Thompson, Weintraub & Rogalski, 2015 ). 
 On the other hand, many neuroimaging studies employing syntactic manipulations have found activations not across the entire language system but, instead, restricted to a subset of the system, most commonly in the inferior frontal and posterior temporal regions (e.g.,  Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, & Thullborn, 1996 ;  Stromswold, Caplan, Alpert, & Rauch, 1996 ;  Cooke  et al. , 2001 ;  Ben-Shachar, Hendler, Kahn, Ben-Bashat, & Grodzinsky, 2003 ;  Wartenburger, Heekeren, Burchert, De Bleser, R., & Villringer, 2003 ;  Constable  et al. , 2004 ;  Bornkessel, Zysset, Friederici, von Cramon, & Schlesewsky, 2005 ;  Fiebach, Schlesewsky, Lohmann, Von Cramon, & Friederici, 2005 ;  Caplan, Stanczak, & Waters, 2008 ;  Meltzer, McArdle, Schafer, & Braun, 2009 ;  Peelle, Troiani, Wingfield, & Grossman, 2010 ;  Christensen, Kizach, & Nyvad, 2012 ; see  Friederici, 2011 , for a recent meta-analysis). These studies suggest a localized view of syntactic processing, in line with many proposals that link syntax to Broca’s area (e.g.,  Bornkessel & Schlesewsky, 2006 ;  Grodzinsky & Friederici, 2006 ;  Grodzinsky & Santi, 2008 ;  Friederici, 2009 ,  2011 ,  2012 ;  Baggio & Hagoort, 2011 ;  Tyler  et al. , 2011 ;  Duffau, Moritz-Gasser, & Mandonnet, 2014 ;  Ullman, 2012 ). 
 How can we reconcile these two sets of conflicting findings? One possibility is that the localized activation patterns in neuroimaging studies result from (i) the use of group analyses, which suffer from sensitivity loss due to inter-subject variability in the precise locations of activation peaks (e.g.,  Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 ); and (ii) differences across brain regions in the overall strength of response to language stimuli. In highly language-responsive regions one might expect relatively wide neighborhoods of strong activation, so that overlap across subjects could be evident despite individual variability in peak location. In regions that are language-selective but respond only weakly to language stimuli, however, one might expect smaller and shallower activation neighborhoods surrounding the (low) peaks, so that overlapping activations across subjects are less likely to emerge. Such reasoning suggests that neuroimaging methods that take into account inter-individual variability may be able to find evidence for distributed, rather than localized, syntactic processing. Therefore, here we use an individual-subjects approach ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ) that allows us to narrow in on the high-level language processing regions in each individual brain. We measure the effect of syntactic complexity on the response of these individually localized regions and show that, in fact, syntactic complexity modulates neural responses throughout the language system, consistent with the evidence from the patient literature. 
 
 
 2. Materials and methods 
 To test for sensitivity to syntactic demands, we chose a commonly used syntactic complexity manipulation: the contrast between subject- and object-extracted relative clauses, as in (1) (See also  Figure 1 ).
 (1) 
 Subject-extracted relative clause:  the star that is greeting the circle Object-extracted relative clause:  the circle that the star is greeting 
 
In both (1a) and (1b), the verb phrase  is greeting  has two arguments (i.e., dependents): a subject who is doing the greeting (the star), and an object who is being greeted (the circle). However, the two sentences critically differ in the distance separating the verb phrase from its two dependents. Specifically, in the subject-extracted relative clause (1a), the dependencies are local: both the word  that  (which refers to  the star ) and the object  the circle  connect locally to the verb phrase  is greeting . In contrast, the object-extracted relative clause (1b) has a more complex dependency structure: the verb phrase  is greeting  is separated from its object,  the circle , by the subject  the star . An appealing feature of this contrast is that a variety of factors that have been shown to affect sentence comprehension (e.g.,  Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995 ;  Gibson & Pearlmutter, 1998 ) are matched across the two conditions, including lexical-level factors (the words are identical) and plausibility. So, only the dependency structure (i.e., syntax) varies. 
 Across many languages, object-extracted relative clauses like (1b) have been shown to cause comprehension difficulty compared to subject-extracted relative clauses like (1a), as reflected in a variety of dependent measures including reading times and response accuracies to comprehension questions (e.g.,  English :  Wanner & Maratsos, 1978 ;  King & Just, 1991 ;  Gibson, 1998 ;  Grodner & Gibson, 2005 ;  French :  Holmes & O’Regan, 1981 ;  Baudiffier, Caplan, Gaonac'h, & Chesnet, 2011 ;  German :  Mecklinger, Schriefers, Steinhauer, & Friederici, 1995 ;  Schriefers, Friederici, & Kuhn, 1995 ;  Dutch :  Frazier, 1987 ;  Mak, Vonk, & Schriefers, 2002 ;  2006 ;  Japanese :  Miyamoto & Nakamura 2003 ;  Ishizuka, Nakatani, & Gibson, 2003 ;  Ueno & Garnsey, 2008 ;  Korean :  O’Grady, Lee & Choo, 2003 ;  Kwon, Polinsky, & Kluender, 2006 ;  Kwon, Gordon, Kluender, & Polinsky, 2010 ;  Russian: 
 Levy, Fedorenko & Gibson, 2013 ). Therefore, the contrast between object- and subject-extracted relative clauses is considered by many to be a marker of syntactic processing, and has been used widely in both investigations of individuals with aphasia and brain imaging studies. 
 As mentioned above, in previous neuroimaging work, such contrasts between object- and subject-extractions as well as other, similar contrasts have produced activations largely restricted to Broca’s area, the surrounding regions in the inferior frontal gyrus and the posterior parts of the middle (and sometimes superior) temporal gyrus. Other regions in the language system – such as the orbital portions of the inferior frontal gyrus or the anterior temporal regions – did not show reliable responses. However, this data pattern does not necessarily imply that the former regions are significantly more sensitive to the syntactic manipulation than the latter. Before such a claim is put forward, two methodological issues warrant consideration. 
 The first issue concerns the sensitivity of fMRI analysis methods to syntactic complexity effects. The vast majority of previous studies have relied on traditional group analyses, where individual brains are transformed into a common space and their contrast maps are then averaged across participants, assuming a shared mapping of functional regions onto anatomy. Although such methods can be effective in detecting large regions of activation that align well across individuals, they suffer from sensitivity loss due to inter-subject anatomical and functional variability (e.g.,  Saxe, Brett, & Kanwisher, 2006 ;  Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 ), which has been shown to be especially pronounced in the frontal and temporal cortices (e.g.,  Frost & Goebel, 2012 ;  Tahmasebi et al., 2012 ). As a result, even when every subject shows a robust response to syntactic complexity manipulations individually, the effect may get “washed out” by group averaging (see e.g.,  Fedorenko & Kanwisher, 2011 , for an example). 
 The second issue regards the validity of statistical tests. Namely, observing that some regions show a significant syntactic complexity effect, whereas others do not, cannot be taken as evidence that regions differ from one another in how important they are for syntactic processing. Such an inference would only be licensed by directly comparing contrast effects across regions, with some regions showing a stronger difference between the responses to object- and subject-extractions, compared to other regions. In other words, a region by extraction-type interaction is needed (see e.g.,  Nieuwenhuis, Forstmann, & Wagenmakers, 2011 , for a recent discussion). 
 In summary, in order to argue that only a particular subset of the language system is engaged in syntactic processing (or, more generally, that different parts of the language system support different kinds of computations), it is important to use methods that take into account inter-subject variability in the exact location of syntactic effects and explicitly test hypotheses of interest. One way to take inter-subject variability into account in the second-level analyses is by using a functional “localizer” that narrows in on the relevant functional subset of each individual brain, in order to then examine the responses of those functionally defined regions to the critical conditions of interest. Thus, we here use a functional localizer for brain regions that support high-level linguistic processing ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ), which robustly activates the key language-responsive regions in the frontal, temporal and parietal cortices. We then employ a standard sentence-picture matching paradigm with object- and subject-extractions to examine whether syntactic complexity affects the response of these brain regions. In addition to testing the significance of this effect in each region, we also test for a region by extraction-type interaction, to assess whether some regions are more sensitive than others to syntactic complexity. 
 
 2.1. Participants 
 Thirteen participants (10 females) between the ages of 18 and 30 – students at MIT and members of the surrounding community – were paid for their participation. Participants were right-handed native speakers of English, naïve to the purposes of the study. All participants gave informed consent in accordance with the requirements of MIT’s Committee On the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES). 
 
 
 2.2. Design, materials and procedure 
 Each participant performed the language localizer task ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ) and the critical syntactic-processing task. Some participants also completed one or two additional tasks for unrelated studies. The entire scanning session lasted approximately 2 hours. 
 
 2.2.1. Language localizer task 
 Participants read sentences (e.g.,  A RUSTY LOCK WAS FOUND IN THE DRAWER ) and lists of unconnected pronounceable nonwords (e.g.,  DAP DRELLO SMOP UL PLID KAV CRE REPLODE ) in a blocked design. Each stimulus consisted of eight words/nonwords. For details of how the language materials were constructed, see  Fedorenko  et al.  (2010) . The materials are available at  http://web.mit.edu/evelina9/www/funcloc/funcloc_localizers.html . Stimuli were presented in the center of the screen, one word/nonword at a time, at the rate of 350ms per word/nonword. Each stimulus was followed by a 300ms blank screen, a memory probe (presented for 1,350ms), and again a blank screen for 350ms, for a total trial duration of 4.8s. Participants were asked to decide whether the probe appeared in the preceding stimulus by pressing one of two buttons. (In previous work we established that similar activations obtain with a passive-reading task; see  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 .) It is important to note that this localizer contrast ( sentences > nonwords ) does not specifically target syntactic processing: instead, it broadly targets high-level language processes, including processing of individual word meanings and combinatorial semantic and syntactic processing (see  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ,  2012b , for further discussion) (see also section 4.2). 
 Condition order was counterbalanced across runs and participants. Experimental blocks lasted 24s (with 5 trials per block), and fixation blocks lasted 16s. Each run (consisting of 3 fixation blocks and 12 experimental blocks) lasted 336s. (Each run contained 4 blocks per condition: in addition to sentences and nonwords, the experiment included a third condition (lists of unconnected words), which was included due to its relevance to another study that was run in the same session.) Each participant completed 3 runs. 
 
 
 2.2.2. Critical task 
 Participants performed a sentence-picture matching task in an event-related design. On each trial, they saw two pictures – each including two characters interacting in some way – and heard a question prompting them to choose one of the pictures (see  Figure 1 ), by pressing one of two buttons. Sentences contained either syntactically simpler subjectextracted relative clauses (e.g.,  Where is the star that is greeting the circle? ) or syntactically more complex object-extracted relative clauses (e.g.,  Where is the circle that the star is greeting? ). 
 For the pictures, we used 8 humanized simple shapes (a circle, a square, a triangle, a rectangle, an oval, a heart, a star and an arrow) and 7 easily depict-able actions (chasing, greeting, hugging, lifting, pulling, pushing and touching). Eight characters allowed for 28 unique character-pairs. These were distributed across the 7 actions with 4 character-pairs per action such that (i) each character was used once for each of the 7 actions, and (ii) each action was paired with each of the 8 characters. For each action/character-pair set, we created two versions of a picture (e.g., a circle greeting a star, and a star greeting a circle, as in  Figure 1 ), for a total of 56 pictures. The position of the agent – on the left vs. on the right of the patient – was balanced across items. 
 For each pair of pictures (e.g., a circle greeting a star, and a star greeting a circle), four sentences were constructed (two per condition), as in (2):
 (2) 
 Subject-extracted, version 1:  Where is the circle that is greeting the star? Object-extracted, version 1:  Where is the star that the circle is greeting? Subject-extracted, version 2:  Where is the star that is greeting the circle? Object-extracted, version 2:  Where is the circle that the star is greeting? 
 
The sentences were recorded by a female native speaker of English, with a natural prosody, which was created to be as similar as possible across trials and conditions. 
 Each participant saw each pair of pictures four times over the course of the experiment, twice in the subject-extracted condition, and twice in the object-extracted condition. Pairs of pictures were distributed across four runs such that there was only one occurrence of each pair of pictures per run. So, across the experiment there were a total of 28 picture pairs (as in  Figure 1 ) × 4 versions of a sentence = 112 trials (56 trials per condition). The position of the target picture (left, right) was randomized across trials. Trials were 6s long. Each trial began with a 200ms fixation, followed by the presentation of the pictures and the sentence. The pictures were presented for 4,000ms, followed by an extra 1,800ms of fixation. Sentence onset was simultaneous with picture onset and each sentence lasted between 4,510ms and 5,373ms ( M =4,919ms). Participants could respond as soon as the sentence began and through the end of the trial. Each of the four runs lasted 252s, which included 28 6s trials and 84s of fixation (interleaved among the trials, such that the inter-trial interval varied between 0 and 8s). Four condition orders were created using the freely available  optseq  algorithm ( Dale, 1999 ). These orders varied across runs. 
 
 
 
 2.3. fMRI data acquisition 
 Structural and functional data were collected on the whole-body 3 Tesla Siemens Trio scanner with a 32-channel head coil at the Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center at the McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT. T1-weighted structural images were collected in 128 axial slices with 1.33 mm isotropic voxels (TR=2000ms, TE=3.39ms). Functional, blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD), data were acquired using an EPI sequence (with a 90° flip angle and using GRAPPA with an acceleration factor of 2), with the following acquisition parameters: thirty-one 4 mm thick near-axial slices acquired in the interleaved order (with 10% distance factor), 2.1mm × 2.1mm in-plane resolution, FoV in the phase encoding (A >> P) direction 200mm and matrix size 96 × 96, TR=2000ms and TE=30ms. The first 10s of each run were excluded to allow for steady state magnetization. 
 
 
 2.4. fMRI data preprocessing 
 MRI data were analyzed using SPM5 and custom Matlab scripts (available – in the form of an SPM toolbox – from  http://www.nitrc.org/projects/spm_ss ). Each subject’s data were motion corrected and then normalized into a common brain space (the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template) and resampled into 2mm isotropic voxels. The data were then smoothed with a 4mm Gaussian filter and high-pass filtered (at 200s). For both the localizer task and the critical task, effects were estimated using a General Linear Model (GLM) in which each experimental condition was modeled with a boxcar function convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF). The boxcar function for the localizer task modeled entire blocks; the function for the critical task modeled entire trials. 
 
 
 2.5. Traditional group analysis 
 Prior to conducting our key analyses, we aimed to replicate prior findings that used group analyses and reported activations for syntactic complexity manipulations mostly in the inferior frontal gyrus and posterior middle temporal gyrus. Therefore, we ran a group analysis of our critical task by: (i) creating a whole-brain, syntactic complexity contrast map for each participant, contrasting the GLM beta-weights for the object-extracted condition with the weights for the subject-extracted condition; and (ii) entering the contrast maps of all participants into a second-level GLM analysis ( p <0.001, uncorrected). 
 
 
 2.6. Group-constrained, Subject-Specific analysis 
 Unlike the previous fMRI investigations of syntactic complexity that used traditional group analyses, our key analyses here were performed within regions of interest that were defined functionally in each individual participant. These regions of interest were defined using the  sentences > nonwords  contrast in the language localizer task. To do so, we used the Group-constrained Subject-Specific (GSS) analysis method developed in  Fedorenko  et al.  (2010 ;  Julian, Fedorenko, Webster, & Kanwisher, 2012 ). In particular, functional regions of interest (fROIs) were constrained to fall within a set of functional “masks” which indicated the expected gross locations of activations for this contrast and which were generated based on a group-level data representation from an independent group of participants (see  Fig. 2a ;  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ). These masks were intersected with each individual subject’s activation map for the  sentences > nonwords  contrast, and the voxels falling within each mask were sorted based on their  t -values for the localizer contrast, choosing the top 10% of voxels as that subject’s functional region of interest (see  Fig. 2c  for sample fROIs). This top  n % approach ensures that the fROIs can be defined in every participant – thus enabling us to generalize the results to the entire population ( Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 ) – and that fROI sizes are the same across participants. However, qualitatively similar results were obtained in an alternative analysis approach where the fROIs were defined as all the voxels that (i) fell within the relevant mask, and (ii) passed a fixed significance threshold ( p <0.001, uncorrected) at the whole-brain level. 
 Eight fROIs were defined in each subject. These included three fROIs on the lateral surface of the left frontal cortex in the inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and its orbital part (LIFGorb) as well as in the middle frontal gyrus (LMFG); and five fROIs on the lateral surface of the temporal and parietal cortex, in the anterior temporal cortex (LAntTemp), middle anterior temporal cortex (LMidAntTemp), middle posterior temporal cortex (LMidPostTemp), posterior temporal cortex (LPostTemp) and angular gyrus (LAngG). We here chose to focus on these “core” regions in the left hemisphere, which most robustly and consistently emerge in the investigations of the language system and which include the regions most frequently linked to syntactic processing (but see  Appendix A  for information on the responses to syntactic complexity of the right hemisphere homologues of these regions, and a couple of additional brain regions that consistently emerge for the localizer contrast). 
 To estimate the responses of fROIs to the conditions of the language localizer, we used an across-runs cross-validation procedure. In particular, each subject’s activation map was first computed for the  sentences > nonwords  contrast using all but one run of data, and the 10% of voxels with the highest  t -values within a given mask were selected as that subject’s fROI. The response of each fROI to the same contrast was then estimated using the left-out run. This procedure was iterated across all possible partitions of the data, and the responses were finally averaged across the left-out runs to derive a single response magnitude for each condition in a given fROI/subject. This  n -fold cross-validation procedure (where  n  is the number of functional runs) allows one to use all of the data for defining the ROIs and for estimating their responses (see  Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 , for discussion), while ensuring the independence of the data used for fROI definition and for response estimation (e.g.,  Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan, & Baker, 2009 ). To estimate the responses of fROIs to the conditions of the critical experiment (i.e., to object-extracted and subject-extracted sentences), data from all runs of the language localizer experiment were used for defining the fROIs. 
 To summarize the logic of our approach: the language localizer allows us to identify a set of voxels / regions that respond robustly during language processing. We then focus specifically on these regions to test their responses to the critical contrast between syntactically more complex (object-extracted) and syntactically simpler (subject-extracted) relative clauses. If syntactic processing is distributed across the entire language system – rather than localized to particular regions – we should find (i) sensitivity to syntactic complexity in most or all of our fROIs, and (ii) no region-by-condition interactions, indicating that the different regions are similarly sensitive to syntactic complexity. 
 Statistical tests across subjects were performed on the beta weights extracted from the fROIs as defined above. Two contrasts were examined: (i)  sentences > nonwords , and (ii)  object-extracted > subject-extracted . 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral results 
 Due to a script error, behavioral responses for the sentence-picture matching task were not recorded for 6 of the 13 participants. However, 4 of these 6 were later brought in and re-tested behaviorally on exactly the same version of the experiment, so that altogether we obtained behavioral data from 11 of the 13 participants. In those 11 participants, we replicate the standard complexity difference, with slower RTs (4.57s vs. 4.40s;  t (10) =2.23,  p <0.05) and lower accuracies (91% vs. 96%;  t (10) = −2.95,  p <0.05) in the object-extracted condition. See also section 3.3.3 below. 
 
 
 3.2. Traditional fMRI group analysis 
 A whole-brain random-effects group analysis of the syntactic complexity contrast  object-extraction > subject-extraction  revealed several significant activation clusters, of which three appeared in regions of the left-hemisphere commonly associated with language processing. These clusters were located in (i) the posterior part of the middle temporal gyrus; (ii) the triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus; and (iii) the mid-anterior part of the superior temporal gyrus ( Table 1 ). The former two clusters are broadly consistent with the activation foci most commonly found in prior studies using similar contrasts. This can be seen in  Figure 3 , showing our group-level activation map along with marked locations of previously reported syntactic complexity effects. 
 
 
 3.3. Group-constrained, Subject-Specific fMRI analysis 
 
 3.3.1. Are syntactic complexity effects localized to particular regions within the language system? 
 Replicating previous work, we find robust responses for the localizer contrast ( sentences > nonwords ) in each of the eight fROIs, using across-run cross-validation (for all regions,  t (12) >5,  p <10 −4 ;  t -tests are across subjects). Critically, all of the regions defined by the localizer, except for the LAngG fROI, also showed a significant effect for our syntactic complexity manipulation. All effects remain significant after false-discovery rate (FDR) correction for the number of fROIs. These key results are summarized in  Figure 4  and  Table A.1 . 
 
 
 3.3.2. Do regions differ reliably with respect to how sensitive they are to syntactic complexity? 
 We found that every region within the language system (with the exception of the LAngG fROI) responds reliably more strongly during the syntactically more complex object-extracted condition than during the syntactically simpler subject-extracted condition. However, the difference between these two conditions is numerically larger in some regions than others. In particular, the largest syntactic complexity effects are observed in the brain regions that have been reported most consistently in previous studies (i.e., regions in and around Broca’s area and regions in the posterior temporal cortex; the LMFG fROI – also reported in a few prior studies (e.g.,  Meltzer  et al. , 2009 ) – also shows a large effect). One possibility is that these regions are in fact more strongly engaged in – and thus perhaps play a bigger role in – syntactic processing compared to the rest of the language system. Nevertheless, our data suggest that this is not the case. 
 In particular, the overall response to language (e.g., the response to the  sentences  condition of the language localizer relative to the fixation baseline) also varies across regions: it is numerically stronger in the more superior and dorsal frontal regions (the LIFG and LMFG fROIs) than in the inferior and ventral LIFGorb fROI, and it is stronger in the LMidPostTemp fROI than in the more anterior temporal regions (LAntTemp and LMidAntTemp fROIs) and the more posterior temporal/temporo-parietal regions (LPostTemp and LAngG fROIs). This pattern of different-strength BOLD responses across the language regions is consistent across participants and studies (see e.g.,  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ,  2011 ;  Mahowald & Fedorenko, in revision .). 
 Given that effect sizes tend to scale with overall response strength, it is not surprising that the effects of syntactic complexity are more difficult to detect in brain regions where the response to language (or perhaps the BOLD signal more generally; see also  Appendix B ) is overall weaker. Indeed, we find that the overall language response ( sentences  >  fixation  effect) in a particular fROI is a significant predictor of that fROI’s response to syntactic complexity ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted  effect), using a linear mixed-effects regression predicting the syntactic effect size from the overall response with random intercepts and slopes for fROI and participant (β=0.18,  t =3.16, χ 2 (1)  = 7.39,  p <0.01). Note that this finding cannot be accounted for by differences in the number of voxels across fROIs, because we obtained similar results when equating the volumes of our fROIs (β=0.18,  t =3.43, χ 2 (1)  = 8.46,  p <0.01). 
 In  Figure 5 , we show the relationship, across the eight ROIs, between the overall response to language ( sentences > fixation , in the localizer experiment) and the size of the  object-extracted > subject-extracted  effect (effect sizes are averaged across participants). As can be seen, the LPostTemp and LIFG fROIs both show a larger syntactic effect than would be predicted by their overall language response (they fall above the trend line), whereas LAntTemp and LMidAntTemp fROIs show a smaller syntactic effect than would be predicted by their overall language response. However, none of these deviations are significant. Specifically, allowing the association between overall language response and syntactic complexity effect size to vary across fROIs, by including a random “overall language response” slope for each fROI, does not significantly improve the model (χ 2 (2)  = 0.25, n.s.). The standard deviation of this random “overall language response” slope is very small (0.01) compared to the size of the corresponding fixed effect (β = 0.18), suggesting that our different fROIs contribute indistinguishable data to the model. Thus, although language regions may differ slightly in the relative strengths of the syntactic complexity effect, most of this variance appears to be accounted for by differences in the overall response to language stimuli across the language system. Beyond this explainable variance we find no evidence for a region-by-condition interaction and we cannot reject the hypothesis that our fROIs are all similarly sensitive to syntactic complexity manipulations. 
 In the  Appendix (sections B  and  C ), we further explore the correlation between the size of the syntactic complexity effect and the magnitude of overall language response. First, we show that this correlation also holds across individual voxels (not just responses averaged across entire fROIs). Second, we show that this correlation is language-specific: the syntactic complexity effect size does not correlate with a nonlinguistic contrast based on a manipulation of working memory load. Because the correlation appears to be language-specific, we conclude that it is not explained by general physiological artifacts (i.e., differences across voxels in susceptibility to signal loss which might cause any two response measures to correlate across voxels). Third, we exclude the possibility that the magnitude of the overall language response ( sentences  >  fixation ) is simply another measure of syntactic processing, which would otherwise trivially explain why it correlates with the syntactic complexity effect size. Namely, we find that the size of the syntactic complexity effect is also correlated with the size of another effect:  word lists > fixation , a lexical effect that does not include sentence-level syntax. This conclusion is also supported by a replication of our main result (a syntactic complexity effect distributed across the language system) in fROIs that were defined based on an alternative localizer contrast:  word lists > nonword lists . 
 
 
 3.3.3. Does the size of the fMRI syntactic complexity effect predict any aspects of the behavioral performance? 
 Participants varied with respect to the size of the  object-extracted  >  subject-extracted  effect. Might these differences be functionally important? In an exploratory analysis, we examined the relationship between the size of the syntactic complexity effect and behavioral performance. Before doing so, we examined the reliability of the behavioral measures, because if the performance estimates are too noisy at the individual-participant level, there is no reason to expect them to correlate with the effect size in fMRI data. We considered four measures: difference in the accuracy / RT between the object-extracted and subject-extracted conditions, and overall (averaged across the two conditions) accuracy / RT. For each measure, we split the data into odd and even-numbered trials and looked for correlations across subjects. Although both of the RT measures were highly reliable ( r =0.91 for the overall RT, and  r =0.51 for the object-extracted  vs.  subject-extracted difference), neither showed a reliable relationship with the size of the fMRI syntactic complexity effect. As for accuracies, the difference measure was not correlated between odd- and even-numbered trials ( r =−0.14), but the overall accuracy was highly reliable across the two data halves ( r =0.70). 
 When we correlated the overall behavioral accuracies with the size of the fMRI syntactic complexity effect, we found that participants with larger syntactic complexity effects in fMRI performed significantly worse in the task. As we see in  Figure 6 , all 8 fROIs show this trend, again highlighting the similarity among these regions with respect to their engagement in syntactic processing. The effect is significant in a linear, mixed-effects model predicting the size of the fMRI syntactic complexity effect from the logit-transformed accuracies with random intercepts for participant and random intercepts and slopes for fROI (β=−0.21,  t =−3.48, χ 2 (1) =9.29,  p <0.01). (This relationship remains significant after a Bonferroni correction for the number of behavioral measures examined, i.e., 4.) 
 One way to interpret this relationship is in terms of comprehension efficiency. For example, some participants may have greater exposure to syntactically complex object-extracted structures and/or have greater working memory capacity (see Discussion), and consequently may not need to activate their language regions more strongly to process the more syntactically complex structures. Such participants are also likely to be overall better in their language comprehension ability, thus answering comprehension questions more accurately. 
 
 
 
 3.4. Why do the traditional group-analysis and the group-constrained, subject-specific analysis produce different results? 
 Traditional group analyses, by design, identify regions of activation that are overlapping across many participants. Regions in which activations show less inter-individual overlap will therefore be missed by such analyses (see e.g.,  Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 , for the underlying math and simulation data). Our alternative analysis method, in contrast, allows for some variability in the locations of activations across people due to its use of individually defined functional regions of interest. Given our results above, we reasoned that activation maps for the syntactic complexity effect would show relatively higher inter-individual overlap in the LIFG and LPostMidTemp compared to other fROIs, as these regions were identified by the traditional group analysis. 
 To visualize these potential differences across regions, we identified regions showing syntactic complexity effects in each participant and evaluated their inter-individual overlap. To this end, we first identified activation peaks in individual maps of the syntactic complexity contrast ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) using a watershed algorithm (to prevent the algorithm from over-parcellating the contrast maps, they were smoothed with a 8mm FWHM Gaussian kernel). An “activation neighborhood” around each peak was then defined (in the original, non-smoothed activation maps) as the largest contiguous set of surrounding voxels having numerically positive contrast estimates. Finally, for each voxel in common MNI space, we counted the number of participants for whom that voxel belonged to an activation neighborhood. 
 Figure 7  shows the overlap measures we obtained. As can be seen, activations in LIFG and LMidPostTemp show the highest overlap across participants, along with LMFG. These three regions are also the ones where the syntactic complexity effects are numerically the strongest, and these two observations are plausibly linked. Given that regions of the language system show relatively high inter-individual variability in their functional-to-anatomical mapping (e.g.,  Amunts  et al. , 1999 ;  Fischl et al., 2008 ;  Frost & Goebel, 2012 ;  Tahmasebi  et al. , 2012 ), overlap in activation maps across participants is mainly expected in the most responsive regions that have high peaks and, thus, larger activation neighborhoods. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Our results demonstrate that syntactic complexity effects – greater responses to more syntactically complex sentences – are not localized to particular regions within the language system, but are instead found throughout the entire system. Although our results are consistent with prior studies that had observed these effects in the inferior frontal and posterior temporal brain regions, we also show that these effects obtain in the rest of the language regions (with the sole exception of the LAngG fROI), including the language-responsive regions in the orbital LIFG, and in the anterior portions of the lateral temporal cortex. 
 As discussed in the Introduction, an architecture where syntactic resources are distributed across the language system fits well with the findings from the patient literature: deficits in syntactic comprehension have been reported following damage to many different components of the language system (e.g.,  Caplan  et al. , 1996 ;  Dick  et al. , 2001 ;  Wilson & Saygin, 2004 ;  Mesulam  et al. , 2015 ; see  Mesulam, 1990 , for an early discussion of distributed language processing). 
 Some previous neuroimaging results further support the idea of distributed syntactic processing, although they do not isolate syntactic processing from other aspects of language comprehension, as the current manipulation does. For example, a contrast between sentences (in which words combine to form syntactic structures) and lists of unconnected words (devoid of such structures) produces activation across the language system (e.g.,  Snijders  et al. , 2009 ;  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ; Pallier, Devauchelle, & Dehaene, 2010;  Bedny, Pascual-Leone, Dodell-Feder, Fedorenko, & Saxe, 2011 ;  Brennan & Pylkkanen, 2012 ; see also earlier studies –  Mazoyer  et al. , 1993 ;  Schlosser, Aoyagi, Fulbright, Gore, & McCarthy, 1998 ;  Vandenberghe, Nobre, & Price, 2002 ;  Humphries, Love, Swinney, & Hickok, 2005 ;  Humphries, Binder, Medler, & Liebenthal, 2006  – although those typically found activations only in parts of the language system). Admittedly, the  sentences > word lists  contrast is not a “pure” syntactic manipulation, because sentences differ from word lists in additional ways: they also engage compositional semantic processes and possibly, at least for auditory presentation, prosodic processes. A somewhat syntactically purer contrast, between Jabberwocky sentences (which preserve the word order, function words and functional morphology of real sentences but use nonwords) and lists of unconnected nonwords, also produces a response throughout the language system (e.g.,  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ;  Bedny  et al. , 2011 ) (see also section 4.1.3 and  Appendix D ). 
 Nonetheless, a vast majority of prior neuroimaging studies of syntactic complexity have instead supported a localized, rather than distributed, view of syntactic processing. We have argued that these prior investigations may not have observed effects in some parts of the language system because of poor sensitivity of traditional group-based analyses (e.g.,  Nieto-Castañon & Fedorenko, 2012 ) and because those regions have an overall weaker response to language and thus smaller, harder to detect, effects, especially for subtle manipulations. Our current findings support this claim: first, we directly contrasted a traditional group-based analysis that found evidence for a few localized foci of syntactic complexity effects, with an analysis based on individual localization of language-responsive fROIs that found these effects robustly present throughout the language system. Second, the regions that the group-based analysis failed to identify were shown to have higher inter-individual variability (i.e., less overlap) of activations. This poorer overlap appeared to coincide with lower responsiveness to language in those regions, compared to the regions that the group-based analysis did successfully identify. 
 Similar reasoning applies to other studies that have targeted syntactic processing and reported effects only in the inferior frontal and posterior temporal regions (e.g.,  syntactic violation manipulations :  Embick, Marantz, Miyashita, O’Neil, & Sakai, 2000 ;  Cooke  et al. , 2006 ;  Friederici, Kotz, Scott, & Obleser, 2010 ;  Herrmann, Obleser, Kalberlah, Haynes, & Friederici, 2012 ; or  syntactic priming :  Santi & Grodzinsky, 2010 ;  Menenti, Segaert, & Hagoort, 2012 ;  Segaert, Menenti, Weber, Petersson, & Hagoort, 2012 ). We hypothesize that those effects (and possibly other, non-syntactic, effects; e.g.,  Devlin  et al. , 2000 ), like the syntactic complexity effects studied here, are actually present throughout the language system. 
 It is worth noting that, contra proposals about Broca’s area and parts of the posterior temporal cortex being the core syntactic centers of the brain, a number of researchers have argued that parts of the anterior lateral temporal cortex are instead critically engaged in combinatorial syntactic (and/or semantic) processing (e.g.,  Humphries, Willard, Buchsbaum, & Hickok, 2001 ;  Vandenberghe  et al. , 2002 ;  Humphries  et al. , 2005 ;  Rogalsky & Hickok, 2009 ;  Baron & Osherson, 2011 ;  Bemis & Pylkkanen, 2011 ;  Brennan, Nir, Hasson, Malach, Heeger, & Pylkkänen, 2012 ;  Zhang & Pylkkänen, 2015 ) (for a further discussion of the anterior temporal lobe, see  Appendix C ). We suspect that, as with the above studies, the observed effects are present across the language system, although it is not at present clear why these studies differ from the studies above in observing the effects in the anterior temporal as opposed to inferior frontal and posterior temporal regions. 
 
 4.1. What do syntactic complexity effects reflect? Interpretations and limitations 
 
 4.1.1 Causal involvement in syntactic processing 
 The finding that a distributed set of language regions are all sensitive to syntactic complexity manipulations should not be interpreted as demonstrating that all of these regions play an equal role in syntactic processing. For example, we do not suggest that every region that shows a stronger response to syntactically complex sentences than to syntactically simpler sentences is causally involved in syntactic processing. A possible alternative is that only a subset of our language fROIs are critical for processing syntax, but their output rapidly travels to the rest of the language system and is therefore reflected in the temporally slow BOLD signal. Furthermore, whereas syntactic complexity primarily modulates syntactic processing, it may additionally modulate other comprehension processes (like those related to the processing of information structure; e.g.,  Jackendoff, 1972 ), thus leading in some fROIs to linguistic but non-syntactic “secondary effects” masking as syntactic effects (but see section 4.2). 
 Like all fMRI studies, our current study is not designed to (and could not) distinguish regions that are causally involved in syntactic processing from those that are more epiphenomenally recruited. Neuropsychological studies are also limited in their ability to identify such distinctions among regions, because naturally occurring brain damage typically encompasses multiple functional areas, as well as extending to white matter tracts connecting regions that may themselves be unaffected by the lesion (e.g.,  Mesulam  et al. , 2015 ). Identifying regions that are critical for syntactic processing ultimately requires causal measurements with both high temporal and spatial resolution, such as invasive stimulation studies using subdural electrodes (inserted pre-surgically for medical reasons; e.g.,  Ojemann, Ojemann, Lettich & Berger, 1989 ). Nonetheless, we emphasize that our current contribution is the demonstration that signals reflecting the modulation of neural activity by syntactic complexity (whatever such activity reflects at the mechanistic and cognitive levels) are present throughout the language system, contrary to many previous suggestions. 
 
 
 4.1.2. Experience-based vs. working-memory-based accounts of syntactic complexity 
 For brain regions that are causally linked to syntactic processing – whatever subset of the language system these may turn out to correspond to – another question arises: which of the factors underlying the complexity difference between object-extracted and subject-extracted structures modulate the activity of these regions? Two classes of proposals have been advanced to account for such complexity differences: experience-based theories (e.g.,  Hale, 2001 ;  Levy, 2008 ;  Gennari & MacDonald, 2008 ,  2009 ;  Wells, Christiansen, Race, Acheson, & MacDonald, 2009 ) and working-memory-based theories (see  O’Grady, 2011 ;  Gibson, Tily, & Fedorenko, 2013 , for overviews). According to the former, object-extractions are more difficult to understand because they are less frequent in the input. According to the latter, processing object-extractions places greater demands on working memory because one of the dependents of the verb has to be retrieved from memory when the verb is encountered (e.g.,  Gibson, 1998 ;  Gordon, Hendrick & Johnson, 2001 ,  2004 ;  McElree, Foraker & Dyer, 2003 ;  Grodner & Gibson, 2005 ;  Fedorenko, Gibson & Rohde, 2006 ;  Lewis, Vasishth & Van Dyke, 2006 ;  Fedorenko, Woodbury & Gibson, 2013 ). Neither class of proposals can fully explain the rich empirical picture that has emerged from dozens of sentence processing studies, and most researchers now agree that a complete account of language comprehension requires both a probabilistic grammar component and a (plausibly domain-general) working memory resource (e.g.,  Boston, Hale, Vasishth, & Kliegl, 2011 ;  Demberg & Keller, 2008 ;  Lewis  et al. , 2006 ;  Gibson  et al. , 2013 ;  Levy  et al. , 2013 ). 
 Does the syntactic complexity effect we observed throughout the language system reflect the differences in frequency between object-extracted and subject-extracted constructions, or the different demands they place on working memory?  Fedorenko  et al.  (2011)  showed that regions of the language system do not respond to general working memory demands, although in the left frontal cortex they lie adjacent to other, distinct regions that are strongly modulated by working memory demands ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2012a ;  Fedorenko, Duncan & Kanwisher, 2013 ). The effects reported here in the language regions are thus unlikely to reflect differences in working memory (cf.  Fiebach, Schlesewsky, & Friederici, 2001 ;  Kaan & Swaab, 2002 ;  de Vries, Monaghan, Knecht, & Zwitserlood, 2008 ;  Rogalsky & Hickok, 2011 ). We therefore conjecture that these effects reflect differences in the relative frequencies of the two constructions, although we note that the design of current experiment cannot provide evidence favoring either account over the other. 
 This interpretation of our results does not contradict the contribution of general working memory resources to the syntactic complexity effects. Namely, whereas we have here focused on the regions of the language system, syntactic complexity manipulations also produce responses in the regions of the domain-general fronto-parietal “multiple demand (MD)” system (e.g.,  Barde, Yeatman, Lee, Glover, & Feldman, 2012 ), and damage to some MD regions can lead to difficulties with syntactically complex structures (e.g.,  Amici  et al. , 2007 ). More generally, MD regions respond to diverse executive tasks (e.g., Duncan & Owen, 2001;  Corbetta & Shulman, 2002 ;  Duncan, 2010 ;  Fedorenko  et al. , 2013 ) across many domains, including language (e.g.,  Rodd, Davis, & Johnsrude, 2005 ;  Novais-Santos  et al. , 2007 ;  January, Trueswell, & Thompson-Schill, 2009 ;  McMillan, Clark, Gunawardena, Ryant, & Grossman, 2012 ;  McMillan  et al. , 2013 ;  Nieuwland, Martin, & Carreiras, 2012 ;  Wild  et al. , 2012 ). An important goal for future work is thus to understand the division of labor between language and MD regions during syntactic processing (see also  Fedorenko, 2014 , for discussion). For example, which regions exhibit sensitivity to syntactic complexity earlier? Does activity in each system relate to distinct aspects of behavior? Is MD activity causally important for language comprehension (e.g.,  Amici  et al. , 2007 )? 
 
 
 4.1.3. Interactions between stimulus and task 
 The discussion above assumes that the syntactic complexity effects we observed reflect, in some way or another, an inherent difference between object-extracted and subject-extracted clauses – a “pure” difference between construction types that would replicate whenever such sentences are processed. Is it possible that these effects instead result from an interaction between construction and our particular sentence-picture matching task? Perhaps some extra-linguistic aspects of this task are more difficult when hearing object-extracted sentences compared to subject-extracted sentences, accounting for our results. 
 For instance, it has been previously argued that both sentence types tend to be initially parsed by assigning the active role of an agent to the first noun encountered (a “subject-first” assumption; e.g.,  Frazier, 1987 ;  Frazier & Flores d’Arcais, 1989 ;  Schriefers  et al. , 1995 ;  Schlesewsky, Fanselow, Kliegl & Krems, 2000 ;  Traxler et al., 2002 ); this assignment is correct only in subject-extracted sentences ( the circle that is greeting the star ), and require reanalysis in the case of object-extracted sentences, where the first noun is the patient of an action ( the circle that the star it greeting ). Perhaps then, upon hearing the first noun in our sentence stimuli, participants searched for a picture in which that noun was depicted as the agent rather than the patient. Such a strategy would correctly solve the task for the subject-extracted sentences, but would force participants to switch pictures upon reanalysis of the object-extracted sentences. Some cognitive process involved in this picture switching might underlie the stronger activations in language regions observed for the latter sentences compared to the former. 
 Interpreting our results as reflecting stimulus-task interactions appears to require that the extra-linguistic differences in task performance for the two sentence types involve executive functions (guiding behavioral strategies), response inhibition, working memory or other, similar, domain-general cognitive resources. However, previous data show that such mental processes do not recruit the language system (as discussed in section 4.1.2). Specifically, language regions respond at or below a low-level baseline to tasks that have general demands similar to those of the sentence-picture matching task (see  Fedorenko  et al. , 2011 ,  2012a ). 
 Furthermore, effects of syntactic complexity like the one studied here are among the most robust sentence-level linguistic phenomena and have been shown to hold across a wide range of paradigms in the prior literature (see section 2; e.g., reading with comprehension questions or plausibility judgments, listening with comprehension questions, listening with a concurrent lexical-decision task or nonword detection task, sentence repetition, etc.). It is generally assumed that the mental processes underlying syntactic complexity effects across all these diverse paradigms are the same. 
 Importantly, syntactic complexity effects also replicate in naturalistic materials under passive reading conditions, where no interaction with an externally imposed task is expected (e.g.,  Demberg & Keller, 2008 ). To further support this claim,  Appendix D  includes an analysis of a syntactic contrast under passive reading conditions from a previously reported dataset ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ). Consistent with our main results, this supplementary analysis demonstrates that all language regions (except for the left AngG) show a stronger response as syntactic processing demands increase. We therefore conclude that extra-linguistic processes caused by an interaction between sentence type and the sentence-picture matching task are not likely to affect the observed responses in the language system. 1 
 
 
 
 4.2. Is syntactic processing cognitively inseparable from other aspects of language comprehension? 
 Perhaps the most important consequence of the finding that syntactic processing is not localized to a subset of the language system is the suggestion of strong (and probably complete) overlap between regions that support syntactic processing and those that process word-level meanings (e.g.,  Fedorenko  et al. , 2012b ; see  Bates & Goodman, 1999 , for an earlier extensive review and discussion; cf.  Marin, Saffran, & Schwartz, 1976 ;  Caramazza & Berndt, 1978 , for earlier opposing views). Indeed, lexico-semantic processing appears to be similarly distributed across the language system. For example, contrasts between single words and various baselines (fixation, false fonts, pseudowords, etc.) elicit responses in all the language regions considered here (e.g.,  Humphries, Binder, Medler, & Liebenthal, 2007 ;  Diaz & McCarthy, 2009 ;  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ;  Bedny  et al. , 2011 ). 
 Of course, it is not straightforward to compare roughly similar distributions of syntactic and lexico-semantic effects across separate studies, especially given the high inter-individual variability in the precise anatomical locations of language regions. It is possible that, within the same individual, each language region consists of several sub-regions, some more heavily recruited during syntactic processing and other more heavily recruited during lexico-semantic processing. Sub-regions of the latter kind might have been missed by our language localizer contrast (sentences > nonwords) if this contrast was somehow biased, such that syntactic differences across its two conditions were stronger than lexico-semantic differences. 
 However, even when we change our localizer contrast to a “purely” lexical comparison between word lists and nonword lists, the identified language regions show the critical syntactic complexity effect ( Appendix C ). More generally, other studies have directly contrasted lexical and syntactic manipulations and found overlapping activations. For example,  Röder, Neville, Bien, & Rösler (2002 ; see also  Keller, Carpenter, & Just, 2001 ) examined syntactically complex vs. simpler sentences that were made up of real words vs. pseudowords. Inferior frontal and posterior temporal regions showed sensitivity to both manipulations: sentences composed of real words produced stronger responses than pseudoword sentences, and syntactically complex sentences produced stronger responses than syntactically simpler sentences. Thus, at least at the spatial scale of voxels measured with fMRI, syntactic and lexico-semantic processes appear to recruit the same set of regions distributed across the entire language system. 
 What are the theoretical implications of an overlap between syntactic processes and lexico-semantic processes at the level of their neural implementation? Specifically, does such overlap indicate that these processes are cognitively inseparable? This conjecture is in line with most current linguistic frameworks and the wealth of available psycholinguistic evidence. Specifically, when we know a language, we possess (i) a large but limited inventory of linguistic knowledge representations (e.g., words); and (ii) an ability to combine these stored knowledge representations to form a potentially infinite number of new meanings, i.e., a compositional capacity (e.g.,  Frege, 1914 ). Early proposals (e.g.,  Chomsky, 1965 ) linked lexico-semantic processing to the storage component of language (i.e., our lexicon), and syntactic processing – to its combinatorial component. However, over the last several decades, the nature of stored linguistic representations has evolved to allow for greater complexity, including information about how morphemes and words can combine with one another (e.g.,  Joshi, Levy, & Takahashi, 1975 ;  Bresnan, 1982 ;  Schabes, Abeille, & Joshi, 1988 ;  Pollard & Sag, 1994 ;  Bybee, 1998 ,  2010 ;  Goldberg, 1995 ;  Chomsky, 1995 ;  Jackendoff, 2002 ,  2007 ;  Culicover & Jackendoff, 2005 ). Consequently, many current proposals construe language knowledge as a continuum from the sounds of the language, to morphemes and words, to more complex units like words stored with the syntactic/semantic contexts in which they frequently occur (the degree of abstractness of these contexts varies depending on the details of the particular proposal). This view is supported by much experimental work showing that comprehenders appear to keep track of co-occurrences at different grain sizes, crossing the boundaries between words and combinatorial rules (e.g.,  Clifton, Frazier, & Connine, 1984 ;  MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994 ;  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994 ;  Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, & Lotocky, 1997 ;  Traxler, Morris, & Seely, 2002 ;  Reali & Christiansen, 2007 ;  Gennari & MacDonald, 2008 ), or between sounds and words ( Farmer, Christiansen, & Monaghan, 2006 ;  Schmidtke, Conrad, & Jacobs, 2014 ). A similar picture obtains in the domain of language production (see e.g.,  Vigliocco & Hartsuiker, 2002 , for a review). 
 Strong neuro-scientific support for the cognitive inseparability of syntactic and lexico-semantic processes cannot, however, rely on spatial overlap alone. It also requires (i) evidence for temporal overlap between the different processes recruiting a given language region; and (ii) causal evidence that the region in question is necessary for the different processes. Unfortunately, joint temporal, spatial and causal evidence cannot be obtained with fMRI. As discussed earlier, it requires methods such as electrocortical stimulation ( Ojemann, Ojemann, Lettich & Berger, 1989 ). Still, the spatial overlap between the responses to individual word meanings and to syntactic complexity throughout the language system allows us to at least entertain the hypothesis that the very same brain regions (i) store our language knowledge, and (ii) support the combination of those knowledge representations to form new meanings (see  Hasson, Chen & Honey, 2015 , for a recent discussion of this idea as applied to neural computation in general; cf. proposals like that of Baggio & Hagoort, 2001, according to which different brain regions of the language system support storage vs. combinatorial processing). 
 
 
 4.3. Dissociations within the language system? 
 As we argued in the Introduction, uncovering the division of linguistic labor among the regions of the fronto-temporal language system is key to understanding the cognitive architecture of the language faculty. However, the most fundamental aspects of the language system’s architecture remain to be discovered. For example, how to divide the language system into constituent regions is still under debate: the division into eight regions based on the average topography of language activations adopted here (from  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ) is only a suggestion (see also  Mahowald & Fedorenko, in revision ). In fact, it is not even clear whether division of the language system into regions is warranted. On the one hand, the different regions of the language system show broadly similar functional profiles as measured with fMRI: they all respond more to meaningful and structured language stimuli like phrases and sentences than to “degraded” stimuli like lists of words, Jabberwocky sentences or lists of nonwords (e.g.,  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ; Pallier  et al ., 2010;  Bedny  et al. , 2011 ). As shown here, they also all show sensitivity to finer-grain syntactic manipulations. In addition, language regions exhibit synchronized low-frequency oscillations during rest (e.g.,  Cordes  et al. , 2000 ;  Hampson, Peterson, Skudlarski, Gatenby, & Gore, 2002 ;  Turken and Dronkers, 2011 ;  Newman, Kenny, Saint-Aubin, & Klein, 2013 ;  Yue, Zhang, Xu, Shu, & Li, 2013 ;  Blank, Kanwisher & Fedorenko, 2014 ) and language comprehension ( Blank et al., 2014 ). Finally, various functional properties of the language regions – such as, how large or lateralized they are – are strongly correlated across regions ( Mahowald & Fedorenko, in revision ). All these results suggest that language regions form  a functionally integrated system  and should be considered as such when thinking about the architecture of language processing (e.g.,  Fedorenko & Thompson-Schill, 2014 ). 
 On the other hand, this is not to say that no functional dissociations exist within the language system. Indeed, a number of prior studies have reported differences among some of the language regions (e.g.,  Thompson-Schill, D’Esposito, & Kan, 1999 ;  Bedny, Caramazza, Grossman, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2008 ; Snijders  et al. , 2008;  Mesulam  et al. , 2015 ). As discussed above, we should also keep in mind the low temporal resolution of fMRI: it is possible that dissociations would be more apparent when examining the language system through a finer temporal lens. Nevertheless, if one is to argue that some region or regions of the language system are functionally distinct from the rest of it, region by condition interactions are critical, and differences in overall responsiveness to language may further need to be taken into account. 
 
 
 4.4. Conclusion 
 Our study provides evidence that sensitivity to syntactic complexity is widespread across the language system, contrary to many previous neuroimaging studies that reported only a few, localized foci of syntactic complexity effects. Investigations of syntactic processing therefore need to expand their scope to include the entire system of high-level language processing regions in order to fully understand how syntax is instantiated in the human brain. More generally, we recommend that neuroimaging studies of the language system follow two methodological considerations. First, analysis methods should allow for inter-individual variability in the exact anatomical location of functional regions. In this regard, functional localization of language regions individually in each participant is one promising method, showing increased sensitivity compared to traditional group analyses. Second, any hypothesized functional differences across regions of the language system should be tested by directly comparing effect sizes across regions (i.e., explicitly testing for a region-by-condition interaction), while taking into account more general differences in overall sensitivity to language. These considerations should guide us as we continue to accumulate evidence about the functional profiles of the regions of the language system; they will enable us to advance and evaluate specific hypotheses about the kinds of representations that such regions are likely to store and the computations that they are likely to perform. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 1 
 A subject-first strategy could still underlie our effects, if such an account rested on the linguistic consequences of this assumption – consistent with the frequency-based interpretation advocated in section 4.1.2 – instead of its extra-linguistic and task-specific consequences. 
 
 
 2 
 We note that the localizer runs used to define fROIs for this model were the same runs in which the language-specific response magnitude was evaluated. However, there is no non-independence issue involved in this procedure, because we are evaluating correlations across voxels instead of effect sizes averaged over the chosen voxels. 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 We thank Nancy Kanwisher and Ted Gibson for many helpful discussions of this work. We thank Melissa Kline for recording the sentences. For comments on the earlier drafts of the manuscript we are grateful to Adele Goldberg, Marina Bedny, David Caplan, Nancy Kanwisher, and especially Ted Gibson, who read and commented on multiple versions. This work was supported by a K99/R00 award HD 057522 to E.F. from NICHD. K.M. was supported by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Amici 
 S 
 
 
 Ogar 
 J 
 
 
 Brambati 
 SM 
 
 
 Miller 
 BL 
 
 
 Neuhaus 
 J 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NL 
 
 
 Gorno-Tempini 
 ML 
 
 
 Performance in specific language tasks correlates with regional volume changes in progressive aphasia 
 Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology 
 2007 
 20 
 4 
 203 
 211 
 18091068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Bürgel 
 U 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Uylings 
 H 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Broca's region revisited: Cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 1999 
 412 
 2 
 319 
 341 
 10441759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ances 
 BM 
 
 
 Leontiev 
 O 
 
 
 Perthen 
 JE 
 
 
 Liang 
 C 
 
 
 Lansing 
 AE 
 
 
 Buxton 
 RB 
 
 
 Regional differences in the coupling of cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism changes in response to activation: Implications for BOLD-fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 39 
 4 
 1510 
 1521 
 18164629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baggio 
 G 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 The balance between memory and unification in semantics: A dynamic account of the N400 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 2011 
 26 
 9 
 1338 
 1367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barde 
 LH 
 
 
 Yeatman 
 JD 
 
 
 Lee 
 ES 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Feldman 
 HM 
 
 
 Differences in neural activation between preterm and full term born adolescents on a sentence comprehension task: Implications for educational accommodations 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2012 
 2 
 S114 
 S128 
 22682901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baron 
 SG 
 
 
 Osherson 
 D 
 
 
 Evidence for conceptual combination in the left anterior temporal lobe 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 55 
 4 
 1847 
 1852 
 21281723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basso 
 A 
 
 
 Lecours 
 AR 
 
 
 Moraschini 
 S 
 
 
 Vanier 
 M 
 
 
 Anatomoclinical correlations of the aphasias as defined through computerized tomography: Exceptions 
 Brain and Language 
 1985 
 26 
 2 
 201 
 229 
 2417656 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bastiaanse 
 R 
 
 
 Edwards 
 S 
 
 
 Word order and finiteness in Dutch and English Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 2004 
 89 
 1 
 91 
 107 
 15010241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bates 
 E 
 
 
 Goodman 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 MacWhinney 
 B 
 
 
 On the emergence of language from the lexicon 
 The Emergence of Language 
 1999 
 Mahwah, NJ 
 Lawrence Erlbaum 
 29 
 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baudiffier 
 V 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Gaonac'h 
 D 
 
 
 Chesnet 
 D 
 
 
 The effect of noun animacy on the processing of unambiguous sentences: Evidence from French relative clauses 
 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 2011 
 64 
 10 
 1896 
 1905 
 21895558 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Grossman 
 E 
 
 
 Pascual-Leone 
 A 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Concepts are more than percepts: The case of action verbs 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 44 
 11347 
 11353 
 18971476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Pascual-Leone 
 A 
 
 
 Dodell-Feder 
 D 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Language processing in the occipital cortex of congenitally blind adults 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2011 
 108 
 11 
 4429 
 4434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Hendler 
 T 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Ben-Bashat 
 D 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 The neural reality of syntactic transformations evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Psychological Science 
 2003 
 14 
 5 
 433 
 440 
 12930473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bemis 
 D 
 
 
 Pylkkanen 
 L 
 
 
 Simple composition: A magnetoencephalography investigation into the comprehension of minimal linguistic phrases 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 8 
 2801 
 2814 
 21414902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Prieto 
 T 
 
 
 Human brain language areas identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 1997 
 17 
 1 
 353 
 362 
 8987760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blank 
 I 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 A functional dissociation between language and multiple-demand systems revealed in patterns of BOLD signal fluctuations 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2014 
 jn-00884. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 I 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 The extended argument dependency model: a neurocognitive approach to sentence comprehension across languages 
 Psychological Review 
 2006 
 113 
 4 
 787 
 17014303 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 I 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Who did what to whom? The neural basis of argument hierarchies during language comprehension 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 26 
 1 
 221 
 233 
 15862222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boston 
 MF 
 
 
 Hale 
 JT 
 
 
 Vasishth 
 S 
 
 
 Kliegl 
 R 
 
 
 Parallel processing and sentence comprehension difficulty 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 2011 
 26 
 3 
 301 
 349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brennan 
 J 
 
 
 Nir 
 Y 
 
 
 Hasson 
 U 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Heeger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 Syntactic structure building in the anterior temporal lobe during natural story listening 
 Brain and Language 
 2012 
 120 
 2 
 163 
 173 
 20472279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brennan 
 J 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 The time-course and spatial distribution of brain activity associated with sentence processing 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 2 
 1139 
 1148 
 22248581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bresnan 
 J 
 
 
 The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations 
 1982 
 1 
 The MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bybee 
 J 
 
 
 A functionalist approach to grammar and its evolution 
 Evolution of Communication 
 1998 
 2 
 2 
 249 
 278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bybee 
 JL 
 
 
 Language, Usage and Cognition 
 2010 
 98 
 Cambridge 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Futter 
 C 
 
 
 Assignment of thematic roles to nouns in sentence comprehension by an agrammatic patient 
 Brain and Language 
 1986 
 27 
 1 
 117 
 134 
 3947937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Hildebrandt 
 N 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Location of lesions in stroke patients with deficits in syntactic processing in sentence comprehension 
 Brain 
 1996 
 119 
 3 
 933 
 949 
 8673503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Stanczak 
 L 
 
 
 Waters 
 G 
 
 
 Syntactic and thematic constraint effects on blood oxygenation level dependent signal correlates of comprehension of relative clauses 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 4 
 643 
 656 
 18052788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Berndt 
 RS 
 
 
 Semantic and syntactic processes in aphasia: A review of the literature 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 1978 
 85 
 4 
 898 
 918 
 356076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caramazza 
 A 
 
 
 Zurif 
 EB 
 
 
 Dissociation of algorithmic and heuristic processes in language comprehension: Evidence from aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1976 
 3 
 4 
 572 
 582 
 974731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chomsky 
 N 
 
 
 Aspects of the Theory of Syntax 
 1965 
 11 
 Cambridge, MA 
 The MIT press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chomsky 
 N 
 
 
 The Minimalist Program 
 1995 
 Cambridge, MA 
 The MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christensen 
 KR 
 
 
 Kizach 
 J 
 
 
 Nyvad 
 AM 
 
 
 The processing of syntactic islands – An fMRI study 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2012 
 26 
 239 
 251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clifton 
 C 
 Jr 
 
 
 Frazier 
 L 
 
 
 Connine 
 C 
 
 
 Lexical expectations in sentence comprehension 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1984 
 23 
 6 
 696 
 708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Berroya 
 E 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Westerveld 
 M 
 
 
 Ni 
 W 
 
 
 Shankweiler 
 D 
 
 
 Sentence complexity and input modality effects in sentence comprehension: an fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 1 
 11 
 21 
 15109993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooke 
 A 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 DeVita 
 C 
 
 
 Gonzalez-Atavales 
 J 
 
 
 Moore 
 P 
 
 
 Chen 
 W 
 
 
 Gee 
 J 
 
 
 Detre 
 J 
 
 
 Large-scale neural network for sentence processing 
 Brain and Language 
 2006 
 96 
 1 
 14 
 36 
 16168473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cooke 
 A 
 
 
 Zurif 
 EB 
 
 
 DeVita 
 C 
 
 
 Alsop 
 D 
 
 
 Koenig 
 P 
 
 
 Detre 
 J 
 
 
 Gee 
 J 
 
 
 Piñango 
 M 
 
 
 Balogh 
 J 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Neural Basis for Sentence Comprehension: Grammatical and Short-Term Memory Components 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2001 
 15 
 80 
 94 
 11835600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2002 
 3 
 3 
 201 
 215 
 11994752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cordes 
 D 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Arfanakis 
 K 
 
 
 Wendt 
 GJ 
 
 
 Turski 
 PA 
 
 
 Moritz 
 CH 
 
 
 Quigley 
 MA 
 
 
 Meyerand 
 ME 
 
 
 Mapping functionally related regions of brain with functional connectivity MR imaging 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 2000 
 21 
 9 
 1636 
 1644 
 11039342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Culicover 
 PW 
 
 
 Jackendoff 
 R 
 
 
 Simpler Syntax 
 2005 
 Oxford 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 2–3 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demberg 
 V 
 
 
 Keller 
 F 
 
 
 Data from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity 
 Cognition 
 2008 
 109 
 2 
 193 
 210 
 18930455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Russell 
 RP 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Wilson 
 J 
 
 
 Moss 
 HE 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Susceptibility-Induced Loss of Signal: Comparing PET and fMRI on a Semantic Task 
 Neuroimage 
 2000 
 11 
 589 
 600 
 10860788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Vries 
 MH 
 
 
 Monaghan 
 P 
 
 
 Knecht 
 S 
 
 
 Zwitserlood 
 P 
 
 
 Syntactic structure and artificial grammar learning: The learnability of embedded hierarchical structures 
 Cognition 
 2008 
 107 
 763 
 774 
 17963740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diaz 
 MT 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 A comparison of brain activity evoked by single content and function words: An fMRI investigation of implicit word processing 
 Brain Research 
 2009 
 1282 
 38 
 49 
 19465009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 F 
 
 
 Bates 
 E 
 
 
 Wulfeck 
 B 
 
 
 Utman 
 JA 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 N 
 
 
 Gernsbacher 
 MA 
 
 
 Language deficits, localization, and grammar: evidence for a distributive model of language breakdown in aphasic patients and neurologically intact individuals 
 Psychological Review 
 2001 
 108 
 4 
 759 
 788 
 11699116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Ludy 
 CA 
 
 
 Redfern 
 BB 
 
 
 Pragmatics in the absence of verbal language: Descriptions of a severe aphasic and a language-deprived adult 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 1998 
 11 
 1 
 179 
 190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Wilkins 
 DP 
 
 
 Van Valin 
 RD 
 Jr 
 
 
 Redfern 
 BB 
 
 
 Jaeger 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lesion analysis of the brain areas involved in language comprehension 
 Cognition 
 2004 
 92 
 1 
 145 
 177 
 15037129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 Wilkins 
 DP 
 
 
 Van Valin 
 RD 
 Jr 
 
 
 Redfern 
 BB 
 
 
 Jaeger 
 JJ 
 
 
 A reconsideration of the brain areas involved in the disruption of morphosyntactic comprehension 
 Brain and Language 
 1994 
 47 
 3 
 461 
 463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duffau 
 H 
 
 
 Moritz-Gasser 
 S 
 
 
 Mandonnet 
 E 
 
 
 A re-examination of neural basis of language processing: proposal of a dynamic hodotopical model from data provided by brain stimulation mapping during picture naming 
 Brain and Language 
 2014 
 131 
 1 
 10 
 23866901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive demands 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 2000 
 23 
 10 
 475 
 483 
 11006464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: Mental programs for intelligent behaviour 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2010 
 14 
 4 
 172 
 179 
 20171926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ekstrom 
 A 
 
 
 How and when the fMRI BOLD signal relates to underlying neural activity: The danger in dissociation 
 Brain Research Reviews 
 2010 
 62 
 2 
 233 
 244 
 20026191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Embick 
 D 
 
 
 Marantz 
 A 
 
 
 Miyashita 
 Y 
 
 
 O'Neil 
 W 
 
 
 Sakai 
 KL 
 
 
 A syntactic specialization for Broca's area 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2000 
 97 
 11 
 6150 
 6154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Farmer 
 TA 
 
 
 Christiansen 
 MH 
 
 
 Monaghan 
 P 
 
 
 Phonological typicality influences on-line sentence comprehension 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2006 
 103 
 32 
 12203 
 12208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Rohde 
 D 
 
 
 The nature of working memory capacity in sentence comprehension: Evidence against domain-specific resources 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2006 
 54 
 4 
 541 
 553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Hsieh 
 PJ 
 
 
 Nieto-Castañón 
 A 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 New method for fMRI investigations of language: defining ROIs functionally in individual subjects 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2010 
 104 
 2 
 1177 
 1194 
 20410363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Behr 
 MK 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Functional specificity for high-level linguistic processing in the human brain 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2011 
 108 
 39 
 16428 
 16433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Some regions within Broca's area do respond more strongly to sentences than to linguistically degraded stimuli: A comment on Rogalsky and Hickok 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 10 
 2632 
 2635 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Language-selective and domain-general regions lie side by side within Broca's area 
 Current Biology 
 2012a 
 22 
 2059 
 2062 
 23063434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Nieto-Castanon 
 A 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Lexical and syntactic representations in the brain: An fMRI investigation with multi-voxel pattern analyses 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012b 
 50 
 4 
 499 
 513 
 21945850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Broad domain-generality in focal regions of frontal and parietal cortex 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2013 
 110 
 41 
 16616 
 16621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Woodbury 
 R 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Direct evidence of memory retrieval as a source of difficulty in long-distance structural dependencies in language 
 Cognitive Science 
 2013 
 37 
 2 
 378 
 394 
 23362990 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 The role of domain-general cognitive control in language comprehension 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 2014 
 5 
 article 335. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Reworking the language network 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2014 
 18 
 3 
 120 
 126 
 24440115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Syntactic working memory and the establishment of filler-gap dependencies: Insights from ERPs and fMRI 
 Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 
 2001 
 30 
 3 
 321 
 338 
 11523277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Revisiting the role of Broca's area in sentence processing: syntactic integration versus syntactic working memory 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 24 
 2 
 79 
 91 
 15455462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Rajendran 
 N 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Augustinack 
 J 
 
 
 Hinds 
 O 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BT 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Cortical folding patterns and predicting cytoarchitecture 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2008 
 18 
 8 
 1973 
 1980 
 18079129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frazier 
 L 
 
 
 Syntactic processing: evidence from Dutch 
 Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 
 1987 
 5 
 4 
 519 
 559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frazier 
 L 
 
 
 Flores d'Arcais 
 GB 
 
 
 Filler driven parsing: A study of gap filling in Dutch 
 Journal of memory and language 
 1989 
 28 
 3 
 331 
 344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frege 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 Gabriel 
 G 
 
 
 Letter to Jourdain 
 Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence 
 1914 
 Chicago 
 Chicago University Press 
 78 
 80 
 1980. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Pathways to language: Fiber tracts in the human brain 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2009 
 13 
 4 
 175 
 181 
 19223226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 The brain basis of language processing: from structure to function 
 Physiological reviews 
 2011 
 91 
 4 
 1357 
 1392 
 22013214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 The cortical language circuit: from auditory perception to sentence comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2012 
 16 
 5 
 262 
 267 
 22516238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 Obleser 
 J 
 
 
 Disentangling syntax and intelligibility in auditory language comprehension 
 Human brain mapping 
 2010 
 31 
 3 
 448 
 457 
 19718654 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 MA 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Measuring structural–functional correspondence: spatial variability of specialised brain regions after macro-anatomical alignment 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 2 
 1369 
 1381 
 21875671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garnsey 
 SM 
 
 
 Pearlmutter 
 NJ 
 
 
 Myers 
 E 
 
 
 Lotocky 
 MA 
 
 
 The contributions of verb bias and plausibility to the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1997 
 37 
 1 
 58 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gennari 
 SP 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 MC 
 
 
 Semantic indeterminacy in object relative clauses 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2008 
 58 
 2 
 161 
 187 
 19724662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gennari 
 SP 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 MC 
 
 
 Linking production and comprehension processes: The case of relative clauses 
 Cognition 
 2009 
 111 
 1 
 1 
 23 
 19215912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies 
 Cognition 
 1998 
 68 
 1 
 1 
 76 
 9775516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Pearlmutter 
 NJ 
 
 
 Constraints on sentence comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 1998 
 2 
 7 
 262 
 268 
 21244925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Tily 
 H 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 
 
 Sanz 
 M 
 
 
 Laka 
 I 
 
 
 Tanenhaus 
 MK 
 
 
 The processing complexity of English relative clauses 
 Language Down the Garden Path: The Cognitive and Biological Basis for Linguistic Structure 
 2013 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 AE 
 
 
 Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure 
 1995 
 University of Chicago Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gordon 
 PC 
 
 
 Hendrick 
 R 
 
 
 Johnson 
 M 
 
 
 Memory interference during language processing 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 
 2001 
 27 
 6 
 1411 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gordon 
 PC 
 
 
 Hendrick 
 R 
 
 
 Johnson 
 M 
 
 
 Effects of noun phrase type on sentence complexity 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2004 
 51 
 1 
 97 
 114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodner 
 D 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Consequences of the serial nature of linguistic input for sentential complexity 
 Cognitive Science 
 2005 
 29 
 2 
 261 
 290 
 21702774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 The neurology of syntax: Language use without Broca's area 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 2000 
 23 
 01 
 1 
 21 
 11303337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Neuroimaging of syntax and syntactic processing 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2006 
 16 
 2 
 240 
 246 
 16563739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 Santi 
 A 
 
 
 The battle for Broca’s region 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2008 
 12 
 12 
 474 
 480 
 18930695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hale 
 J 
 
 
 A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model 
 Proceedings of the Second Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Language technologies 
 2001 
 Association for Computational Linguistics 
 1 
 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampson 
 M 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 JC 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Detection of functional connectivity using temporal correlations in MR images 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2002 
 15 
 4 
 247 
 262 
 11835612 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harrison 
 RV 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Panesar 
 J 
 
 
 Mount 
 RJ 
 
 
 Blood capillary distribution correlates with hemodynamic-based functional imaging in cerebral cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2002 
 12 
 3 
 225 
 233 
 11839597 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hasson 
 U 
 
 
 Chen 
 J 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Hierarchical process memory: memory as an integral component of information processing 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2015 
 19 
 6 
 304 
 313 
 25980649 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Herrmann 
 B 
 
 
 Obleser 
 J 
 
 
 Kalberlah 
 C 
 
 
 Haynes 
 JD 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Dissociable neural imprints of perception and grammar in auditory functional imaging 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2012 
 33 
 584 
 595 
 21391281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Holmes 
 VM 
 
 
 O'Regan 
 JK 
 
 
 Eye fixation patterns during the reading of relative-clause sentences 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 1981 
 20 
 4 
 417 
 430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Willard 
 K 
 
 
 Buchsbaum 
 B 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Role of anterior temporal cortex in auditory sentence comprehension: An fMRI study 
 NeuroReport 
 2001 
 12 
 8 
 1749 
 1752 
 11409752 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Love 
 T 
 
 
 Swinney 
 D 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Response of anterior temporal cortex to syntactic and prosodic manipulations during sentence processing 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2005 
 26 
 2 
 128 
 138 
 15895428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Syntactic and semantic modulation of neural activity during auditory sentence comprehension 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2006 
 18 
 4 
 665 
 679 
 16768368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension: An fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 36 
 3 
 924 
 932 
 17500009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ishizuka 
 T 
 
 
 Nakatani 
 K 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 Relative clause extraction complexity in Japanese 
 Poster presented at the 16th annual CUNY conference on human sentence processing 
 2003 
 Cambridge, MA 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackendoff 
 R 
 
 
 Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar 
 1972 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackendoff 
 R 
 
 
 Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution 
 2002 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jackendoff 
 R 
 
 
 A parallel architecture perspective on language processing 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1146 
 2 
 22 
 17045978 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 January 
 D 
 
 
 Trueswell 
 JC 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Co-localization of Stroop and syntactic ambiguity resolution in Broca's area: Implications for the neural basis of sentence processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2009 
 21 
 12 
 2434 
 2444 
 19199402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 The neural basis of semantic cognition: converging evidence from neuropsychology, neuroimaging and TMS 
 Cortex 
 2013 
 49 
 3 
 611 
 625 
 23260615 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jezzard 
 P 
 
 
 Clare 
 S 
 
 
 Sources of distortion in functional MRI data 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 2–3 
 80 
 85 
 10524596 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joshi 
 AK 
 
 
 Levy 
 LS 
 
 
 Takahashi 
 M 
 
 
 Tree adjunct grammars 
 Journal of Computer and System Sciences 
 1975 
 10 
 1 
 136 
 163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Julian 
 JB 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Webster 
 J 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 An algorithmic method for functionally defining regions of interest in the ventral visual pathway 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 4 
 2357 
 2364 
 22398396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Thulborn 
 KR 
 
 
 Brain activation modulated by sentence comprehension 
 Science 
 1996 
 274 
 5284 
 114 
 116 
 8810246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaan 
 E 
 
 
 Swaab 
 TY 
 
 
 The brain circuitry of syntactic comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2002 
 6 
 8 
 350 
 356 
 12140086 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Functional specificity in the human brain: a window into the functional architecture of the mind 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2010 
 107 
 25 
 11163 
 11170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 The neural bases of sentence comprehension: a fMRI examination of syntactic and lexical processing 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 3 
 223 
 237 
 11230094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 King 
 J 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Individual differences in syntactic processing: The role of working memory 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1991 
 30 
 5 
 580 
 602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PS 
 
 
 Baker 
 CI 
 
 
 Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2009 
 12 
 5 
 535 
 540 
 19396166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kwon 
 N 
 
 
 Gordon 
 PC 
 
 
 Lee 
 Y 
 
 
 Kluender 
 R 
 
 
 Polinsky 
 M 
 
 
 Cognitive and linguistic factors affecting subject/object asymmetry: An eye-tracking study of prenominal relative clauses in Korean 
 Language 
 2010 
 86 
 3 
 546 
 582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kwon 
 N 
 
 
 Polinsky 
 M 
 
 
 Kluender 
 R 
 
 
 
 
 Baumer 
 D 
 
 
 Montero 
 D 
 
 
 Scanlon 
 M 
 
 
 Subject preference in Korean 
 Proceedings of the 25th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 
 2006 
 Somerville, MA 
 Cascadilla Press 
 1 
 14 
 (WCCFL 25) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lambon-Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Sage 
 K 
 
 
 Jones 
 RW 
 
 
 Mayberry 
 EJ 
 
 
 Coherent concepts are computed in the anterior temporal lobes 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2010 
 107 
 6 
 2717 
 2722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 Expectation-based syntactic comprehension 
 Cognition 
 2008 
 106 
 3 
 1126 
 1177 
 17662975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy 
 R 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Gibson 
 E 
 
 
 The syntactic complexity of Russian relative clauses 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2013 
 69 
 4 
 461 
 495 
 24711687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis 
 RL 
 
 
 Vasishth 
 S 
 
 
 Van Dyke 
 JA 
 
 
 Computational principles of working memory in sentence comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2006 
 10 
 10 
 447 
 454 
 16949330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 MC 
 
 
 Pearlmutter 
 NJ 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution 
 Psychological Review 
 1994 
 101 
 4 
 676 
 703 
 7984711 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Magnusdottir 
 S 
 
 
 Fillmore 
 P 
 
 
 den Ouden 
 DB 
 
 
 Hjaltason 
 H 
 
 
 Rorden 
 C 
 
 
 Kjartansson 
 O 
 
 
 Bonilha 
 L 
 
 
 Fridriksson 
 J 
 
 
 Damage to left anterior temporal cortex predicts impairment of complex syntactic processing: A lesion- symptom mapping study 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2013 
 34 
 10 
 2715 
 2723 
 22522937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahowald 
 K 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Reliable individual-level neural markers of high-level language processing, a necessary precursor for relating neural variability to behavioral and genetic variability 
 ( in revision ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mak 
 WM 
 
 
 Vonk 
 W 
 
 
 Schriefers 
 H 
 
 
 The influence of animacy on relative clause processing 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2002 
 47 
 1 
 50 
 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mak 
 WM 
 
 
 Vonk 
 W 
 
 
 Schriefers 
 H 
 
 
 Animacy in processing relative clauses: The hikers that rocks crush 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2006 
 54 
 4 
 466 
 490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marin 
 OS 
 
 
 Saffran 
 EM 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Dissociations of language in aphasia: implications for normal function 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1976 
 280 
 1 
 868 
 884 
 1070946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 BM 
 
 
 Tzourio 
 N 
 
 
 Frak 
 V 
 
 
 Syrota 
 A 
 
 
 Murayama 
 N 
 
 
 Levrier 
 O 
 
 
 Salamon 
 G 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Mehler 
 J 
 
 
 The cortical representation of speech 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1993 
 5 
 4 
 467 
 479 
 23964919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McElree 
 B 
 
 
 Foraker 
 S 
 
 
 Dyer 
 L 
 
 
 Memory structures that subserve sentence comprehension 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2003 
 48 
 1 
 67 
 91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McMillan 
 CT 
 
 
 Clark 
 R 
 
 
 Gunawardena 
 D 
 
 
 Ryant 
 N 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 fMRI evidence for strategic decision-making during resolution of pronoun reference 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 5 
 674 
 687 
 22245014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McMillan 
 CT 
 
 
 Coleman 
 D 
 
 
 Clark 
 R 
 
 
 Liang 
 TW 
 
 
 Gross 
 RG 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Converging evidence for the processing costs associated with ambiguous quantifier comprehension 
 Frontiers in psychology 
 2013 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mecklinger 
 A 
 
 
 Schriefers 
 H 
 
 
 Steinhauer 
 K 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Processing relative clauses varying on syntactic and semantic dimensions: An analysis with event-related potentials 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1995 
 23 
 4 
 477 
 494 
 7666761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meltzer 
 JA 
 
 
 McArdle 
 JJ 
 
 
 Schafer 
 RJ 
 
 
 Braun 
 AR 
 
 
 Neural aspects of sentence comprehension: Syntactic complexity, reversibility, and reanalysis 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 20 
 8 
 1853 
 1864 
 19920058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menenti 
 L 
 
 
 Segaert 
 K 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 The neuronal infrastructure of speaking 
 Brain and Language 
 2012 
 122 
 2 
 71 
 80 
 22717280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 RS 
 
 
 Kim 
 SG 
 
 
 Spatial and temporal limits in cognitive neuroimaging with fMRI 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 1999 
 3 
 6 
 207 
 216 
 10354573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M 
 
 
 Large-scale neurocognitive networks and distributed processing for attention, language, and memory 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1990 
 28 
 5 
 597 
 613 
 2260847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 Thompson 
 CK 
 
 
 Weintraub 
 S 
 
 
 Rogalski 
 EJ 
 
 
 The Wernicke conundrum and the anatomy of language comprehension in primary progressive aphasia 
 Brain 
 2015 
 138 
 8 
 2423 
 2437 
 26112340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miyamoto 
 E 
 
 
 Nakamura 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Garding 
 G 
 
 
 Tsujimura 
 M 
 
 
 Subject/object asymmetries in the processing of relative clauses in Japanese 
 Proceedings of the 22nd West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 
 2003 
 Somerville, MA 
 Cascadilla Press 
 342 
 355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monti 
 MM 
 
 
 Parsons 
 LM 
 
 
 Osherson 
 DN 
 
 
 Thought beyond language neural dissociation of algebra and natural language 
 Psychological science 
 2012 
 23 
 8 
 914 
 922 
 22760883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 AJ 
 
 
 Kenny 
 S 
 
 
 Saint-Aubin 
 J 
 
 
 Klein 
 RM 
 
 
 Can skilled readers perform a second task in parallel? A functional connectivity MRI study 
 Brain and Language 
 2013 
 124 
 1 
 84 
 95 
 23291725 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nieto-Castañon 
 A 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 Subject-specific functional localizers increase sensitivity and functional resolution of multi-subject analyses 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 63 
 1646 
 1669 
 22784644 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 BU 
 
 
 Wagenmakers 
 EJ 
 
 
 Erroneous analyses of interactions in neuroscience: a problem of significance 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2011 
 14 
 9 
 1105 
 1107 
 21878926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nieuwland 
 MS 
 
 
 Martin 
 AE 
 
 
 Carreiras 
 M 
 
 
 Brain regions that process case: Evidence from Basque 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2012 
 33 
 11 
 2509 
 2520 
 21898678 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Novais-Santos 
 S 
 
 
 Gee 
 J 
 
 
 Shah 
 M 
 
 
 Troiani 
 V 
 
 
 Work 
 M 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Resolving sentence ambiguity with planning and working memory resources: Evidence from fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 1 
 361 
 378 
 17574445 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O'Grady 
 W 
 
 
 Lee 
 M 
 
 
 Choo 
 M 
 
 
 A subject-object asymmetry in the acquisition of relative clauses in Korean as a second language 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition 
 2003 
 25 
 3 
 433 
 448 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Grady 
 W 
 
 
 
 
 Kidd 
 E 
 
 
 Relative clauses: Processing and acquisition 
 The Acquisition of Relative Clauses: Processing, Typology and Function 
 2011 
 Amsterdam 
 John Benjamins 
 13 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 G 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 J 
 
 
 Lettich 
 EREEGT 
 
 
 Berger 
 M 
 
 
 Cortical language localization in left, dominant hemisphere: an electrical stimulation mapping investigation in 117 patients 
 Journal of neurosurgery 
 1989 
 71 
 3 
 316 
 326 
 2769383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pallier 
 C 
 
 
 Devauchelle 
 AD 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cortical representation of the constituent structure of sentences 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2011 
 108 
 6 
 2522 
 2527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papoutsi 
 M 
 
 
 Stamatakis 
 EA 
 
 
 Griffiths 
 J 
 
 
 Marslen-Wilson 
 WD 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Is left fronto-temporal connectivity essential for syntax? Effective connectivity, tractography and performance in left-hemisphere damaged patients 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 58 
 2 
 656 
 664 
 21722742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pascual 
 B 
 
 
 Masdeu 
 JC 
 
 
 Hollenbeck 
 M 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Insausti 
 R 
 
 
 Ding 
 SL 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Large-scale brain networks of the human left temporal pole: a functional connectivity MRI study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2015 
 25 
 3 
 680 
 702 
 24068551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 12 
 976 
 987 
 18026167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Troiani 
 V 
 
 
 Wingfield 
 A 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Neural processing during older adults’ comprehension of spoken sentences: Age differences in resource allocation and connectivity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 773 
 782 
 19666829 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pollard 
 C 
 
 
 Sag 
 IA 
 
 
 Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar 
 1994 
 Chicago 
 University of Chicago Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reali 
 F 
 
 
 Christiansen 
 MH 
 
 
 Processing of relative clauses is made easier by frequency of occurrence 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2007 
 57 
 1 
 1 
 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rodd 
 JM 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 The neural mechanisms of speech comprehension: fMRI studies of semantic ambiguity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2005 
 15 
 8 
 1261 
 1269 
 15635062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Röder 
 B 
 
 
 Stock 
 O 
 
 
 Neville 
 H 
 
 
 Bien 
 S 
 
 
 Rösler 
 F 
 
 
 Brain activation modulated by the comprehension of normal and pseudo-word sentences of different processing demands: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Neuroimage 
 2002 
 15 
 4 
 1003 
 1014 
 11906240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogalsky 
 C 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Selective attention to semantic and syntactic features modulates sentence processing networks in anterior temporal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 4 
 786 
 796 
 18669589 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rogalsky 
 C 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 The role of Broca's area in sentence comprehension 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 7 
 1664 
 1680 
 20617890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolheiser 
 T 
 
 
 Stamatakis 
 EA 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Dynamic processing in the human language system: synergy between the arcuate fascicle and extreme capsule 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 47 
 16949 
 16957 
 22114265 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Samuels 
 JA 
 
 
 Benson 
 DF 
 
 
 Some aspects of language comprehension in anterior aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1979 
 8 
 3 
 275 
 286 
 509199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Santi 
 A 
 
 
 Grodzinsky 
 Y 
 
 
 fMRI adaptation dissociates syntactic complexity dimensions 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 51 
 4 
 1285 
 1293 
 20338244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Divide and conquer: a defense of functional localizers 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 30 
 4 
 1088 
 1099 
 16635578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schabes 
 Y 
 
 
 Abeille 
 A 
 
 
 Joshi 
 AK 
 
 
 Parsing strategies with 'lexicalized' grammars: Application to tree adjoining grammars 
 Proceedings of the 12th conference on Computational linguistics-Volume 
 1988 
 8 
 2 
 Association for Computational Linguistics 
 578 
 583 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Fanselow 
 G 
 
 
 Kliegl 
 R 
 
 
 Krems 
 J 
 
 
 
 
 Hemforth 
 B 
 
 
 Konieczny 
 L 
 
 
 The subject preference in the processing of locally ambiguous wh-questions in German 
 German sentence processing 
 2000 
 Netherlands 
 Springer 
 65 
 93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlosser 
 MJ 
 
 
 Aoyagi 
 N 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Functional MRI studies of auditory comprehension 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1998 
 6 
 1 
 1 
 13 
 9673659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmidtke 
 DS 
 
 
 Conrad 
 M 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 AM 
 
 
 Phonological iconicity 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 2014 
 5 
 article 80. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schriefers 
 H 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Kuhn 
 K 
 
 
 The processing of locally ambiguous relative clauses in German 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1995 
 34 
 4 
 499 
 520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 Saffran 
 EM 
 
 
 Marin 
 OS 
 
 
 The word order problem in agrammatism: I. Comprehension 
 Brain and Language 
 1980 
 10 
 2 
 249 
 262 
 7407546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Segaert 
 K 
 
 
 Menenti 
 L 
 
 
 Weber 
 K 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Shared syntax in language production and language comprehension — an fMRI study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 7 
 1662 
 1670 
 21934094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selnes 
 OA 
 
 
 Knopman 
 DS 
 
 
 Niccum 
 N 
 
 
 Rubens 
 AB 
 
 
 Larson 
 D 
 
 
 Computed tomographic scan correlates of auditory comprehension deficits in aphasia: A prospective recovery study 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1983 
 13 
 5 
 558 
 566 
 6870207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snijders 
 TM 
 
 
 Vosse 
 T 
 
 
 Kempen 
 G 
 
 
 Van Berkum 
 JJA 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Retrieval and unification of syntactic structure in sentence comprehension: an fMRI study using word-category ambiguity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 7 
 1493 
 1503 
 19001084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stromswold 
 K 
 
 
 Caplan 
 D 
 
 
 Alpert 
 N 
 
 
 Rauch 
 S 
 
 
 Localization of syntactic comprehension by positron emission tomography 
 Brain and Language 
 1996 
 52 
 3 
 452 
 473 
 8653390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tahmasebi 
 AM 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 Wild 
 CJ 
 
 
 Rodd 
 JM 
 
 
 Hakyemez 
 H 
 
 
 Abolmaesumi 
 P 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 Is the link between anatomical structure and function equally strong at all cognitive levels of processing? 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 7 
 1593 
 1603 
 21893681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanenhaus 
 MK 
 
 
 Trueswell 
 JC 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 JL 
 
 
 Eimas 
 PD 
 
 
 Sentence comprehension 
 Speech, Language and Communication 
 1995 
 San Diego, CA 
 Academic Press 
 217 
 262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Kan 
 IP 
 
 
 Effects of repetition and competition on activity in left prefrontal cortex during word generation 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 23 
 3 
 513 
 522 
 10433263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thothathiri 
 M 
 
 
 Kimberg 
 DY 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 MF 
 
 
 The neural basis of reversible sentence comprehension: Evidence from voxel-based lesion symptom mapping in aphasia 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2012 
 24 
 1 
 212 
 222 
 21861679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tramo 
 MJ 
 
 
 Baynes 
 K 
 
 
 Volpe 
 BT 
 
 
 Impaired syntactic comprehension and production in Broca's aphasia CT lesion localization and recovery patterns 
 Neurology 
 1988 
 38 
 1 
 95 
 95 
 3336468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Traxler 
 MJ 
 
 
 Morris 
 RK 
 
 
 Seely 
 RE 
 
 
 Processing subject and object relative clauses: Evidence from eye movements 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 2002 
 47 
 1 
 69 
 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trueswell 
 JC 
 
 
 Tanenhaus 
 MK 
 
 
 Garnsey 
 S 
 
 
 Semantic influences on parsing: Use of thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity resolution 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 1994 
 33 
 285 
 318 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turken 
 U 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: Converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses 
 Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 
 2011 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Marslen-Wilson 
 WD 
 
 
 Randall 
 B 
 
 
 Wright 
 P 
 
 
 Devereux 
 BJ 
 
 
 Zhuang 
 J 
 
 
 Papoutsi 
 M 
 
 
 Stamatakis 
 EA 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal cortex and syntax: function, structure and behaviour in patients with left hemisphere damage 
 Brain 
 2011 
 134 
 2 
 415 
 431 
 21278407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ueno 
 M 
 
 
 Garnsey 
 SM 
 
 
 An ERP study of the processing of subject and object relative clauses in Japanese 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 2008 
 23 
 5 
 646 
 688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ullman 
 MT 
 
 
 The declarative/procedural model 
 Routledge Encyclopedia of Second Language Acquisition 
 2012 
 London 
 Routledge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The response of left temporal cortex to sentences 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 4 
 550 
 560 
 12126497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Varley 
 RA 
 
 
 Klessinger 
 NJ 
 
 
 Romanowski 
 CA 
 
 
 Siegal 
 M 
 
 
 Agrammatic but numerate 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2005 
 102 
 9 
 3519 
 3524 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vigliocco 
 G 
 
 
 Hartsuiker 
 RJ 
 
 
 The interplay of meaning, sound, and syntax in sentence production 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 2002 
 128 
 3 
 442 
 472 
 12002697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wanner 
 E 
 
 
 Maratsos 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Halle 
 M 
 
 
 Bresnan 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 G 
 
 
 An ATN approach to comprehension 
 Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality 
 1978 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 119 
 161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wartenburger 
 I 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Burchert 
 F 
 
 
 De Bleser 
 R 
 
 
 Villringer 
 R 
 
 
 Grammaticality judgments on sentences with and without movement of phrasal constituents—an event-related fMRI study 
 Journal of neurolinguistics 
 2003 
 16 
 301 
 314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wells 
 JB 
 
 
 Christiansen 
 MH 
 
 
 Race 
 DS 
 
 
 Acheson 
 DJ 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 MC 
 
 
 Experience and sentence processing: Statistical learning and relative clause comprehension 
 Cognitive psychology 
 2009 
 58 
 2 
 250 
 271 
 18922516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wild 
 CJ 
 
 
 Yusuf 
 A 
 
 
 Wilson 
 DE 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Davis 
 MH 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 Effortful listening: the processing of degraded speech depends critically on attention 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 32 
 40 
 14010 
 14021 
 23035108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Willems 
 RM 
 
 
 Benn 
 Y 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Toni 
 I 
 
 
 Varley 
 R 
 
 
 Communicating without a functioning language system: implications for the role of language in mentalizing 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2011 
 49 
 11 
 3130 
 3135 
 21810434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Saygin 
 AP 
 
 
 Grammaticality judgment in aphasia: Deficits are not specific to syntactic structures, aphasic syndromes, or lesion sites 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2004 
 16 
 2 
 238 
 252 
 15068594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Galantucci 
 S 
 
 
 Tartaglia 
 MC 
 
 
 Rising 
 K 
 
 
 Patterson 
 DK 
 
 
 Henry 
 ML 
 
 
 Ogar 
 JM 
 
 
 DeLeon 
 J 
 
 
 Miller 
 BL 
 
 
 Gorno-Tempini 
 ML 
 
 
 Syntactic processing depends on dorsal language tracts 
 Neuron 
 2011 
 72 
 2 
 397 
 403 
 22017996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 The impact of vascular factors on language localization in the superior temporal sulcus 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2014 
 35 
 8 
 4049 
 4063 
 24452906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 C 
 
 
 Gallate 
 J 
 
 
 The function of the anterior temporal lobe: a review of the empirical evidence 
 Brain Research 
 2012 
 1449 
 94 
 116 
 22421014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yue 
 Q 
 
 
 Zhang 
 L 
 
 
 Xu 
 G 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Li 
 P 
 
 
 Task-modulated activation and functional connectivity of the temporal and frontal areas during speech comprehension 
 Neuroscience 
 2013 
 237 
 87 
 95 
 23357111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 L 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 The interplay of composition and concept specificity in the left anterior temporal lobe: An MEG study 
 Neuroimage 
 2015 
 111 
 1 
 228 
 240 
 25703829 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zurif 
 E 
 
 
 Swinney 
 D 
 
 
 Prather 
 P 
 
 
 Solomon 
 J 
 
 
 Bushell 
 C 
 
 
 An on-line analysis of syntactic processing in Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia 
 Brain and Language 
 1993 
 45 
 3 
 448 
 464 
 8269334 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix 
 
 A. Sensitivity to syntactic complexity in the “core” language system and the extended language system 
 
 Table A.1 
 
 Effects a , b  for the localizer contrast c  ( sentences  >  nonwords ) and the critical contrast ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) in the “core” language system 
 
 
 
 
 fROI 
 Localizer effect 
 Syntactic complexity effect 
 
 
 
 
 LIFGorb 
 t =5.79; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =3.41; 
 p <0.01 
 
 
 LIFG 
 t =8.31; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =4.66; 
 p <10 −3 
 
 
 LMFG 
 t =6.72; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =4.63; 
 p <10 −3 
 
 
 LAntTemp 
 t =6.28; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =2.34; 
 p <0.05 
 
 
 LMidAntTemp 
 t =7.52; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =4.19; 
 p <10 −3 
 
 
 LMidPostTemp 
 t =10.44; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =5.43; 
 p <10 −3 
 
 
 LPostTemp 
 t =9.17; 
 p <10 −4 
 t =5.43; 
 p <10 −3 
 
 
 LAngG 
 t =8.16; 
 p <10 −4 
 t <1; 
 n.s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 We report uncorrected  p  values ( df =12), but all effects remain significant after an FDR correction for the number of regions ( n =8). 
 
 
 b 
 See also  Figure 4 . 
 
 
 c 
 Estimated in data not used for defining the fROIs, using across-runs cross-validation. 
 
 
 
 
 Table A.2 
 
 Effects a  for the localizer contrast ( sentences  >  nonwords ) b  and for the critical contrast ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) in the extended language system 
 
 
 
 
 fROI 
 Localizer effect 
 Syntactic complexity effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right hemisphere homologues of “core” language regions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   RIFGorb 
 t =3.71;  p <0.005 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
   RIFG 
 t =3.89;  p <0.005 
 t =2.19;  p <0.05 
 
 
   RMFG 
 t =2.05;  p <0.05 
 t =1.23; n.s. 
 
 
   RAntTemp 
 t =5.37;  p <10 −4 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
   RMidAntTemp 
 t =3.75;  p <0.005 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
   RMidPostTemp 
 t =5.67;  p <10 −4 
 t =2.39;  p <0.05 
 
 
   RPostTemp 
 t =4.44;  p <10 −3 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
   RAngG 
 t =2.59;  p <0.05 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial frontal cortex region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   LSFG 
 t =5.51;  p <10 −4 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cerebellar regions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   RCereb 
 t =4.63;  p <10 −3 
 t =1.88;  p <0.05 
 
 
   LCereb 
 t=6.28; p<10 −4 
 t <1; n.s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 We report uncorrected  p  values ( df =12). 
 
 
 b 
 Estimated in data not used for defining the fROIs, using across-runs cross-validation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 B. The spatial pattern of syntactic complexity effects is better explained by language-specific responsiveness than by general, non-specific proneness to signal loss 
 In section 3.3.2 we report that the size of our syntactic complexity effect in a given language fROI is strongly predicted by the response magnitude to language in that fROI. Analyses of the relationship between these two effects was performed on contrast estimates that were averaged across voxels in each fROI. Yet this averaging might have obscured potential heterogeneity within these regions. It is therefore possible that, on a finer-grain spatial scale, one would not find an association between syntactic complexity effect sizes and overall language response. To test this possibility, we here explore the relationship between the two effects across individual voxels. 
 A correlation between the syntactic complexity effect size and overall language response across voxels would be compatible with two interpretations. One possibility is that the association is not language-specific: a strong correlation across voxels would be expected for any two effects, linguistic or non-linguistic, due to physiological artifacts. In particular, inter-regional differences in vascularization (e.g.,  Harrison, Harel, Panesar, & Mount, 2002 ;  Ances  et al. , 2008 ;  Ekstrom, 2010 ;  Wilson, 2014 ) or proneness to signal loss (e.g.,  Jezzard & Clare, 1999 ;  Menon & Kim, 1999 ) might explain why different contrasts co-vary across voxels (e.g., regardless of the particular contrast, effect sizes across voxels might scale with the voxels’ distance from air-tissue interfaces). An alternative interpretation, however, is that the association between the two effects is language-specific and would not generalize to non-linguistic effects. 
 To distinguish these possibilities, we ran a model predicting the size of the syntactic complexity effect ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) across individual voxels using two predictors: a non-linguistic effect and a language-specific response ( sentences  >  fixation  in the localizer task). Our non-linguistic effect contrasted two versions of a spatial working memory task differing in difficulty ( hard  >  easy ). In this task, which our participants performed in the scanner for another study, participants have to keep track of four  vs.  eight locations within a 3 × 4 grid. This task has previously been shown to have reliable variability across cortical voxels (allowing, in particular, the functional localization of frontal and parietal regions of the “cognitive control” or “multiple demand” system; e.g.,  Fedorenko  et al. , 2013 ). According to the first interpretation above, predicting the size of the syntactic complexity effect from the size of the non-linguistic effect would not benefit from adding the language-specific response magnitude as a predictor (given that all contrasts should show strong correlations). However, according to the second interpretation, the size of the syntactic complexity effect would be predicted by the size of the language-specific response magnitude above and beyond the non-linguistic effect size. 
 A linear, mixed-effects regression model with random intercepts and slopes for both participant and fROI supported the second interpretation: the contribution of the language-specific response magnitude to the model was significant (β=0.16,  t =5.22, χ 2 (1) =15.7,  p <10 −4 ). In fact, when the language-specific response magnitude was included in the model, the non-linguistic effect size was not a significant predictor of the syntactic complexity effect size (β=−0.03,  t =−0.31, χ 2 (1) =0.09, n.s.). 2  Moreover, this lack of association between syntactic complexity and non-linguistic effects is not due to the restricted range of contrast values in our fROIs (where non-linguistic effects are very weak), as our results extend beyond those regions. Specifically, similar results were obtained when we ran the model on all individual voxels falling within the group-based masks instead of only including voxels falling within participant-specific fROIs (contribution of language-specific response magnitude: β=0.15,  t =5.21, χ 2 (1) =17,  p <10 −4 ; contribution of non-linguistic effect size: β=−0.01,  t =−0.11, χ 2 (1) =0.01, n.s.). Therefore, the correlation between the size of the syntactic complexity effect and the response magnitude to language is functionally specific, and does not generalize to non-linguistic contrasts. It is therefore unlikely that physiological artifacts, such as differences across voxels in proneness to signal loss, are the main factor underlying this correlation. 
 
 
 C. Language fROIs are sensitive not only to sentence-level syntax, but also to lexical information 
 We would like to stress that the results reported in  Appendix B  should not be taken as indication that our localizer contrast ( sentences > nonword lists ) was in fact just a localizer for syntactic processing. Our localizer targets regions involved in various aspects of high-level linguistic processing, including both semantic and syntactic processing at both the lexical and sentence levels, as previous work from our lab has shown ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ,  2012b ). To more directly ensure that our localizer did not exclusively target sentence-level syntactic processing, we took advantage of our localizer design which included, besides sentences and nonword lists, a third condition – word lists that did not form sentences (and that were included here for the purposes of another study). Below, we briefly report three analyses targeting the contrasts between word-lists and control conditions (either nonword lists or fixation) as a measure of lexical processing unrelated to sentence-level syntax. 
 First, we measured the size of the  words  >  nonwords  effect in our fROIs (localized with the  sentences  >  nonwords  contrast). Replicating our prior work ( Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ) and using across-runs cross-validation as in the other analyses, we observed reliable responses in all fROIs except for LMFG ( t s>1.92,  p s<0.05; all regions except for LIFG remained significant after FDR correction for the number of regions). Second, we found that across individual voxels in all eight fROIs, the size of the  sentences  >  fixation  effect was predicted by the size of the  words  >  fixation  effect, above and beyond the prediction provided by the non-linguistic working memory effect (linear, mixed-effects regression with random intercepts and slopes for both participant and fROI: β=1.18,  t =16.23, χ 2 (1) =36.21,  p <10 −8 ). These findings demonstrate that our fROIs are sensitive not only to sentence-level syntactic information, but also to lexical information. 
 Third, we repeated our main analysis of the syntactic complexity effect (reported in section 3.3.1), but now defined fROIs using the  words > nonwords  contrast (instead of using the  sentences > nonwords  contrast). Despite the fact that this alternative localizer tends to produce weaker contrast effects compared to the localizer reported in the paper, we found a significant syntactic complexity effect in all regions except for LAntTemp and LAngG ( t s > 2.83,  p s < 0.03; all regions remained significant after FDR correction for the number of regions) (see  Figure C.1 ). 
 The apparent lack of a syntactic complexity effect in the LAntTemp (cf. a significant effect reported in the main text, when this fROI was localized with the sentences > nonwords contrast) should be interpreted with care. First, the effect sizes of the words > nonwords localizer contrast are much weaker than those of the sentences > nonwords localizer contrast, throughout the entire language system. Thus, the words > nonwords localizer contrast has inferior localization capacities, and this weakness might account for the lack of a syntactic complexity effect in the LAntTemp. Second, we emphasize that a functional difference between the LAntTemp and the other language regions requires a region-by-condition interaction. 
 Alternatively, the lack of a syntactic complexity effect in a fROI localized with a lexical contrast might imply that the anterior temporal lobe contains a sub-region that is recruited for processing word-level information but not sentence-level syntactic information. Such a sub-region is perhaps separate from the sub-region that did show a syntactic complexity effect in the main text (for a similar suggestion, see:  Pascual  et al. , 2015 ). This conjecture might explain why the role of anterior temporal lobe in language processing remains debated: on the one hand, it has been reported to engage in syntactic and semantic combinatorial processes above the word level, and only for linguistic stimuli but not for other meaningful stimuli (e.g.,  Humphries  et al. , 2001 ;  Vandenberghe  et al. , 2002 ;  Humphries  et al. , 2005 ;  Rogalsky & Hickok, 2009 ;  Baron & Osherson, 2011 ;  Bemis & Pylkkanän, 2011 ;  Brennan  et al. , 2012 ;  Zhang & Pylkkänen, 2015 ); on the other hand, it has been identified as an amodal (and non-linguistic) semantic hub for simple concepts ( Lambon-Ralph, Sage, Jones, & Mayberry, 2010 ;  Mesulam  et al. , 2015 ; for reviews, see:  Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007 ;  Wong & Gallate, 2012 ;  Jefferies, 2013 ). 
 
 
 
 Figure C.1.  Replication of the main result using an alternative language localizer contrast ( words > nonwords) . Responses of the language fROIs are shown to the conditions of the alternative language localizer and the critical experiment ( object-extracted > subject-extracted ), using the same conventions as described in  Figure 4 . The results using the original localizer are reported in section 3.3.1. 
 
 
 D. Language fROIs are sensitive to syntactic manipulations during a passive reading task 
 In section 4.1.3, we discuss the possibility that the syntactic complexity effects we observed do not simply reflect the difference between object-extracted and subject-extracted sentences, but instead result from an interaction between sentence type and the sentence-picture matching task. Although we find this account of our results unlikely, we wanted to demonstrate that the same language regions exhibit sensitivity to syntactic processing during a passive reading task. For this purpose, we analyzed data reported in  Fedorenko  et al.  (2010) , from 12 participants (experiment 1) who passively read linguistic stimuli, including critically, Jabberwocky sentences (which preserve the word order, function words and functional morphology of real sentences but use nonwords) and lists of unconnected nonwords. Because only the stimuli in the former condition contain identifiable syntactic structure (e.g., due to the presence of function words), we interpret the Jabberwocky > nonwords contrast as a syntactic contrast. These data were analyzed with the same procedures described in the Methods section, and are presented in Figure  D.1 . Consistent with our main results, all language fROIs show a stronger response to Jabberwocky sentences than to nonwords (including the AngG, which shows the smallest effect size and a negative beta weight for nonwords). 
 We note that our critical contrast reported in the main text (object-extracted > subject-extracted) still provides stronger evidence for sensitivity to syntactic processing compared with the Jabberwocky > nonwords contrast, because the former (i) is “tighter” and based on a minimal pair of sentences that contain identical words and only differ in their word order (syntax); and (ii) uses sentences with real words, as opposed to the less natural nonwords and, therefore, has stronger ecological validity. Nevertheless, the Jabberwocky > nonwords contrast reported here contributes converging evidence in support of our main result. We believe that these data, measured during a passive-reading task, alleviate the concerns about our results reflecting an interaction between sentence-type and the sentence-picture matching task. 
 
 
 
 Figure D.1.  Responses of the language fROIs to real sentences, Jabberwocky sentences and lists of nonwords. The sentences > nonwords contrast was used to localize the fROIs. The effect sizes for all three conditions, as well as the jabberwocky > nonwords contrast, were then evaluated in independent data, using across-runs cross-validation (see section 2.6). Asterisks denote the significance of the Jabberwocky > nonwords contrast. The same conventions described in  Figure 4  are used. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic illustration of sample trials in the object-extracted condition. In these instances, the picture matching the sentence is on the left. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Functional regions of interest (fROIs) in the language system. (a) The probabilistic overlap map for the contrast  sentences > nonwords  in a prior dataset of 25 subjects (Experiments 1 and 2 in  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ). This map was used for generating group-based masks (outlined in gray) which were then used in the current experiment to constrain the selection of individual subjects’ fROIs. (b) The probabilistic overlap map of individual fROIs in the current experiment (shown in red), constrained to fall within the masks (outlined in gray) that were defined based on the prior data shown in (a). (c) Individual fROIs in six sample subjects in the current experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Syntactic complexity effects in the left hemisphere identified with traditional group analysis. Both (a) and (b) show the activation map of our critical contrast,  object-extraction > subject-extraction  ( p <0.001, uncorrected for whole-brain multiple comparisons) in hot colors. White circles show the locations of activations to similar syntactic complexity contrasts reported in prior studies as reviewed by  Friederici (2011 ; referred to in that paper as “studies of movement”). Notice that the activations in the current study fall within the same general locations found previously, namely, the posterior middle temporal gyrus and the inferior frontal gyrus. (a) The effects are superimposed on sagittal slices of an anatomical scan from one of our participants. (b) The effects are projected onto an inflated cortical surface of an average brain in MNI space. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Responses of the language fROIs to the conditions of the language localizer and the critical experiment. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean by participants. The  sentences > nonwords  contrast is highly significant ( p <10 −4 ) in every region (this analysis was carried out using across-runs cross-validation, so that the data used to define the fROIs and estimate the responses are independent, as described in section 2.6). For the  object-extracted > subject-extracted  contrast: * significance at the  p <0.05 level, and *** significance at the  p <10 −3  level or stronger. All effects remain significant after an FDR correction for the number of regions ( n =8). (Note that it is difficult to directly compare the magnitudes of response to the sentences condition of the localizer task and the magnitudes of response to the two critical conditions, because of many differences in the design, materials and procedure across the two experiments.) 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 The syntactic complexity effect size co-varies with overall sensitivity to language. The mean size, across participants, of the syntactic complexity effect ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) is plotted against the mean effect size of the overall response to language, as estimated in the localizer experiment ( sentences  >  fixation ). To control for inter-individual differences in the overall response strength, data for the eight fROIs were  z -scored within each participant prior to averaging. Crosses show standard errors across participants for both effects. A dashed, black line depicts the linear regression line for predicting the syntactic complexity effect based on the overall language response, and was estimated for visualization purposes only (the linear mixed-effects regression reported in the Results section was carried out using individual data from all participants). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 The relationship between task accuracy and the size of the syntactic complexity effect ( object-extracted > subject-extracted ) in fMRI. Data is shown for each of the 8 fROIs, which all show a downward trend. Blue lines are based on a simple linear regression for each region, with smoothed 95% confidence intervals shaded in gray. Most of the points fall above 0, which shows the main effect of increased fMRI response to the object-extracted condition relative to the subject-extracted condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Overlap across participants in the anatomical location of the syntactic complexity effect. Heat maps depict voxels in which more than 40% of participants have an “activation neighborhood” for the syntactic complexity contrast ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ). Neighborhoods were defined as maximal sets of contiguous voxels that surrounded an activation peak and had contrast estimates numerically greater than zero. Black contours depict our group-based masks (from  Fedorenko  et al. , 2010 ) used to define fROIs. Numbers correspond to the order of fROIs in  Figure 4 : 1, LIFGorb; 2, LIFG; 3, LMFG; 4, LAntTemp; 5, LMidAntTemp; 6, LMidPostTemp; 7, LPostTemp; 8, LAngG. Data are superimposed on horizontal slices of Freesurfer’s average T1 scan in common MNI space. Slices were chosen to maximize visibility of the greatest overlap in each mask. Note the especially high overlap (shown in dark red) in the LIFG and LMidPostTemp. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Activation clusters for the syntactic complexity contrast ( object-extracted  >  subject-extracted ) identified with traditional group analysis 
 
 
 
 
 Region a 
 Center coordinates (mm) b 
 Volume (mm 3 ) 
 Peak t -value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Left middle temporal gyrus (posterior) 
 −48 
 −58 
 5 
 4624 
 7.09 * 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus, triangular 
 −40 
 28 
 0 
 88 
 5.36 * 
 
 
 Left superior temporal gyrus (mid-anterior) 
 −57 
 −12 
 −5 
 280 
 7.26 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 We only report clusters that are located in left-hemispheric regions commonly associated with the language system. 
 
 
 b 
 Coordinates are reported in MNI space. 
 
 
 * 
 p <0.001, uncorrected for whole-brain multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 
 
