
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 26679527 
 4790432 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.12.003 
 NIHMS746917 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical Anomalies of Dyslexia: Disambiguating the Effects of Disorder, Performance, and Maturation 
 
 
 
 
 Xia 
 Zhichao 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 Fumiko 
 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Linjun 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 Hua 
 
 1 
 2 
 * 
 
 
 1 State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China 
 2 Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain and Learning Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China 
 3 Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, UCSF, 401 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA 
 4 Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St #900, New Haven, CT 06511, USA 
 5 Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi Shinjuku Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan 
 6 College of Chinese Studies, Beijing Language and Culture University, Beijing 100083, China 
 
 * Corresponding Author: Hua Shu, PhD. Address: State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China. Tel: + 86 010-58808186. Fax: + 86 010-58800567.  shuhua@bnu.edu.cn 
 
 
 9 
 3 
 2016 
 
 
 08 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 29 
 1 
 2016 
 
 
 29 
 1 
 2017 
 
 81 
 68 
 78 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 An increasing body of studies has revealed neuroanatomical impairments in developmental dyslexia. However, whether these structural anomalies are driven by dyslexia (disorder-specific effects), absolute reading performance (performance-dependent effects), and/or further influenced by age (maturation-sensitive effects) remains elusive. To help disentangle these sources, the current study used a novel disorder (dyslexia vs. control) by maturation (younger vs. older) factorial design in 48 Chinese children who were carefully matched. This design not only allows for direct comparison between dyslexics versus controls matched for chronological age and reading ability, but also enables examination of the influence of maturation and its interaction with dyslexia. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) showed that dyslexic children had reduced regional gray matter volume in the left temporo-parietal cortex (spanning over Heschl’s gyrus, planum temporale and supramarginal gyrus), middle frontal gyrus, superior occipital gyrus, and reduced regional white matter in bilateral parieto-occipital regions (left cuneus and right precuneus) compared with both age-matched and reading-level matched controls. Therefore, maturational stage-invariant neurobiological signatures of dyslexia were found in brain regions that have been associated with impairments in the auditory/phonological and attentional systems. On the other hand, maturational stage-dependent effects on dyslexia were observed in three regions (left ventral occipito-temporal cortex, left dorsal pars opercularis and genu of the corpus callosum), all of which were previously reported to be involved in fluent reading and its development. These striking dissociations collectively suggest potential atypical developmental trajectories of dyslexia, where underlying mechanisms are currently unknown but may be driven by interactions between genetic and/or environmental factors. In summary, this is the first study to disambiguate maturational stage on neuroanatomical anomalies of dyslexia in addition to the effects of disorder, reading performance and maturational stage on neuroanatomical anomalies of dyslexia, despite the limitation of a relatively small sample-size. These results will hopefully encourage future research to place greater emphasis on taking a developmental perspective to dyslexia, which may, in turn, further our understanding of the etiological basis of this neurodevelopmental disorder, and ultimately optimize early identification and remediation. 
 
 
 dyslexia 
 developmental trajectories 
 etiology 
 brain morphometry 
 MRI 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Developmental dyslexia is a common neurological disorder, affecting about 7% of school-age children ( Peterson & Pennington, 2012 ). It is characterized by neuroanatomical anomalies in focal regions, as evident from recent meta-analyses of voxel-based morphometry (VBM) studies ( Linkersdorfer, Lonnemann, Lindberg, Hasselhorn, & Fiebach, 2012 ;  Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2013 ). These studies reported anomalies in bilateral temporo-parietal cortex (LTPC), posterior superior temporal and supramarginal gyri, left ventral occipito-temporal cortex (LvOTC) consisting of inferior temporal and fusiform gyri, as well as bilateral cerebellum. It is unclear, however, whether these cortical anomalies represent causal relationships from having dyslexia (disorder-specific effects), their absolute level of reading performance regardless of dyslexia or age (performance-dependent effects), and/or abnormal brain changes unfolding over time (maturation-sensitive effects). Since most previous studies adopted a cross-sectional design and included only two groups (usually children with dyslexia and their age-matched controls, where children with a wide range of age were collapsed), it is possible that important maturational, stage-dependent deviations in dyslexic children have been masked ( Oliver, Johnson, Karmiloff-Smith, & Pennington, 2000 ). 
 Until now, only two studies (in the English language) have tried to disentangle these effects using a design that additionally included reading-level matched typically developing readers (reading-matched controls) ( Hoeft, et al., 2007 ;  Krafnick, Flowers, Luetje, Napoliello, & Eden, 2014 ). In these studies, the authors identified disorder-specific regions by showing that older dyslexic children (DYS-older) were anomalous compared to both chronological age-matched typically developing readers (age-matched controls, a.k.a. TD-older) and younger but reading-matched typically developing readers (reading-matched controls, a.k.a. TD-younger). Performance-dependent regions were identified by showing that DYS-older were anomalous compared to TD-older but similar to reading-matched TD-younger readers. Using this design,  Hoeft and colleagues (2007)  found a disorder-specific neuroanatomical region that overlapped with a similar disorder-specific region identified functionally in the left inferior parietal lobule (LIPL). Conversely, a recent VBM study conducted by  Krafnick et al. (2014)  did not find any significant disorder-specific effects in regions previously considered important for dyslexia, e.g., left temporo-parietal, occipito-temporal or bilateral cerebellar regions. They found, instead, that many of the deficits observed in previous studies of dyslexia could be explained by individual differences in reading performance. Curiously, they identified a small area in the right precentral region as the only region that showed disorder-specific effects. Inconsistent results between these two studies could be due to methodological differences such as sample size and the threshold adopted, but another possibility is the difference in the developmental stages that were examined, especially considering developmental stage influences neuroanatomy ( Giedd & Rapoport, 2010 ) and participants of these two studies differed in age by an average of 4 years (y) (i.e., mean age of 13 and 9 y for Hoeft’s and Krafnik’s studies respectively). Indeed, previous studies have shown that maturational stages make a substantial difference in neuroanatomy, especially during the developmental stages that were investigated in the two studies ( Clark, et al., 2014 ). 
 In order to dissociate disorder-specific, performance-dependent and maturation-sensitive effects at the neuroanatomical level, the current study adopted a novel design. In addition to matching groups based on age and reading-level, a fourth group consisting of younger dyslexic readers who were matched by age to the reading-matched controls (DYS-younger) was recruited. This design allowed developmental effects of the brain and its interaction with the disorder (i.e., dyslexia) to be taken into account. Therefore, this study addresses three critical questions concerning neural impairments in dyslexia that had remained unresolved:
 (1) Neuroanatomical signatures of disorder-specific deficits in dyslexia independent of performance and maturation. If reduced volume is a persistent hallmark of dyslexia from a young age, there should be significant differences in three independent comparisons between dyslexia and normal controls (i.e., DYS-older < TD-older and DYS-older < TD-younger as in previous studies, but additionally, DYS-younger < TD-younger). In other words, there will be main effects of group (dyslexia versus respective age-matched controls), but additionally, DYS-older would be anomalous compared to TD-younger. This pattern provides insights into the causal relationship between neuroanatomy and disorder and also the stability over maturation, at least within the age-range of the current study. (2) Neuroanatomical signatures of reading performance. If a region is purely associated with reading performance, it will show both main effects of disorder and maturation, but no significant difference between groups with comparable reading performance (i.e., DYS-older and TD-younger). This pattern provides information on the neural underpinning of an individual’s absolute level of reading irrespective of disorder and maturational stage. (3) Neuroanatomical signatures of maturation-sensitive effects in dyslexia. If neuroanatomical manifestations change with age, the affected regions will show significant interaction effect between disorder [DYS vs. TD] and maturation [younger vs. older]. This pattern could be used to reveal possible neuroanatomical perturbation to the typical developmental trajectory, which might be associated with factors such as abnormal gene expression during maturation. Such an abnormality may also be a defining feature of dyslexia, but one that is different from sustained disorder-specific impairment defined in (1) above. 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1. Participants and Study Design 
 Twenty-four dyslexic children and the same number of typically developing children were selected from two projects, which shared the same goal of investigating neural differences between dyslexic and typical readers, same MRI acquisition parameters, and imaging data collection period, but differed in the relative age of participants ( Table 1 ) ( Lei, et al., 2011 ;  Pan, Yan, Laubrock, Shu, & Kliegl, 2013 ). All children were healthy, right-handed native mandarin speakers, aged 10―15 years old. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and hearing, without a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders based on self and parental-reports. They were recruited from local primary and middle schools in Beijing. IQ of each participant was within normal range (primary school: Full Scale IQ above 80 on the Chinese version of Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children [C-WISC] ( Gong & Cai, 1993 ); middle school: standardized score above 80 on the Standard Progressive Matrices ( Raven & Court, 1998 )). The current study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Beijing Normal University. All parents and children gave informed consents and assents. 
 Criteria for dyslexia were met if the child performed at least 1 standard deviation (SD) below the norm (lowest 15 percentile) in the standardized single-character recognition task. This procedure has been proven diagnostic for dyslexia in previous studies in Mainland China (e.g.,  Lei, et al., 2011 ;  Xue, Shu, Li, Li, & Tian, 2013 ;  Zhang, et al., 2012 ). In order to reduce the overlap between the two groups, the scores of TD children recruited if above −0.5 SD (highest 70 percentile) in the screening task, which was conducted between Grades 4 to 6. Once these two groups were identified, younger and older subsamples were selected based on age. There were no significant differences in age, gender or handedness at the group level. Specifically, DYS-younger group and TD-younger group did not differ significantly in terms of age and gender (DYS-younger: N = 12, 7 females, age: mean [M] = 11.0 y; SD = 0.9; range = 10.0―12.3; TD-younger: N = 12, 6 females, age: M = 11.0 y; SD = 0.3; range = 10.6―11.3; age: P = 0.71; gender: P = 0.68). DYS-older and TD-older groups did not differ significantly either (DYS-older: N = 12, 7 females, age: M = 14.1 y; SD = 0.4; range = 13.2―14.7; TD-older: N = 12, 6 females, age: M = 14.1 y; SD = 0.5; range = 13.1―14.9; age: P = 0.78; gender: P = 0.68). Performance IQ was matched in the younger and older subsamples, respectively (DYS-younger vs. TD-younger: based on Picture Completion, Arrangement and Object Assembly of C-WISC: P = 0.80; DYS-older vs. TD-older: based on Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices in the older subsample: P = 0.19). Since the IQ measurements were different between the younger and older subsamples, it was not possible to make direct IQ comparisons based on age. Overall, there were two independent dyslexic groups and their respective age-matched controls. Additionally, the older dyslexic (DYS-older) and younger typically developing children (TD-younger) were matched in reading measures at the group level (all P’s > 0.10;  Table 1 ). Thus, the TD-younger also served as the reading-matched control for the DYS-older group. 
 
 
 2.2. Behavioral Measures 
 To assess children’s current reading abilities and underlying cognitive skills, a battery of tests was conducted within one week of their MRI scans. Ms and SDs of raw scores are summarized in  Table 1 . The battery included: a) Character recognition was used to estimate the literacy level of children ( Xue, et al., 2013 ). Participants were instructed to read aloud 150 characters one-by-one until failing 15 items consecutively. Each correct answer was worthy of one score. b) Word list reading was used to measure the accuracy and speed of familiar real word reading ( Zhang, et al., 2012 ), in which 180 two-character words with high frequency were arranged in a 9-column by 20-row matrix in one A4 paper. Children had to read aloud these words in sequence as accurately and rapidly as possible. The time used to complete the task was recorded and converted to an index that indicated how many words the individual could read correctly in one minute. c) Reading fluency was used to measure the efficiency of accessing the semantic information of written words ( Lei, et al., 2011 ). There were 100 sentences (e.g., the sun rises in the west), gradually increasing in length. Children were required to read silently as fast as possible (within 3 minutes) and indicate the correctness of each sentence. The final score was calculated using the sum of characters in the sentences with correct responses. d) Phonological deletion was used to measure phonological awareness ( Li, Shu, McBride-Chang, Liu, & Peng, 2012 ). In the task, the child had to pronounce loudly what would be left when a consonant or vowel was deleted from the given syllable, for example, say /u1/ in response to the syllable /shu1/ if /sh/ was deleted. This test consists of three sections (i.e., to delete initial, middle or final phonemes, respectively). There were three practice trials and 8―10 testing items in each section. The full score was 28. e) Rapid Automatized Naming was used to assess their efficiency of phonological representation retrieval from visual input ( Lei, et al., 2011 ). Five numbers, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 were repeated randomly five times in the task, and participants were instructed to name the items as accurately and rapidly as possible. The task was given twice and an average time was calculated as the final score. f) Morphological awareness was assessed by morphological production ( Shu, McBride-Chang, Wu, & Liu, 2006 ). In each trial, one character was orally presented to the child in the context of a high frequency word. Participants were required to produce one new word in which the character has the same meaning as it in the example word and another one in which the character has a different meaning. In total, fifteen characters were given and the full mark was 30. g) Phonological working memory was assessed using Digit Recall. There were 21 sets of numbers arranged in length (from 2 to 8). The child had to repeat the digits in the original order immediately after listening. One correct repetition was worth one score with a full score being 21. 
 
 
 2.3. T1-Weighted Image Acquisition 
 Before formal MRI scanning, all the children were familiarized with the experiment procedure and the noise of an actual MRI environment using a mock scanner. They were also informed about the duration of each session and setting details. All images were acquired at Beijing Normal University’s Imaging Center for Brain Research (BICBR) using a 3.0 Tesla Siemens MAGNETOM Trio scanner. High resolution whole brain T1-weighted structural MR image (magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition with gradient echo [MPRAGE], repetition time [TR] = 2530 ms; echo time [TE] = 3.39 ms; inversion time [TI] = 1100 ms; Flip Angle = 7 degree; axial slices = 144; slice thickness = 1.33 mm; field of view [FOV] = 256 × 192 mm; matrix = 256 × 192 × 144; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1.33 mm) was acquired for each child. After acquisition, all images were reviewed by a radiologist who was blind to the participants’ clinical details to determine any pathological deviations and ensure data quality. 
 
 
 2.4. Image Processing 
 VBM was performed with VBM8 toolbox ( http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/ ), implemented in SPM8 ( http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.ul/spm ) and executed in MATLAB (version 7.11, MathWorks, Natick, MA). Since the participants were children, Template-O-Matic (TOM8) Toolbox was used to create customized Tissue Probability Maps in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space specific to sample group characteristics including age and gender ( Wilke, Holland, Altaye, & Gaser, 2008 ). Native T1 volumes were first segmented into gray matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid with a resampling at 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 mm with a trilinear interpolation. Then, GM and WM segments were registered to a custom template initially by applying affine-normalization and then by using Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registrations Through Expoentiated Lie Algebra (DARTEL) ( Ashburner, 2007 ). Next, GM and WM segments were modulated by the ‘non-linear only’ modulation ( http://www.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/segmentation/modulation/ ), which is conducted by multiplying normalized GM/WM segments with the Jacobian determinant acquired from non-linear spatial normalization. The modulated images were smoothed with an 8-mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) isotropic Gaussian kernel. The outputs were maps in which values in each voxel represented regional tissue volume of GM, WM or CSF. These individually modulated data were thresholded to create masks by minimizing partial volume effects, which were then used to restrict analyses to GM and WM regions. Typical to VBM analyses, only values of GM or WM volume greater than 0.25 were kept within these masks for further statistics. 
 
 
 2.5. Statistical Analyses 
 
 2.5.1. Whole Brain Voxel-Based Analyses 
 In order to identify the effects of disorder and its interaction with maturational stage, whole brain analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with gender as a nuisance variable was conducted on regional GM and WM volume, respectively (using the full factorial option of SPM8). Family-Wise Error (FWE) correction with non-stationary of smoothness correction (uncorrected P-voxel < 0.001, corrected P-cluster < 0.05) was used to control multiple comparisons error ( Hayasaka, Phan, Liberzon, Worsley, & Nichols, 2004 ). If no clusters survived under the conservation FWE correction, a less stringent threshold of P-voxel < 0.001 (uncorrected) with at least 200 continuous voxels (675 mm 3 ) was applied for exploratory analyses. Brain regions that showed only the main effect of maturation were not interrogated in ROI analyses or discussed further. This was because age-related changes (e.g., decrease in GM and increase in WM within the second decade) are commonly observed across a widespread region of the brain, and the focus of this study was to distinguish anomalies related specifically to dyslexia. 
 For the purpose of presentation, significant clusters were displayed on a mean normalized GM or WM image of all subjects with MRIcron ( http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricro/mricron/ ). Anatomical labeling of significant brain areas was performed with Xjview ( http://www.alivelearn.net/xjview8/ ) for the aim of comparison with previous studies. 
 
 
 2.5.2. Region-of-Interest (ROI) Analyses 
 ROI analyses were conducted in significant clusters from whole brain analyses to confirm the direction of the effects and to examine the specific hypotheses of the current study. The value of each voxel in the cluster was extracted and averaged. All the subsequent analyses were conducted with PASW Statistics 18.0 (SPSS inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A false discovery rate of 5% was used to control multiple comparisons error for the number of regions. 
 In order to identify dyslexia-specific anomalies in regional brain volumes that exist independent of maturation and reading performance, three post-hoc contrasts were performed (DYS-older vs. TD-older, DYS-younger vs. TD-younger, and DYS-older vs. TD-younger [reading-matched controls]) in the clusters showing main effects of disorder. Additionally, comparisons between older and younger subsamples were also conducted in DYS and TD separately (i.e., DYS-older vs. DYS-younger; TD-older vs. TD-younger) to test whether these regions also displayed maturational (i.e., age) effects. The same analysis was also used to detect performance-dependent effect, in which there were significant effects of disorder and maturation, while there were no significant differences between reading-matched pairs. Finally, to reveal the source of the disorder-by-maturation interaction, post hoc independent t-tests were performed. In another words, the difference in slopes of regional brain volume across different age groups between dyslexic and typically developing children were compared ([DYS-older - DYS-younger] vs. [TD-older - TD-younger]). 
 
 
 2.5.3. Non-Parametric Statistics 
 Considering the small sample size of the current study (12 subjects for each of the four groups), we repeated analyses in ‘2.5.2. ROI Analysis’ using non-parametric statistics to confirm the reliability of our findings. Permutation testing (5000 permutations) was applied using R software (version 3.2.2;  https://www.r-project.org/ ) and the package ‘asbio’ (A Collection of Statistical Tools for Biologists;  https://www.r-project.org/ ) in each cluster identified in the previous parametric whole-brain model. Function ‘perm.fact.test’ was used to conduct permutation testing of the main effect of disorder and interaction effect in the ANOVA, and function ‘MC.test’ was used in post-hoc contrasts. A false discovery rate of 0.05 was used to control multiple comparisons error. 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral Profiles 
 As expected, reading performances and underlying cognitive skills were significantly impaired in dyslexia ( Table 1 ). In the age-matched comparisons, DYS-younger performed significantly worse than TD-younger in all reading measures (character recognition: P < 0.001; word list reading: P < 0.001; reading fluency: P < 0.001) and underlying cognitive skills (phoneme deletion: P = 0.002; RAN: P = 0.002; morphological production: P < 0.001; digit recall: P = 0.038). DYS-older also performed worse than TD-older, especially in character recognition (P < 0.001) and reading fluency (P = 0.003). As for the underlying component processes, the lower performance of older dyslexics was found in phoneme deletion (P = 0.023) and morphological production (P = 0.026). In the reading-matched comparison, DYS-older showed no significant difference from TD-younger in any raw scores (i.e., not standardized for age) of these measures (all Ps > 0.05). Additionally, there was maturation-related improvement in both dyslexics and controls, i.e., older children performed better than their younger counterparts in raw scores of all measures (all Ps < 0.05) except trends in digit recall (TD-older vs. TD-younger: P = 0.057; DYS-older vs. DYS-younger: P = 0.123). 
 
 
 3.2. Brain Results 
 
 3.2.1. Whole-Brain Results 
 As the first step, whole brain ANCOVA of regional GM volume controlling for gender showed a main effect of disorder in three clusters (P-cluster < 0.05, corrected) ( Table 2 ,  Fig. 1A ). One was located in the LTPC spanning over Heschl’s gyrus, planum temporale and supramarginal gyrus. The other two were located in the left middle frontal gyrus (LMFG) and the left superior occipital gyrus (LSOG) respectively. Two clusters displayed significant disorder-by-maturation interaction, one in the LvOTC, and the other at the junction between left inferior frontal sulcus and precentral sulcus (i.e., dorsal part of left pars opercularis; hereafter: LdIFGop) ( Table 2 ,  Fig. 1A ). 
 ANCOVA was also conducted in regional WM volume with gender as a nuisance variable. For the main effect of disorder, two clusters in bilateral parieto-occipital cortices: left cuneus (LCUN) and right precuneus (RPCUN) survived the FWE correction with non-stationary cluster extent of P-cluster < 0.05 ( Table 2 ;  Fig. 1B ). For the disorder-by-maturation interaction, no region survived the correction. For exploratory purposes, we applied a less stringent uncorrected threshold of P-voxel < 0.001 (uncorrected) with at least 200 continuous voxels (675 mm 3 ). A cluster (505 voxels, 1704 mm 3 ) was identified in the genu of the corpus callosum (CCgenu;  Table 2 ;  Fig. 1B ). Since CCgenu has been associated with working memory and fluent reading, and also showed shrinkage in dyslexia ( Casanova, et al., 2010 ;  Edwards, Sherr, Barkovich, & Richards, 2014 ;  Hynd, et al., 1995 ), this locus was also included in further ROI analyses. 
 
 
 3.2.2. Dyslexia-Specific Abnormalities 
 ROI analyses were first performed in the five clusters showing main effects of disorder. According to the logic presented in the Introduction, if one region shows similar effects in all three comparisons (i.e., DYS-older vs. TD-older, DYS-younger vs. TD-younger, DYS-older vs. TD-younger), it is more likely to be disorder-specific. Here, we found that dyslexic readers showed reduced volume in the three GM ROIs compared to typical readers in both older and younger subsamples (LTPC: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.012; LTPC: DYS-younger < TD-younger: P < 0.001; LMFG: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.008; LMFG: DYS-younger < TD-younger: P < 0.001; LSOG: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.023; LSOG: DYS-younger < TD-younger: P < 0.001). Furthermore, dyslexic readers showed reduced GM Volume in these regions compared with reading-matched controls (DYS-older < TD-younger; LTPC: P = 0.002; LMFG: P = 0.001; LSOG: P < 0.001;  Fig. 2A, B, C ). 
 The WM clusters in bilateral parieto-occipital areas displayed a similar pattern. That is, dyslexic children had significantly decreased volume in the older age-range (DYS-older < TD-older; RPCUN: P = 0.001; LCUN: P = 0.003) as well as the younger age-range (DYS-younger < TD-younger; RPCUN: P = 0.014; LCUN: P = 0.004). Additionally, dyslexics showed significantly less volume compared with reading-matched controls (DYS-older < TD-older: RPCUN: P = 0.009; LCUN: P = 0.003;  Fig. 2D, E ). 
 Most of the clusters remained significant even when age, gender and nonverbal IQ were controlled for (LTPC: DYS-younger < TD-younger: P < 0.001; DYS-older < TD-younger: P = 0.002; LMFG: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.013; DYS-younger < TD-younger: P = 0.001; DYS-older < TD-younger: P = 0.001; LSOG: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.011; DYS-younger < TD-younger: P < 0.001; DYS-older < TD-younger: P < 0.001; LCUN: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.002; DYS-younger < TD-younger: P = 0.005; DYS-older < TD-younger: P = 0.003; RPCUN: DYS-older < TD-older: P = 0.007; DYS-younger < TD-younger: P = 0.019; DYS-older < TD-younger: P = 0.006). The only exception was that the comparison between DYS-older and TD-older in LTPC, which was no longer significant and showed a marginal effect (P = 0.053). Same as before, there was either no significant difference between younger and older groups for either the dyslexic (DYS-older vs. DYS-younger) or TD groups (TD-older vs. TD-younger; all Ps > 0.05). Taken together, these findings reveal persistent regional impairments across maturation, even when compared to reading-matched controls, and suggest causal involvement of these regions in dyslexia. 
 
 
 3.2.3. Performance-Dependent Effects 
 As per the logic outlined in Introduction, if a region is performance-dependent, there should be main effects of both disorder and maturation, but no significant difference between dyslexics and reading-matched controls (i.e., DYS-older vs. TD-younger). However, in this study no significant maturational effects were found within regions showing an effect of disorder ( Fig. 2  lower right panel). Thus, no regions were purely associated with reading performance, at least during the age-range we examined. 
 
 
 3.2.4. Atypical Brain Development in Dyslexia 
 We compared both regional GM and WM volume of the three regions showing disorder-by-maturation interaction between younger and older children within dyslexic and control groups separately to explore the nature of the interaction effect. Interestingly, we found that the maturational effects were opposing in the dyslexic and controls: while the control group showed reduced GM in older compared with younger children (TD-older < TD-younger; LdIFGop: P < 0.001; LvOTC: P < 0.001), dyslexic children showed increased GM in older compared with the younger subsample (DYS-older > DYS-younger; LdIFGop: P = 0.046; LvOTC: P = 0.003). Furthermore, while DYS-younger showed less GM than TD-younger (DYS-younger < TD-younger; LdIFGop: P < 0.001; LvOTC: P < 0.001;  Fig. 2F, G ), an opposite effect was found in the older subsample (DYS-older > TD-older; LdIFGop: P = 0.015; LvOTC: P = 0.003). 
 For white matter, the interaction effect in the CCgenu was different from that in GM clusters. That is, while older typically developing children showed larger WM volume than the younger children (TD-older > TD-younger: P = 0.018), dyslexics showed the opposite pattern (DYS-older < DYS-younger: P = 0.004). In other words, CCgenu showed opposite effects compared to GM regions in its relationship between dyslexics and typically developing children across the two maturational stages examined. Dyslexic children of primary school age had significantly larger volume in this region than typically developing children (P = 0.035), whereas middle school aged dyslexic children showed significantly smaller CCgenu than their typical peers (P = 0.002) ( Fig. 2H ). 
 
 
 3.2.5. Confirmatory Analyses using Non-Parametric Statistics 
 ROI analyses were repeated with a non-parametric permutation test. All significant clusters related to dyslexia-specific and maturation-sensitive impairments remained significant (all P’s < 0.05, corrected) and were in line with the specific hypotheses described before ( Table S1 ). 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Our study is the first study to disambiguate the effects of disorder, performance and maturation in dyslexic children. By adopting a novel disorder-by-maturation factorial design that also enabled us to compare dyslexics with reading-level matched controls, we confirmed that children with dyslexia have maturation- and performance-independent tissue loss in networks of regions that closely align with speech/phonological (LTPC) and the dorsal attention pathways (LMFG, LSOG and bilateral parieto-occipital areas). Additionally, three previously reported reading-related regions (LdIFGop, LvOTC and CCgenu) showed an interaction between disorder and maturational stage. In accordance with the possible predictions of the nature of abnormalities laid out in the introduction, this finding suggests that neuroanatomical manifestations of children with dyslexia might follow abnormal developmental trajectories ( Clark, et al., 2014 ;  Yeatman, Dougherty, Ben-Shachar, & Wandell, 2012 ). We first discuss persistent deficits specific to dyslexia found in the current study, followed by the neurodevelopmental insights gained from this study. Cross-linguistic issues are touched upon at the end. 
 
 4.1. Persistent Neural Impairments in Developmental Dyslexia 
 Although increasing evidence has demonstrated the neurobiological substrate of dyslexia, the issue of causality remains hotly debated ( Goswami, 2015 ). By revealing the same reduction of GM/WM volume across two age subsamples and the reading-matched comparison, the present study provides strong support for the existence of etiological neuroanatomical alterations that are often implicated as auditory/phonological areas and dorsal visual attention systems. 
 Anomaly in the left temporo-parietal region is the most consistent finding in dyslexia research ( Gabrieli, 2009 ). In accordance with previous findings, we found that dyslexic children displayed persistently reduced GM in this region, regardless of age (maturational stage) and absolute level of reading performance. The peak was located in the left supramarginal gyrus and extended into the superior temporal cortex, including Heschl’s gyrus and planum temporale. Functional imaging studies suggest these regions are involved in phonological processing, including fine-grained phonological representations ( Chang, et al., 2010 ;  Mesgarani, Cheung, Johnson, & Chang, 2014 ), integration of audiovisual input and grapheme to phoneme conversion ( Erickson, Heeg, Rauschecker, & Turkeltaub, 2014 ), and phonological working memory ( Leff, et al., 2009 ), all of which are closely associated with reading development ( Ramus & Szenkovits, 2008 ). In line with these findings, dysfunction in these regions is also associated with phonological processing deficits in dyslexia ( Gabrieli, 2009 ;  Hoeft et al., 2006 ; B. A.  Shaywitz et al., 2002 ; Tanaka et al., 2011; Simos et al., 2013). In particular, our finding in LTPC is compatible with Hoeft and colleagues’ study, where hypoactivation of LIPL (including supramarginal gyrus) during a rhyming task and reduced GM of similar regions were found when comparing dyslexics with both age-matched and reading-matched controls ( Hoeft, et al., 2006 ;  Hoeft, et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, phonological processing-related impairments have been shown to precede the onset of reading instruction at both neuro-functional and anatomical levels ( Black, et al., 2012 ;  Raschle, Chang, & Gaab, 2011 ;  Raschle, Zuk, & Gaab, 2012 ), which might be caused by specific genetic anomalies (for a review, see  Giraud & Ramus, 2013 ). Combining previous findings with our current study, we deduce that impairment in the LTPC might occur at an early stage and persist throughout reading development. 
 Besides the LTPC, dyslexic children also displayed persistent GM reduction in LMFG, LSOG and WM reduction in bilateral parieto-occipital regions (cuneus and precuneus) irrespective of age. Anatomically, these regions are located within the fronto-parietal attention network, which are mainly connected by the superior longitudinal fasciculus ( Thiebaut de Schotten, et al., 2011 ). The spatial dorsal attention network has been proposed to be associated with dyslexia and reading (S. E.  Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2008 ;  Vidyasagar & Pammer, 2010 ;  Vogel, Miezin, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2012 ). Consistent with this hypothesis, behavioral studies have shown selective visual-attention deficits in dyslexia across cultures ( Facoetti, Paganoni, Turatto, Marzola, & Mascetti, 2000 ;  Kronbichler, et al., 2008 ;  Zhao, Qian, Bi, & Coltheart, 2014 ). As for the underlying neural basis, functional MRI studies support evidence of reduced activation in parietal lobe during visual attention tasks in dyslexia ( Peyrin, Demonet, N’Guyen-Morel, Le Bas, & Valdois, 2011 ;  Peyrin, et al., 2012 ). Most recently, decreased resting-state functional connectivity between left inferior parietal sulcus and LMFG were found in dyslexic children, regardless of whether they received remediation or not ( Koyama, et al., 2013 ). These results suggest that individuals with dyslexia can be characterized by a persistent functional connectivity anomaly (S. E.  Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2008 ). Although concrete evidence is lacking and clarification of the precise mechanism requires further research, increasing studies suggest a functional disruption of the dorsal visual attention pathway in dyslexia, for which the current study provides support at the neuroanatomical level. 
 
 
 4.2. Anomalous Neuroanatomical Development in Developmental Dyslexia 
 The underlying neural mechanisms of dyslexia are complex and are likely associated with interactions among disorder, performance (level of reading proficiency) and maturational stage. However, most neuroanatomical studies have only focused on the “average” deficits in dyslexics collapsed across maturational stages and compared with chronological age-matched controls. Thus, findings of those studies are prone to confounding factors such as natural brain maturation. In our study, three previously reported reading related regions (i.e., LvOTC, LdIFGop and CCgenu) showed opposing maturation-related differences between dyslexics and controls. These findings are consistent with the consensus that brain structure undergoes continuing changes ( Giedd & Rapoport, 2010 ), and that relations between brain and cognitive abilities change dynamically ( Erus, et al., 2014 ;  Schnack, et al., 2014 ; B. A.  Shaywitz, et al., 2007 ;  Yeatman, et al., 2012 ). These interactions further suggest that, similar to other neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism ( Ecker, et al., 2014 ;  Shaw, et al., 2007 ), dyslexia might also be characterized by atypical developmental trajectory of specific brain areas. 
 Typically, GM development follows an inverted U-shape where peaks coincide at different times depending on the anatomical location ( Giedd & Rapoport, 2010 ;  Raznahan, et al., 2011 ). Functional neuroimaging studies have also shown an inverted U-shape in the developmental trajectory of neural responses to words ( Ben-Shachar, Dougherty, Deutsch, & Wandell, 2011 ;  Maurer, et al., 2006 ) in regions such as the LvOTC. Thus, our findings that TD displayed a decrease while DYS showed an increase in LvOTC GM may reflect different developmental tuning curves. In line with our findings that dyslexic children in the younger subsample showed anomalous decrease in LvOTC compared to TD controls, reduced tissue volume has been reported in preschool children at risk for dyslexia, suggesting this alteration exists even before formal reading instruction begins ( Raschle, et al., 2011 ). On the other hand, in the older subsample, the reverse relationship was observed (GM volume was elevated in dyslexics when typical readers were already descending in volumes). It is possible that dyslexic children show anomalous and possibly a protracted period of GM increase compared to TD controls of similar age. To some extent, this addresses why this ventral area often shows conflicting results in previous literature. First, when a study includes children with a large age-range, the effects may wash out and show non-significant effects (e.g.,  Brambati, et al., 2004 ). Second, if participants are recruited before the age at which this shift occurs, dyslexic children are likely to display decreased volume compared with controls (e.g.,  Kronbichler, et al., 2008 ). Conversely, those who predominantly focus on adults would find GM volume to be increased in dyslexics (e.g,.  Silani, et al., 2005 ). Our finding in the LvOTC not only supports the existence of a shift of abnormality at a neuroanatomical level, it also provides some indication that this shift occurs at some point within ages 10 to 15. This might be associated with the fact that while typically developing children begin to focus more on fluency and comprehensive skill, children with dyslexia are still putting effort in individual word recognition. However, this time window is somewhat inconsistent with Kronbichler’s results where he found a decrease in dyslexic children aged 14 to 16 years of age ( Kronbichler, et al., 2008 ). Speculatively, the point at which the shift occurs might be affected by several factors including region-specificity, disorder severity, reading experience and linguistic specificity. To directly address this issue, future studies are warranted to establish empirical evidence of the developmental trajectory and influencing factors in both dyslexics and typical readers. 
 Similar to the LvOTC, LdIFGop also showed the interaction effect. This area is considered an important part of the articulatory system ( Hickok & Poeppel, 2007 ) and is involved in phonological processing ( Fiez, Tranel, Seager-Frerichs, & Damasio, 2006 ), motor programming and articulatory coding ( Price, 2012 ). It also plays a compensatory role when the circuit involved in naming is disrupted ( Seghier, Bagdasaryan, Jung, & Price, 2014 ). Findings of functional neuroimaging studies suggest that dyslexics’ increased reliance on an articulation-based strategy is a result of compensation for poor performance in reading across development ( Brunswick, McCrory, Price, Frith, & Frith, 1999 ; B. A.  Shaywitz, et al., 2002 ). Although there is less evidence at the neuroanatomical level, an association between phonological awareness and cortical thickness in this region has been identified (but see  Lu, et al., 2007 ). Together, the abnormal age-related GM change in LdIFGop may reflect a compensatory mechanism, i.e., strategies employed by dyslexics that are different from typical developing children (B. A.  Shaywitz, et al., 2002 ; B. A.  Shaywitz, et al., 2007 ). 
 Finally, we found a maturational-sensitive effect of dyslexia in WM volume of the CCgenu. This structure, as a bridge connecting bilateral homotopic frontal regions, plays an important role in working memory and fluent reading ( Casanova, et al., 2010 ;  Edwards, et al., 2014 ;  Short, et al., 2013 ). This is especially observed in individuals with agenesis of the corpus callosum, who show intact general cognitive processing skills but impairments in phonological processing, a characteristic also seen in developmental dyslexia ( Paul, Corsello, Kennedy, & Adolphs, 2014 ). The increased WM of CCgenu in TD children is in line with results of neurodevelopmental research ( Giedd & Rapoport, 2010 ;  Raznahan, et al., 2011 ). Furthermore, atypical trajectory of fractional anisotropy in white matter fibers (i.e., left superior longitudinal fasciculus and inferior longitudinal fasciculus) that manifests initially higher but decreases with age in children with poor reading skill has been shown in a recent longitudinal study ( Yeatman, et al., 2012 ). While WM change across the lifespan can be driven by multiple biological processes and environmental factors ( Yeatman, Wandell, & Mezer, 2014 ), further research is required to clarify maturation of this structure and its fine-grained function in reading acquisition and deficits. 
 
 
 4.3. Universal Principles Underlying Neural Manifestations of Chinese Dyslexia 
 There is a long-lasting history discussing similarities and differences in the manifestations of dyslexia between alphabetic languages (e.g., English) and non-alphabetic languages (e.g., Chinese) ( Peterson & Pennington, 2012 ). At a more general level, the question of whether universal principles underlie reading and reading development across languages ( Bolger, Perfetti, & Schneider, 2005 ;  Tan, Laird, Li, & Fox, 2005 ) is still hotly debated. Chinese is a logographic writing system that does not require phoneme-grapheme conversion, and hence, is very different from alphabetic scripts ( Siok, Perfetti, Jin, & Tan, 2004 ). While increasing evidence suggests that cognitive skills, such as phonological processing, that are repeatedly found to be critical in English-speaking samples also largely contribute to reading development in Chinese children ( Goswami, et al., 2011 ;  Lei, et al., 2011 ;  Shu, et al., 2006 ;  Shu, Peng, & McBride-Chang, 2008 ;  Zhang, et al., 2012 ), most available neuroanatomical evidence suggests that there might be different neural circuitries underlying Chinese dyslexia, which are driven by the linguistic specificities such as visuo-spatial complexity and heavy memory burden while learning to read ( Liu, et al., 2013 ;  Siok, Niu, Jin, Perfetti, & Tan, 2008 ). Since longitudinal research is still lacking and all the previous studies only recruited groups of dyslexia and age-matched controls, the different sources of neuroanatomical differences were largely unknown. Against this background, the current study adopted a novel research design and for the first time identified disorder-specific effects in regions that have been associated with auditory/phonological and visual attentional processing in Chinese dyslexia. The locations of these clusters were similar to those found in prior studies of English, e.g., LIPL ( Hoeft, et al., 2007 ). Moreover, we also found manifestations that were sensitive to maturational stages, which are in line with recent longitudinal studies ( Clark, et al., 2014 ;  Yeatman, et al., 2012 ). 
 In general, all writing systems, including Chinese, represent spoken language and seem to share a common central reading network including left posterior superior temporal gyrus, dorsal aspects of the inferior frontal gyrus and occipito-temporal area ( Bolger, et al., 2005 ). In fact, auditory/phonological and visual/orthographic information processing are two main important aspects for reading in any language, and breakdown of any aspect will impede reading development, irrespective of writing systems ( Goswami, et al., 2011 ;  Shu, et al., 2008 ;  Siok & Fletcher, 2001 ;  Zhang, et al., 2012 ;  Zhao, et al., 2014 ). In alphabetic languages, there is a consensus that dyslexia is associated with phonological processing deficits and the underlying neural basis is located in the left temporo-parietal cortex ( Gabrieli, 2009 ;  Linkersdorfer, et al., 2012 ;  Richlan, et al., 2013 ). The dorsal attention deficit hypothesis has also received support from imaging studies ( Eden, et al., 1996 ; S. E.  Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2008 ;  Vidyasagar & Pammer, 2010 ). Therefore, the persistent neuroanatomical tissue loss in the LTPC, LMFG, LSOG and bilateral parieto-occipital regions identified in the current study suggests some impairments in Chinese dyslexic children are similar to those in English. 
 The disorder-by-maturation interaction effects in LvOTC, LdIFGop, and CCgenu provide a glimpse into the abnormal development of high-order brain regions. More recently, a longitudinal study found abnormal cortical thickness changes in a group of Norwegian dyslexic children (7 dyslexics vs. 10 controls) ( Clark, et al., 2014 ). The authors also found early and persistent neuroanatomical abnormalities only in lower-level auditory areas, rather than putative reading network (e.g., left fusiform gyrus), which might be affected more by external factors like reading instruction. Although our study differed in experimental design (i.e., longitudinal design vs. factorial design containing reading-level matched controls), language background (i.e., Norwegian has a shallow orthography while Chinese is very deep) and regions showing specific effects (e.g., persistent deficit: left Heschl’s gyrus in theirs vs. LTPC, LSOG, LMFG, and bilateral parieto-occipital cortex in our study), both found sustained and maturation-sensitive deficits in the dyslexic brain. This consistency reflects a possible universal principle underlying neural manifestations of dyslexia. While impairments of regions involved in basic sensory processes may impede typical reading acquisition from an early stage ( Clark, et al., 2014 ), the development of high-level reading areas may be affected more by multiple factors such as the statistical properties of writing system (e.g., orthographic complexity;  Frost, 2012 ). In the other words, central neural deficits may be shared across different writing systems and further shaped by language-related variations ( Richlan, 2014 ). 
 
 
 4.4. Limitations and Future Directions 
 First, considering the relatively small sample size and cross-sectional nature of the data, the current findings should be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, we believe that the design adopted here is informative in disentangling different resources of neural manifestations in dyslexia. To confirm and extend our findings, longitudinal studies with much larger cohorts of subjects should be conducted. Such research can further answer questions including the precise timing and trajectory of neuroanatomical growth (i.e., the precise timetable) and how abnormal trajectories occur in children with dyslexia. Secondly, factors like gender ( Altarelli, et al., 2013 ) and intervention ( Krafnick, Flowers, Napoliello, & Eden, 2011 ) also influence neuroanatomical manifestations of dyslexia. It is therefore important to explore the developmental trajectories of the reading network in dyslexic boys and girls respectively, as well as different outcomes of intervention applied at different time points. Thirdly (and finally), since GM and WM features are strongly heritable and typical brain maturation depends on finely controlled expression of specific genes, appropriate environments and experiences ( Tau & Peterson, 2010 ), examining how genetic programming, brain maturation, environmental factors, and their interactions lead to atypical development of reading abilities is critically important ( Wright & Zecker, 2004 ). 
 
 
 
 5. Conclusion 
 In summary, the current study disambiguates for the first time the syndrome-specific, performance-dependent and disorder-by-maturation related abnormalities in dyslexic brain. The findings support that dyslexia is a neurological disorder with both persistent neural deficits and anomalous developmental trajectories in specific areas. As a starting point, more research should be conducted to build causal models of dyslexia in order to further understand the mechanisms at the biological, cognitive and behavioral levels. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
 
 
 
 The authors would like to thank all the children and their parents participating in this study, as well as Mengmeng Su, Shuang Song and other lab members for their work on data collection. 
 
 Funding 
 
 This research was supported by the National Key Basic Research Program of China (2014CB846103), the Natural Science Foundation of China (31271082, 81461130018), the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing (7132119), and Fundamental Research Fund for the Central Universities to Hua Shu. Fumiko Hoeft is supported in part by the NIH grants K23HD054720 (PI: F. Hoeft), R01HD078351 (PI: F. Hoeft), UCSF Academic Senate Pilot Grant for Junior Investigators (PI: F. Hoeft), UCSF - Center for Creativity (CCC) Neuroscience Fellowship (PI: F. Hoeft), UCSF Dyslexia Center (PI: F. Hoeft), Dennis & Shannon Wong DSEA 88 Wong Family Foundation (F. Hoeft), R01HD067254/R01HD044073 (PI: L. Cutting, Vanderbilt U), R01HD065794 (PI: K. Pugh, Haskins Labs), P01HD001994 (PI: J. Rueckl, Haskins Labs), R01MH104438 (PI: C. Nordahl, UC Davis MIND Inst), R01MH103371 (PI: D. Amaral, UC Davis MIND Inst), Flora Family Foundation (PI: R. Hendren), UCSF Catalyst Award (PI: R. Hancock), and UCSF Resource Allocation Program (RAP) Digital Health Award (PI: R. Hancock). 
 
 
 Abbreviations 
 
 
 age-matched 
 
 chronological age-matched 
 
 
 
 ANCOVA 
 
 analysis of covariance 
 
 
 
 ANOVA 
 
 analysis of variance 
 
 
 
 CCgenu 
 
 genu of corpus callosum 
 
 
 
 DYS-older 
 
 dyslexic children of older subsample 
 
 
 
 DYS-younger 
 
 dyslexic children of younger subsample 
 
 
 
 GM 
 
 gray matter 
 
 
 
 LCUN 
 
 left cuneus 
 
 
 
 LIPL 
 
 left inferior parietal lobule 
 
 
 
 LdIFGop 
 
 left dorsal pars opercularis 
 
 
 
 LMFG 
 
 left middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 
 LSOG 
 
 left superior occipital gyrus 
 
 
 
 LTPC 
 
 left temporo-temporal cortex 
 
 
 
 LvOTC 
 
 left ventral occipito-temporal cortex 
 
 
 
 reading-matched 
 
 reading level-matched 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 
 region-of-interest 
 
 
 
 RPCUN 
 
 right precuneus 
 
 
 
 TD-older 
 
 typically developing children of older subsample 
 
 
 
 TD-younger 
 
 typically developing children of younger subsample 
 
 
 
 VBM 
 
 voxel-based morphometry 
 
 
 
 WM 
 
 white matter 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Altarelli 
 I 
 
 
 Monzalvo 
 K 
 
 
 Iannuzzi 
 S 
 
 
 Fluss 
 J 
 
 
 Billard 
 C 
 
 
 Ramus 
 F 
 
 
 Dehaene-Lambertz 
 G 
 
 
 A functionally guided approach to the morphometry of occipitotemporal regions in developmental dyslexia: evidence for differential effects in boys and girls 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2013 
 33 
 11296 
 11301 
 23825432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 38 
 95 
 113 
 17761438 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 RF 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Wandell 
 BA 
 
 
 The Development of Cortical Sensitivity to Visual Word Forms 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 2387 
 2399 
 21261451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Black 
 JM 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 H 
 
 
 Stanley 
 L 
 
 
 Nagamine 
 M 
 
 
 Zakerani 
 N 
 
 
 Thurston 
 A 
 
 
 Kesler 
 S 
 
 
 Hulme 
 C 
 
 
 Lyytinen 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Serrone 
 C 
 
 
 Raman 
 MM 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Maternal history of reading difficulty is associated with reduced language-related gray matter in beginning readers 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 3021 
 3032 
 22023744 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Schneider 
 W 
 
 
 Cross-cultural effect on the brain revisited: universal structures plus writing system variation 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2005 
 25 
 92 
 104 
 15846818 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brambati 
 SM 
 
 
 Termine 
 C 
 
 
 Ruffino 
 M 
 
 
 Stella 
 G 
 
 
 Fazio 
 F 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 Regional reductions of gray matter volume in familial dyslexia 
 Neurology 
 2004 
 63 
 742 
 745 
 15326259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brunswick 
 N 
 
 
 McCrory 
 E 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Explicit and implicit processing of words and pseudowords by adult developmental dyslexics: A search for Wernicke’s Wortschatz? 
 Brain 
 1999 
 122 
 Pt 10 
 1901 
 1917 
 10506092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casanova 
 MF 
 
 
 El-Baz 
 A 
 
 
 Elnakib 
 A 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JM 
 
 
 Williams 
 EL 
 
 
 Switala 
 AE 
 
 
 Corpus Callosum Shape Analysis with Application to Dyslexia 
 Translational Neuroscience 
 2010 
 1 
 124 
 130 
 22545196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 EF 
 
 
 Rieger 
 JW 
 
 
 Johnson 
 K 
 
 
 Berger 
 MS 
 
 
 Barbaro 
 NM 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 Categorical speech representation in human superior temporal gyrus 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2010 
 13 
 1428 
 1432 
 20890293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 KA 
 
 
 Helland 
 T 
 
 
 Specht 
 K 
 
 
 Narr 
 KL 
 
 
 Manis 
 FR 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical precursors of dyslexia identified from pre-reading through to age 11 
 Brain 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ecker 
 C 
 
 
 Shahidiani 
 A 
 
 
 Feng 
 Y 
 
 
 Daly 
 E 
 
 
 Murphy 
 C 
 
 
 D’Almeida 
 V 
 
 
 Deoni 
 S 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Gillan 
 N 
 
 
 Gudbrandsen 
 M 
 
 
 Wichers 
 R 
 
 
 Andrews 
 D 
 
 
 Van Hemert 
 L 
 
 
 Murphy 
 DGM 
 
 
 The effect of age, diagnosis, and their interaction on vertex-based measures of cortical thickness and surface area in autism spectrum disorder 
 J Neural Transm 
 2014 
 121 
 1157 
 1170 
 24752753 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 VanMeter 
 JW 
 
 
 Rumsey 
 JM 
 
 
 Maisog 
 JM 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 Abnormal processing of visual motion In dyslexia revealed by functional brain imaging 
 Nature 
 1996 
 382 
 66 
 69 
 8657305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Edwards 
 TJ 
 
 
 Sherr 
 EH 
 
 
 Barkovich 
 AJ 
 
 
 Richards 
 LJ 
 
 
 Clinical, genetic and imaging findings identify new causes for corpus callosum development syndromes 
 Brain 
 2014 
 137 
 1579 
 1613 
 24477430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erickson 
 LC 
 
 
 Heeg 
 E 
 
 
 Rauschecker 
 JP 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 An ALE meta-analysis on the audiovisual integration of speech signals 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erus 
 G 
 
 
 Battapady 
 H 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Hakonarson 
 H 
 
 
 Gur 
 RE 
 
 
 Davatzikos 
 C 
 
 
 Gur 
 RC 
 
 
 Imaging Patterns of Brain Development and their Relationship to Cognition 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facoetti 
 A 
 
 
 Paganoni 
 P 
 
 
 Turatto 
 M 
 
 
 Marzola 
 V 
 
 
 Mascetti 
 GG 
 
 
 Visual-spatial attention in developmental dyslexia 
 Cortex 
 2000 
 36 
 109 
 123 
 10728901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Seager-Frerichs 
 D 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Specific reading and phonological processing deficits are associated with damage to the left frontal operculum 
 Cortex 
 2006 
 42 
 624 
 643 
 16881271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 R 
 
 
 Towards a universal model of reading 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 2012 
 35 
 263 
 279 
 22929057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Dyslexia: A New Synergy Between Education and Cognitive Neuroscience 
 Science 
 2009 
 325 
 280 
 283 
 19608907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 Structural MRI of pediatric brain development: what have we learned and where are we going? 
 Neuron 
 2010 
 67 
 728 
 734 
 20826305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giraud 
 AL 
 
 
 Ramus 
 F 
 
 
 Neurogenetics and auditory processing in developmental dyslexia 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2013 
 23 
 37 
 42 
 23040541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gong 
 Y 
 
 
 Cai 
 T 
 
 
 Wechsler intelligence scale for children, Chinese revision (C-WISC) 
 1993 
 China 
 Map Press Hunan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goswami 
 U 
 
 
 Sensory theories of developmental dyslexia: three challenges for research 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2015 
 16 
 43 
 54 
 25370786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goswami 
 U 
 
 
 Wang 
 HLS 
 
 
 Cruz 
 A 
 
 
 Fosker 
 T 
 
 
 Mead 
 N 
 
 
 Huss 
 M 
 
 
 Language-universal Sensory Deficits in Developmental Dyslexia: English, Spanish, and Chinese 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 325 
 337 
 20146613 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hayasaka 
 S 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Nonstationary cluster-size inference with random field and permutation methods 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 22 
 676 
 687 
 15193596 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 D 
 
 
 The cortical organization of speech processing 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 8 
 393 
 402 
 17431404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Hernandez 
 A 
 
 
 McMillon 
 G 
 
 
 Taylor-Hill 
 H 
 
 
 Martindale 
 JL 
 
 
 Meyler 
 A 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Neural basis of dyslexia: A comparison between dyslexic and nondyslexic children equated for reading ability 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2006 
 26 
 10700 
 10708 
 17050709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Meyler 
 A 
 
 
 Hernandez 
 A 
 
 
 Juel 
 C 
 
 
 Taylor-Hill 
 H 
 
 
 Martindale 
 JL 
 
 
 McMillon 
 G 
 
 
 Kolchugina 
 G 
 
 
 Black 
 JM 
 
 
 Faizi 
 A 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Functional and morphometric brain dissociation between dyslexia and reading ability 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2007 
 104 
 4234 
 4239 
 17360506 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hynd 
 GW 
 
 
 Hall 
 J 
 
 
 Novey 
 ES 
 
 
 Eliopulos 
 D 
 
 
 Black 
 K 
 
 
 Gonzalez 
 JJ 
 
 
 Edmonds 
 JE 
 
 
 Riccio 
 C 
 
 
 Cohen 
 M 
 
 
 Dyslexia and corpus callosum morphology 
 Arch Neurol 
 1995 
 52 
 32 
 38 
 7826273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koyama 
 MS 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Jutagir 
 DR 
 
 
 Sunshine 
 J 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 SJ 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Cortical signatures of dyslexia and remediation: an intrinsic functional connectivity approach 
 PLoS One 
 2013 
 8 
 e55454 
 23408984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krafnick 
 AJ 
 
 
 Flowers 
 DL 
 
 
 Luetje 
 MM 
 
 
 Napoliello 
 EM 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 An Investigation into the Origin of Anatomical Differences in Dyslexia 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2014 
 34 
 901 
 908 
 24431448 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krafnick 
 AJ 
 
 
 Flowers 
 DL 
 
 
 Napoliello 
 EM 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 Gray matter volume changes following reading intervention in dyslexic children 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 57 
 733 
 741 
 21029785 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Staffen 
 W 
 
 
 Hutzler 
 F 
 
 
 Mair 
 A 
 
 
 Ladurner 
 G 
 
 
 Developmental dyslexia: gray matter abnormalities in the occipitotemporal cortex 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2008 
 29 
 613 
 625 
 17636558 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leff 
 AP 
 
 
 Schofield 
 TM 
 
 
 Crinion 
 JT 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Grogan 
 A 
 
 
 Green 
 DW 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The left superior temporal gyrus is a shared substrate for auditory short-term memory and speech comprehension: evidence from 210 patients with stroke 
 Brain 
 2009 
 132 
 3401 
 3410 
 19892765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lei 
 L 
 
 
 Pan 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 HY 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Zhang 
 YP 
 
 
 Chen 
 L 
 
 
 Tardif 
 T 
 
 
 Liang 
 WL 
 
 
 Zhang 
 ZX 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Developmental trajectories of reading development and impairment from ages 3 to 8 years in Chinese children 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 2011 
 52 
 212 
 220 
 20854364 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Liu 
 HY 
 
 
 Peng 
 H 
 
 
 Chinese children’s character recognition: Visuo-orthographic, phonological processing and morphological skills 
 Journal of Research in Reading 
 2012 
 35 
 287 
 307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linkersdorfer 
 J 
 
 
 Lonnemann 
 J 
 
 
 Lindberg 
 S 
 
 
 Hasselhorn 
 M 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 Grey matter alterations co-localize with functional abnormalities in developmental dyslexia: an ALE meta-analysis 
 PLoS One 
 2012 
 7 
 e43122 
 22916214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 L 
 
 
 You 
 WP 
 
 
 Wang 
 WJ 
 
 
 Guo 
 XJ 
 
 
 Peng 
 DL 
 
 
 Booth 
 J 
 
 
 Altered brain structure in Chinese dyslexic children 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2013 
 51 
 1169 
 1176 
 23542499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lu 
 L 
 
 
 Leonard 
 C 
 
 
 Thompson 
 P 
 
 
 Kan 
 E 
 
 
 Jolley 
 J 
 
 
 Welcome 
 S 
 
 
 Toga 
 A 
 
 
 Sowell 
 E 
 
 
 Normal developmental changes in inferior frontal gray matter are associated with improvement in phonological processing: a longitudinal MRI analysis 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 1092 
 1099 
 16782757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maurer 
 U 
 
 
 Brem 
 S 
 
 
 Kranz 
 F 
 
 
 Bucher 
 K 
 
 
 Benz 
 R 
 
 
 Halder 
 P 
 
 
 Steinhausen 
 HC 
 
 
 Brandeis 
 D 
 
 
 Coarse neural tuning for print peaks when children learn to read 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 33 
 749 
 758 
 16920367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mesgarani 
 N 
 
 
 Cheung 
 C 
 
 
 Johnson 
 K 
 
 
 Chang 
 EF 
 
 
 Phonetic feature encoding in human superior temporal gyrus 
 Science 
 2014 
 343 
 1006 
 1010 
 24482117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oliver 
 A 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MH 
 
 
 Karmiloff-Smith 
 A 
 
 
 Pennington 
 B 
 
 
 Deviations in the emergence of representations: A neuroconstructivist framework for analysing developmental disorders 
 Developmental Science 
 2000 
 3 
 1 
 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pan 
 J 
 
 
 Yan 
 M 
 
 
 Laubrock 
 J 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Kliegl 
 R 
 
 
 Eye-voice span during rapid automatized naming of digits and dice in Chinese normal and dyslexic children 
 Developmental Science 
 2013 
 16 
 967 
 979 
 24118721 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paul 
 LK 
 
 
 Corsello 
 C 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DP 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Agenesis of the corpus callosum and autism: a comprehensive comparison 
 Brain 
 2014 
 137 
 1813 
 1829 
 24771497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peterson 
 RL 
 
 
 Pennington 
 BF 
 
 
 Developmental dyslexia 
 Lancet 
 2012 
 379 
 1997 
 2007 
 22513218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peyrin 
 C 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 N’Guyen-Morel 
 MA 
 
 
 Le Bas 
 JF 
 
 
 Valdois 
 S 
 
 
 Superior parietal lobule dysfunction in a homogeneous group of dyslexic children with a visual attention span disorder 
 Brain Lang 
 2011 
 118 
 128 
 138 
 20739053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peyrin 
 C 
 
 
 Lallier 
 M 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Pernet 
 C 
 
 
 Baciu 
 M 
 
 
 Le Bas 
 JF 
 
 
 Valdois 
 S 
 
 
 Neural dissociation of phonological and visual attention span disorders in developmental dyslexia: FMRI evidence from two case reports 
 Brain Lang 
 2012 
 120 
 381 
 394 
 22285025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 62 
 816 
 847 
 22584224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramus 
 F 
 
 
 Szenkovits 
 G 
 
 
 What phonological deficit? 
 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 2008 
 61 
 129 
 141 
 18038344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raschle 
 NM 
 
 
 Chang 
 M 
 
 
 Gaab 
 N 
 
 
 Structural brain alterations associated with dyslexia predate reading onset 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 57 
 742 
 749 
 20884362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raschle 
 NM 
 
 
 Zuk 
 J 
 
 
 Gaab 
 N 
 
 
 Functional characteristics of developmental dyslexia in left-hemispheric posterior brain regions predate reading onset 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2012 
 109 
 2156 
 2161 
 22308323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raven 
 JC 
 
 
 Court 
 JH 
 
 
 Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales 
 1998 
 Oxford Psychologists Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raznahan 
 A 
 
 
 Shaw 
 P 
 
 
 Lalonde 
 F 
 
 
 Stockman 
 M 
 
 
 Wallace 
 GL 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 D 
 
 
 Clasen 
 L 
 
 
 Gogtay 
 N 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 How Does Your Cortex Grow? 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 7174 
 7177 
 21562281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of developmental dyslexia: the role of orthographic depth 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2014 
 8 
 347 
 24904383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Structural abnormalities in the dyslexic brain: a meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry studies 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2013 
 34 
 3055 
 3065 
 22711189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schnack 
 HG 
 
 
 van Haren 
 NEM 
 
 
 Brouwer 
 RM 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Durston 
 S 
 
 
 Boomsma 
 DI 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 Changes in Thickness and Surface Area of the Human Cortex and Their Relationship with Intelligence 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Bagdasaryan 
 J 
 
 
 Jung 
 DE 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The importance of premotor cortex for supporting speech production after left capsular-putaminal damage 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2014 
 34 
 14338 
 14348 
 25339747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaw 
 P 
 
 
 Eckstrand 
 K 
 
 
 Sharp 
 W 
 
 
 Blumenthal 
 J 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 D 
 
 
 Clasen 
 L 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 Rapoport 
 JL 
 
 
 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a delay in cortical maturation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2007 
 104 
 19649 
 19654 
 18024590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Marchione 
 KE 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Lyon 
 GR 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Disruption of posterior brain systems for reading in children with developmental dyslexia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2002 
 52 
 101 
 110 
 12114001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Holahan 
 JM 
 
 
 Marchione 
 KE 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Zelterman 
 D 
 
 
 Lacadie 
 C 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Age-related changes in reading systems of dyslexic children 
 Ann Neurol 
 2007 
 61 
 363 
 370 
 17444510 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Paying attention to reading: the neurobiology of reading and dyslexia 
 Dev Psychopathol 
 2008 
 20 
 1329 
 1349 
 18838044 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Short 
 SJ 
 
 
 Elison 
 JT 
 
 
 Goldman 
 BD 
 
 
 Styner 
 M 
 
 
 Gu 
 HB 
 
 
 Connelly 
 M 
 
 
 Maltbie 
 E 
 
 
 Woolson 
 S 
 
 
 Lin 
 WL 
 
 
 Gerig 
 G 
 
 
 Reznick 
 JS 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 JH 
 
 
 Associations between white matter microstructure and infants’ working memory 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 64 
 156 
 166 
 22989623 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Wu 
 S 
 
 
 Liu 
 HY 
 
 
 Understanding Chinese developmental dyslexia: Morphological awareness as a core cognitive construct 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 2006 
 98 
 122 
 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Peng 
 H 
 
 
 McBride-Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Phonological awareness in young Chinese children 
 Developmental Science 
 2008 
 11 
 171 
 181 
 18171377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silani 
 G 
 
 
 Frith 
 U 
 
 
 Demonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Fazio 
 F 
 
 
 Perani 
 D 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Brain abnormalities underlying altered activation in dyslexia: a voxel based morphometry study 
 Brain 
 2005 
 128 
 2453 
 2461 
 15975942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 The role of phonological awareness and visual-orthographic skills in Chinese reading acquisition 
 Dev Psychol 
 2001 
 37 
 886 
 899 
 11699761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Niu 
 ZD 
 
 
 Jin 
 Z 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 A structural-functional basis for dyslexia in the cortex of Chinese readers 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2008 
 105 
 5561 
 5566 
 18391194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siok 
 WT 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Jin 
 Z 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Biological abnormality of impaired reading is constrained by culture 
 Nature 
 2004 
 431 
 71 
 76 
 15343334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tan 
 LH 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of phonological processing of Chinese characters and alphabetic words: a meta-analysis 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2005 
 25 
 83 
 91 
 15846817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tau 
 GZ 
 
 
 Peterson 
 BS 
 
 
 Normal development of brain circuits 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2010 
 35 
 147 
 168 
 19794405 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thiebaut de Schotten 
 M 
 
 
 Dell’Acqua 
 F 
 
 
 Forkel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Vergani 
 F 
 
 
 Murphy 
 DG 
 
 
 Catani 
 M 
 
 
 A lateralized brain network for visuospatial attention 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2011 
 14 
 1245 
 1246 
 21926985 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vidyasagar 
 TR 
 
 
 Pammer 
 K 
 
 
 Dyslexia: a deficit in visuo-spatial attention, not in phonological processing 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2010 
 14 
 57 
 63 
 20080053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vogel 
 AC 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 The putative visual word form area is functionally connected to the dorsal attention network 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 537 
 549 
 21690259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilke 
 M 
 
 
 Holland 
 SK 
 
 
 Altaye 
 M 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Template-O-Matic: A toolbox for creating customized pediatric templates 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 41 
 903 
 913 
 18424084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wright 
 BA 
 
 
 Zecker 
 SG 
 
 
 Learning problems, delayed development, and puberty 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2004 
 101 
 9942 
 9946 
 15210987 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 J 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Li 
 WL 
 
 
 Tian 
 XM 
 
 
 The Stability of Literacy-Related Cognitive Contributions to Chinese Character Naming and Reading Fluency 
 Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 
 2013 
 42 
 433 
 450 
 22923217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeatman 
 JD 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 RF 
 
 
 Ben-Shachar 
 M 
 
 
 Wandell 
 BA 
 
 
 Development of white matter and reading skills 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2012 
 109 
 E3045 
 3053 
 23045658 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeatman 
 JD 
 
 
 Wandell 
 BA 
 
 
 Mezer 
 AA 
 
 
 Lifespan maturation and degeneration of human brain white matter 
 Nat Commun 
 2014 
 5 
 4932 
 25230200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 YJ 
 
 
 Zhang 
 LJ 
 
 
 Shu 
 H 
 
 
 Xi 
 J 
 
 
 Wu 
 H 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 Li 
 P 
 
 
 Universality of categorical perception deficit in developmental dyslexia: an investigation of Mandarin Chinese tones 
 Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
 2012 
 53 
 874 
 882 
 22489956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhao 
 J 
 
 
 Qian 
 Y 
 
 
 Bi 
 HY 
 
 
 Coltheart 
 M 
 
 
 The visual magnocellular-dorsal dysfunction in Chinese children with developmental dyslexia impedes Chinese character recognition 
 Sci Rep 
 2014 
 4 
 7068 
 25412386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Results of whole brain ANCOVA. All significant at P-cluster < 0.05 with FWE correction, except CCgenu: P-voxel < 0.001 (uncorrected) with 505 continuous voxels. The GM clusters are presented on the mean normalized GM image of all subjects at the upper panel (A) and the WM clusters are presented on the mean normalized WM image of all subjects at the lower panel (B). Three GM clusters (left temporo-parietal cortex, LTPC; left middle frontal gyrus, LMFG; left superior occipital gyrus, LSOG) and two WM clusters (left cuneus, LCUN; right precuneus, RPCUN) showed main effect of disorder (red). Two clusters (left ventral occipito-temporal cortex, LvOTC; left dorsal pars opercularis, LdIFGop) and one cluster located in the genu of the corpus callosum showed disorder-by-maturation interaction effect (cyan). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Raw regional volumes are plotted for each of the ROIs (gold = DYS-younger; blue = TD-younger; orange = DYS-older; purple = TD-older). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographics of the four subgroups 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 DYS-younger [Mean (SD)] 
 TD-younger [Mean (SD)] 
 DYS-older [Mean (SD)] 
 TD-older [Mean (SD)] 
 DYS-younger vs. TD-younger (Age-matched control) 
 DYS-older vs. TD-older (Age-matched control) 
 DYS-older vs. TD-younger (Read-matched control) 
 
 
 
 
 N 
 12 
 12 
 12 
 12 
 --- 
 --- 
 --- 
 
 
 Age 
 11 (0.9) 
 11 (0.3) 
 14.1 (0.4) 
 14.1 (0.5) 
 0.707 
 0.781 
 < 0.001 *** 
 
 
 Gender 
 7 M, 5 F 
 6 M, 6 F 
 7 M, 5 F 
 6 M, 6 F 
 0.682 
 0.682 
 0.682 
 
 
 Performance IQ 
 100 (10) 
 101 (10) 
 110 (17) 
 117 (9) 
 0.800 
 0.188 
 ---  a 
 
 
 Character Recognition 
 88 (8) 
 125 (9) 
 122 (11) 
 139 (5) 
 < 0.001 *** 
 < 0.001 *** 
 0.505 
 
 
 Word List Reading 
 66 (14) 
 100 (13) 
 98 (24) 
 120 (23) 
 < 0.001 *** 
 0.036 * 
 0.862 
 
 
 Reading Fluency 
 151 (52) 
 308 (66) 
 383 (129) 
 552 (120) 
 < 0.001 *** 
 0.003 ** 
 0.086 
 
 
 Phoneme Deletion 
 13 (6) 
 20 (4) 
 19 (5) 
 23 (2) 
 0.002 ** 
 0.023 * 
 0.454 
 
 
 Rapid Automatically Naming 
 22 (6) 
 15 (2) 
 14 (4) 
 13 (3) 
 0.002 ** 
 0.215 
 0.599 
 
 
 Morphological Production 
 19 (4) 
 25 (2) 
 24 (4) 
 27 (1) 
 < 0.001 *** 
 0.026 * 
 0.841 
 
 
 Digit Recall 
 16 (2) 
 18 (2) 
 18 (3) 
 19 (1) 
 0.038 * 
 0.055 
 0.728 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: 
 
 
 a 
 Participants in younger and older subsamples were recruited from two projects, respectively. Because IQ measurements were different, it was not possible to compare IQ between younger and older subsamples. 
 
 
 DYS-younger, dyslexic children of younger subsample; DYS-older, dyslexic children of older subsample; TD-younger, control participants of younger subsample; TD-older, control participants of older subsample. 
 
 
 * 
 P < 0.05 
 
 
 ** 
 P < 0.01 
 
 
 *** 
 P < 0.001. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Peak coordinates and details of clusters from whole brain voxel-based analyses 
 
 
 
 
 Matter 
 Brain area 
 P-corrected 
 Size (voxels) 
 MNI coordinates (peak) 
 
 
 Z value 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 Gray matter 
 Main Effect of Disorder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Left supramarginal gyrus, left superior temporal gyrus, left rolandic operculum left postcentral gyrus 
 0.008 
 866 
 4.27 
 −50 
 −45 
 28 
 
 
 
 Left superior occipital gyrus, left middle occipital gyrus, left calcarine fissure and surrounding cortex 
 0.032 
 648 
 4.05 
 −20 
 −75 
 21 
 
 
 
 Left middle frontal gyrus, left superior frontal gyrus 
 0.047 
 228 
 4.07 
 −27 
 18 
 43 
 
 
 
 Disorder × Maturation Interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Left inferior temporal gyrus, left occipital gyrus 
 0.006 
 606 
 4.79 
 −54 
 −57 
 −15 
 
 
 
 Left inferior frontal gyrus (opercular part), left middle frontal gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus (triangular part) 
 0.049 
 269 
 4.78 
 −41 
 12 
 33 
 
 
 White matter 
 Main Effect of Disorder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right precuneus, right median cingulate and paracingulate gyri, right superior occipital gyrus 
 0.043 
 343 
 4.08 
 17 
 −57 
 37 
 
 
 
 Left superior occipital gyrus, left precuneus, left middle occipital gyrus, left superior parietal gyrus 
 0.046 
 310 
 4.11 
 −18 
 −61 
 36 
 
 
 
 Disorder × Maturation Interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genu of corpus callosum 
 ---  a 
 505 
 3.65 
 6 
 21 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: 
 
 
 a 
 Note: voxel-level P < 0.001, uncorrected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 This study disentangled different sources of anomalies in dyslexic children. 
 
 
 Persistent volume decreases were found in phonology and attention related regions. 
 
 
 There were areas that showed maturation-sensitive impairments in dyslexia. 
 
 
 Dyslexia is characterized by both persistent and altered neural deficits. 
 
 
 
 
