
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 26702775 
 4755795 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.12.015 
 NIHMS745141 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Decisions about the past are guided by reinstatement of specific
memories in the hippocampus and perirhinal cortex 
 
 
 
 
 Mack 
 Michael. L. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Preston 
 Alison. R. 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712 
 2 Center for Learning and Memory, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712 
 3 Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712 
 
 Corresponding authors: Michael L. Mack, Center for Learning and
Memory, The University of Texas at Austin, 100 East 24th Street, Austin, TX
78712-0805,  mack.michael@gmail.com . Alison R. Preston, Center for
Learning and Memory, The University of Texas at Austin, 100 East 24th Street,
Austin, TX 78712-0805,  apreston@utexas.edu 
 
 
 17 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 12 
 2015 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2016 
 
 
 15 
 2 
 2017 
 
 127 
 144 
 157 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 When faced with a new challenge, we often reflect on related past
experiences to guide our behavior. The ability to retrieve memories that overlap
with current experience, a process known as pattern completion, is theorized as
a critical function of the hippocampus. Although this view has influenced
research for decades, there is little empirical support for hippocampal pattern
completion to individual memory elements and its influence on behavior. We used
pattern analysis of brain activity measured with functional magnetic resonance
imaging to demonstrate that specific elements of past experiences are reinstated
in the hippocampus, as well as perirhinal cortex (PRC), when making decisions
about those experiences. Linking neural measures of specific memory
reinstatement in the hippocampus and PRC to behavior with computational modeling
revealed that reinstatement predicts the speed of memory-based decisions.
Moreover, hippocampal activation during retrieval was selectively coupled to
regions of occipito-temporal cortex that showed content-specific item
reinstatement. These results provide evidence for hippocampal pattern completion
and its role in the mechanisms of decision making. 
 
 
 Graphical abstract 
 
 
 
 
 decision making 
 hippocampus 
 medial temporal lobe 
 memory 
 perirhinal cortex 
 computational modeling 
 
 
 
 Decisions often rely on information that is not immediately available. Whether it
is ordering an entrée at a favorite restaurant or deciding among treatment
options for a medical condition, many of our decisions are guided by what we recall from
past experience. Most research on the neural systems of decision making have focused on
perceptual decisions that depend on information directly or recently available to the
sensory system ( Heekeren et al., 2008 ). Although
such studies have characterized how external sensory information is represented and
interpreted by the brain to influence behavior ( Bogacz et
al., 2010 ;  Bollimunta et al., 2012 ;
 Gold and Shadlen, 2007 ;  Hanks et al., 2014 ;  Heekeren
et al., 2008 ;  Nienborg and Cumming,
2009 ), the neural computations that support how we use internally-generated
content from past experiences to guide decision making remain poorly understood. 
 It is well known that our ability to encode and remember past experiences depends
critically on the medial temporal lobe (MTL) ( Eichenbaum, 2004 ;  Squire, 2004 ). The
prominent theoretical view ( Marr, 1971 ;  McClelland et al., 1995 ;  O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001 ) proposes that successful
memory retrieval involves reinstatement of memory representations through a process
known as pattern completion. Specifically, the hippocampus is thought to act as an
auto-associative network that reinstates complete memory representations from partial or
degraded input. It has been further proposed that the content of these reinstated
memories serve as internally-generated evidence that guides subsequent behavior ( Lisman and Grace, 2005 ;  Norman and O’Reilly, 2003 ). In the present study, our
goal was to test the theoretical prediction that during memory-based decision making,
specific memory elements are reinstated in the human hippocampus and that this
reinstatement predicts decisions. 
 Empirical evidence for hippocampal memory reinstatement and its influence on
decision making has been established in human electrophysiological studies. This work
has demonstrated that firing patterns of single neurons in medial temporal lobe
selectively code for specific contents of memory ( Heit
et al., 1988 ) and that reinstatement of these firing patterns during
retrieval is related to memory performance ( Gelbard-Sagiv et al., 2008 ;  Paz et al.,
2010 ;  Rutishauser et al., 2015 ).
However, such empirical evidence of pattern completion in human functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) research has been limited. Initial reports focused on
differences in process rather than contents of memories, inferring pattern completion
from a reduction in blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) response to repeated
presentations of objects and similar lures relative to initial encoding ( Bakker et al., 2008 ;  Lacy et
al., 2011 ). Such an effect is consistent with pattern completion; however, it
is unknown whether or not such reduced neural responding reflects reinstatement of
specific memory elements. fMRI studies have demonstrated that hippocampal activation
patterns during spatial context encoding exhibit a bias towards existing spatial
templates, a finding consistent with pattern completion processes ( Stokes et al., 2015 ). Further, it has been shown that
hippocampal activation patterns during retrieval differentiate between stored event
representations ( Chadwick et al., 2011 ,  2010 ) and are consistent with episode-specific
templates of activation patterns recorded after encoding and retrieval ( Wimber et al., 2015 ). However, these extant findings cannot
speak to the central tenet of pattern completion: hippocampal activation patterns
representing specific memory elements are themselves reinstated during decisions that
rely on memory. 
 A second theoretical aspect of pattern completion with limited empirical support
is the proposal that reinstated mnemonic information in the hippocampus serves as
evidence for memory-based decision making ( Lisman and
Grace, 2005 ;  Norman and O’Reilly,
2003 ). It has been demonstrated that successful memory decisions are
associated with stronger reinstatement signatures in content-specific cortical regions
( Bosch et al., 2014 ;  Johnson et al., 2009 ;  Kuhl
and Chun, 2014 ;  LaRocque et al., 2013 ;
 Polyn et al., 2005 ;  Ritchey et al., 2012 ;  Staresina et al., 2012 ;  Wing et al.,
2015 ). However, the behavioral link between memory decisions and hippocampal
pattern completion has yet to be observed. Furthermore, the link between reinstatement
and behavior observed in these studies is based on the indirect comparison of cortical
reinstatement signatures during successful versus unsuccessful memory choices, thus
limiting the sensitivity of evaluating the direct influence of reinstatement on decision
making on a trial-by-trial basis. Recent neuroimaging evidence shows that the magnitude
of hippocampal activation is linked to memory confidence judgments ( Leiker and Johnson, 2015 ;  Thakral et al., 2015 ) and the speed of memory decisions ( Gordon et al., 2014 ), with greater retrieval-related
activation for higher confidence and faster responses. Electrophysiological work in
humans has further identified single cells within the hippocampus that exhibit firing
patterns consistent with a graded representation of memory strength and confidence
during recognition decisions ( Rutishauser et al.,
2015 ). However, these studies did not index hippocampal pattern completion
per se. And, although the single cell finding is a compelling demonstration of
hippocampal cells representing memory evidence, the kind of information carried by these
cells was not item specific, and the memory-specific firing patterns were observed in
response to perceptual information currently available to the participant. The
theoretically important question remains as to whether or not internally generated
hippocampal memory evidence is directly related to decisions about the specific mnemonic
content. 
 Here, we sought direct evidence of pattern completion during memory-based
decision making by indexing reinstatement of the specific components of individual
memories from patterns of fMRI activation in the human hippocampus and surrounding
cortices. Participants learned arbitrary associations between pictures of objects and
famous faces and places before performing a delayed match-to-memory test ( Chen et al., 2011 ), in which objects cued memory
retrieval of the associated face or place ( Figure
1 ). We used neural pattern similarity ( Kriegeskorte et al., 2008 ;  Xue et al.,
2010 ) to assess the reinstatement of specific people and places during memory
retrieval in parahippocampal cortex (PHC) and perirhinal cortex (PRC), MTL cortical
regions that have demonstrated content-specific coding (e.g.,  LaRocque et al., 2013 ;  Liang
et al., 2013 ;  Staresina et al., 2012 ),
and hippocampus ( Figure 1 ). Item-specific patterns
during retrieval were compared to item-specific neural patterns recorded during a
pre-exposure phase, in which participants viewed each item in isolation prior to
associative encoding. This approach allowed us to go beyond category level decoding of
memory reinstatement ( Johnson et al., 2009 ;  Polyn et al., 2005 ), a method that has failed to
provide evidence for reinstatement of hippocampal representations ( Diana et al., 2008 ;  Gordon et
al., 2014 ; cf.  Kuhl and Chun, 2014 ),
to assess reinstatement of specific memory elements. 
 Furthermore, we investigated the theoretical proposal that reinstated mnemonic
information in hippocampus serves as evidence for memory-based decision making ( Lisman and Grace, 2005 ;  Norman and O’Reilly, 2003 ). To this end, we assessed
the link between neural reinstatement of specific memory content in MTL subregions,
including the hippocampus, and decisions about the memory probes with a mathematical
model of decision making commonly used to assess how perceptual evidence impacts
decisions ( Ratcliff, 1978 ). Critically, our
model-based approach extends beyond correlation methods (e.g.,  Gordon et al., 2014 ) to test whether or not MTL neural
reinstatement signatures are predictive of subsequent behavior. Typical approaches to
relating brain measures to behavior are largely discriminative, focusing on differences
in neural activation across known conditions. For example, studies that compare neural
measures based on successful versus unsuccessful memory performance have revealed that
cortical reinstatement is stronger for correct than incorrect memory decisions (e.g.,
 Kuhl and Chun, 2014 ). The discriminative
approach can reveal potentially important neural differences across conditions, but the
resulting findings are ultimately correlational. In contrast, a generative approach
attempts to describe the system of interest first and then evaluate the system under
different conditions. Such an approach is considered generative because the modeled
system can generate predictions for novel situations ( Ng
and Jordan, 2002 ). Here, we take a generative approach by using a modeling
framework that makes explicit assumptions about how neural information available in the
MTL influences memory decisions. By doing so, we provide a strong and direct test of the
hypothesis that internally generated memory evidence in the hippocampus predicts
mnemonic decision making on a trial-by-trial basis. 
 We also tested the key hypothesis that reinstatement in the hippocampus is linked
to reinstatement in cortex ( Ciocchi et al., 2015 ;
 Tanaka et al., 2014 ). It has been
demonstrated that the magnitude of hippocampal BOLD activation during both encoding and
retrieval scales with reinstatement signatures in neocortex ( Gordon et al., 2014 ;  Horner
et al., 2015 ;  Ritchey et al., 2012 ;
 Wing et al., 2015 ). Such findings suggest
that the hippocampus plays an important role in the re-experiencing of mnemonic content
by influencing cortical reinstatement. We extend this work by asking whether or not
regions of the hippocampus and the surrounding cortex that demonstrate item-specific
reinstatement are functionally coupled to regions of occipito-temporal cortex (OTC) that
selectively reinstate specific mnemonic content. Such a functional link would suggest
that not only is item-specific memory evidence reinstated in the hippocampus, but that
the same underlying neural substrate is also communicating with regions of neocortex
that demonstrate item-specific reinstatement. 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Twenty-five volunteers (15 females, mean age 20.2 years old, ranging
from 18 to 29 years) participated in the experiment; one participant was
excluded from analysis due to a failure in the button-response recording device
and an additional participant was removed from further analysis due to
substantial head motion. All subjects were right handed, had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and were compensated $75 for
participating. 
 
 
 Materials 
 Eight color images of famous faces (Oprah Winfrey, Taylor Swift, Meghan
Fox, Julia Roberts, Barack Obama, Steve Martin, Owen Wilson, and Morgan Freeman)
and famous places (Mount Fuji, Florida Everglades, Yosemite National Park,
Monument Valley, Eiffel Tower, Las Vegas Strip, Taj Mahal, and London Bridge) as
well as eighty-eight color images of everyday objects were used in the
experiment ( Figure 1A ). Face and object
images consisted of a cropped face or object placed on a white background. All
stimuli were sized to 300 × 300 pixels. Eight independent raters
provided visual distinctiveness ratings for a set of 30 famous faces and places.
The four most visually distinctive female and male faces and four most visually
distinctive natural and man-made places were selected for the experiment. 
 
 
 Task Procedure 
 After an initial screening and consent in accordance with the University
of Texas Institutional Review Board, participants were instructed on the
pre-exposure, associative learning, and delayed match to memory (DMTM) tasks.
Participants then performed all three tasks in the MRI scanner by viewing visual
stimuli back-projected onto a screen through a mirror attached onto the head
coil. Foam pads were used to minimize head motion. Stimulus presentation and
timing was performed using custom scripts written in Matlab (Mathworks) and
Psychtoolbox ( www.psychtoolbox.org ) on an Apple Mac Pro computer running OS X
10.7. 
 
 Pre-exposure Phase 
 During the pre-exposure, participants were instructed to respond as
quickly as possible when a centrally-located fixation cross changed color to
blue or yellow by pressing one of two buttons on a MRI-compatible button
box. On each trial, a face, place, or object image was presented for 1s
along with a black fixation cross ( Figure
1C ). After a random delay (250–750ms) from image and
fixation onset, the fixation cross changed color to blue or yellow. After 1s
had elapsed from the onset of the image and fixation cross, a blank screen
was presented for 3–6s. Participants were instructed to respond only
to the fixation cross color change and that the image stimuli were
irrelevant to the task. Trials were presented in a mixed design with blocks
of eight trials consisting of stimuli from the same visual category (faces,
places, and objects). Within a block, trials were randomly jittered with an
average trial duration of 5.5s and a range of 4–7s. Each of the
eight famous faces and places and eight objects were presented twice across
a pre-exposure run. Five fixation blocks, each lasting 15s, were presented
interleaved with the stimulus blocks. Each run lasted 341s, and participants
completed four runs. The entire pre-exposure phase lasted approximately
twenty-five minutes. 
 
 
 Associative Learning Phase 
 Each of the eight famous faces and places were paired with five
objects for a total of eighty pairs. These pairings were randomly selected
across participants. Participants performed repetitions of study and test
blocks to learn the paired associates. Although participants performed the
associative learning phase in the scanner, we did not collect fMRI data for
this experimental phase. On each trial of a study block, a face-object or
place-object stimulus pair was presented for 3.5s followed by 0.5s of
fixation ( Figure 1C ). The stimulus
images were presented at the same time as the object image. The object image
appeared 8.1° to the left of the screen center, and the face/place
image 8.1° to the right of the screen center. Labels for the
faces/places and objects were presented in black, 32-point, Helvetica text
below the images. Each image subtended 7.3° × 7.3°
of visual space. Participants were instructed to view and attempt to
remember the pairs. All 80 pairs were shown in random order during a study
block. 
 After study, participants were tested on the eighty paired
associates. On each test trial, an object stimulus from one of the pairs was
presented above three faces or places, with one face/place being the correct
paired associate and two faces/places from different pairs serving as lures.
Lures were always from the same category as the correct face or place.
Participants responded by pressing one of three buttons on a MRI button box
to indicate which of the three face/place stimuli was associated with the
object. Test trials were self-paced with a 1s feedback screen that presented
the object along with the correct face/place. Test trials were separated by
a 500ms fixation. All 80 pairs were tested in random order. After each test
block, the average accuracy was calculated across the test trials for that
block. If the test accuracy was greater than or equal to 85%,
participants moved onto the delayed match to memory task phase. Otherwise,
participants repeated the study and test blocks with different randomized
trial orders. 
 
 
 Delayed match to memory (DMTM) task 
 The test phase consisted of trials of a delayed match to memory
task. In contrast to the widely-used delayed match to sample task, in which
a stimulus is presented and held in working memory through a delay period
before a match decision is made to a probe stimulus, the delayed match to
memory task requires cued retrieval from long-term memory during the delay
period. On each trial of the DMTM phase, an object from one of the eighty
pairs encoded during the associative learning phase was presented as a
memory cue for 1s followed by a 9s blank screen. After the 9s delay, a
memory probe was presented that was either the correct face/place paired
associate (a match trial) or a different face/place associated with a
different object (a mismatch trial). The probe stimulus was presented for 1s
before presentation of a 3s fixation ( Figure
1C ). Participants were instructed to respond whether or not the
probe stimulus was an associative match or mismatch to the object cue by
pressing one of two buttons on a MRI compatible button box. Participants
were also instructed to respond within 1s of the probe onset. A strict
response deadline was used to encourage memory retrieval of the associated
face/place during the delay period. Each run of the DMTM phase consisted of
sixteen trials. Across these sixteen trials, each of the eight famous faces
and places was a retrieval target, half of which were match trials and the
other half mismatch trials. Across five runs all objects from the eighty
learned pairs were presented as a cue. Null fixation events with durations
of 2–8s sampled from a truncated exponential distribution for a
total of 72s were randomly intermixed between trials throughout each run to
maximize the efficiency of the trial order. Each run lasted 294s with the
entire memory test phase lasting approximately thirty minutes. 
 
 
 
 MRI data acquisition 
 Whole-brain imaging data were acquired on a 3.0T Siemens Skyra system at
the University of Texas at Austin Imaging Research Center. A high-resolution
T1-weighted MPRAGE structural volume (TR = 1.9s, TE = 2.43ms,
flip angle = 9°, FOV = 256mm, matrix =
256×256, voxel dimensions = 1mm isotropic) was acquired for
coregistration and parcellation. Functional images were acquired using a
T2*-weighted multiband accelerated EPI pulse sequence (TR = 1s,
TE = 30ms, flip angle = 62°, FOV = 220mm, matrix
= 110×110, slice t hickness = 2mm, multiband factor
= 4) allowing for whole brain coverage with 2mm isotropic voxels. 
 
 
 MRI data preprocessing and statistical analysis 
 MRI data were preprocessed and analyzed using FSL 5.0 ( Smith et al., 2004 ) and custom Python routines.
Functional images were realigned to the first volume of the fourth run from the
preprocessing phase to correct for motion, spatially smoothed using a 4mm
full-width-half-maximum Gaussian kernel, high-pass filtered (128s), and
detrended to remove linear trends within each run. Functional images were
registered to the MPRAGE structural volume using Advanced Normalization Tools
(ANTS, version 1.9;  Avants et al., 2011 ).
All analyses were performed in the native space of each participant. 
 
 
 Regions of interest 
 The hippocampus and subregions of MTL cortex (PRC and PHC) were
delineated by hand on the 1mm Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template
brain ( Figure 1B ) by an expert trained to
segment MTL and hippocampus. Given the established functional differences in
lateral versus medial subregions of entorhinal cortex (ERC; e.g.,  Knierim et al., 2014 ) and the limited
resolution of fMRI, we excluded ERC from our analyses. The segmentations were
validated by two other expert raters and have been used in previous published
studies ( Schlichting and Preston, 2014 ;
 Schlichting et al., 2015 ). PRC was
defined as the lateral and medial wall of the collateral sulcus and a 3mm wide
transition zone between PHC and PRC was excluded from both regions. Hippocampal,
PHC, and PRC ROIs were reverse-normalized to each individual’s
functional space using ANTS. Specifically, a nonlinear transformation was
calculated from the MNI template brain to each participant’s T1-weighted
MPRAGE volume. This warp was then concatenated with the MPRAGE to functional
space transformation calculated using ANTS. Finally, the concatenated
transformation was applied to the anatomical MTL ROIs to move each ROI into each
participant’s functional space. See the  Supplemental Materials  for methods
and findings from an exploratory analyses of hippocampal subfields
DG/CA 2,3  and CA 1 . 
 A region of interest including occipito-temporal cortex (OTC) was
constructed from an automated cortical segmentation performed with Freesurfer,
version 5.3 ( Fischl et al., 2002 ).
Specifically, the Freesurfer cortical segmentation was performed on each
participant’s T1-weighted MPRAGE volume and all cortical regions
contained within occipito-temporal cortex, but excluding medial temporal lobe
cortex, were added to an OTC ROI that was specific to each participant. The OTC
ROIs was transformed to each participant’s functional space using
ANTS. 
 
 
 Pattern classification analysis 
 The goal of the classification analysis was to assess the extent to
which category-level information (face vs. place) was reinstated in different
MTL subregions during memory retrieval (Figure
3). Pattern classification analyses were implemented using PyMVPA
( Hanke et al., 2009 ) and custom
Python routines. All classification analyses were conducted on preprocessed and
spatially smoothed functional data. The decision to perform multivariate
analyses on spatially smoothed data is consistent with recent studies employing
MVPA in the MTL ( Kuhl and Chun, 2014 ;
e.g.,  Schapiro et al., 2012 ) and
demonstrations that smoothing does not result in information loss ( Kamitani and Sawahata, 2010 ;  Op de Beeck, 2010 ). A linear support vector
machine (SVM) classifier was trained to discriminate neural activation patterns
of faces, places, objects, and fixation acquired during the pre-exposure phase.
Each trial in the pre-exposure phase was labeled according to the stimulus
category that was presented during the trial. To account for the hemodynamic
lag, the fMRI data was time shifted by 4 seconds. 
 First, the classifier was evaluated for each of the MTL ROIs (PRC, PHC,
and hippocampus) with a leave-one-out 4-fold cross-validation using the
pre-exposure phase’s four functional runs. Classifiers were trained to
predict face, scene, object, and fixation blocks during the pre-exposure phase.
All four categories were included in the classifier to isolate the four sources
of potential information in neural patterns during the DMTM phase. By including
both objects and fixation in the classifier, the delay period information
associated with perceptual processing of the cue object and the fixation point
was accounted for in the classifier evidences for those two categories. With
this experimentally irrelevant variance accounted for, the classifier evidences
for face and scene categories during the DMTM delay period was less biased and
more accurately reflected category information reinstated through memory
retrieval. Classifier performance during the pre-exposure phase was assessed by
taking the average accuracy across the cross-validation folds within each
participant, then evaluating whether or not across the participant’s
classification accuracy was significantly greater than chance levels
(25% chance accuracy with four classes) according to a Bayesian
Estimation Supersedes the  t -Test procedure (BEST;  Kruschke, 2012 ). 
 BEST is a hierarchical Bayesian version of the traditional
 t -test that estimates the  t -test statistic
through a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling method. The BEST procedure is
a generalization of the Student t-test such that the specific form of the
 t  distribution (defined by the mean, standard deviation,
and shape parameter) used by the test is estimated from the data through MCMC
methods. Instead of assuming normally-distributed data (i.e., setting the shape
parameter equal to ∞) as is the case with traditional
 t -tests, the MCMC method estimates all three parameters of the
 t  distribution defined by the data and provides a valid
test between groups of data even when the data is not normally distributed. As
the name of the test implies, the BEST procedure is a generalization of the
traditional  t -test and is a statistically superior method for
evaluating means from group data ( Kruschke,
2012 ). All BEST tests conducted in the current work consisted of
10,000 MCMC samples with the first 1,000 samples discarded for burn-in. A BEST
analysis provides a distribution of credible values of the test statistic
summarized in the form of 95% highest density interval (HDI) that is
akin to a 95% confidence interval from traditional t-test methods.
Although the results of a BEST analysis are best summarized by the 95%
HDI, we also calculated a  P  statistic that corresponds to the
proportion of the sampling posterior probability distribution that falls below
each test’s chance level (i.e.,  P  is an analogue to a
 p  value from traditional null hypothesis testing methods).
Additionally, all reported  P  values are corrected to control
for false discovery rate with  α  = 0.05. All
three ROIs showed greater than chance accuracy (all  P  <
0.0001) at decoding the four stimulus classes during the pre-exposure phase
(PHC: mean = 32.9%, HDI = [31.5%,
34.3%]; PRC: mean = 28.7%, HDI =
[27.2%, 29.7%]; hippocampus: mean =
27.3%, HDI = [26.2%,
28.3%]). 
 To further test the reliability of the pre-exposure MVPA classifiers, we
ran randomization tests on all of the classifiers to empirically define chance
levels. To perform these tests, we reran the classification analysis, but
shuffled labels on the test data in each of the cross validation folds. This
analysis was repeated 1000 times for each participant to create a null
distribution of classifier accuracies. For each participant and each ROI, a
 p  value was calculated that corresponded to the proportion
of the null distribution accuracies that were greater than the observed
accuracy. These  p  values were converted to  z 
values with the inverse cumulative normal distribution and evaluated across
participants with a one-sample BEST test. Both PHC and PRC classifiers showed
significantly greater accuracies than a baseline z value of 1.65 (corresponding
to a  p  value of 0.05; PHC: mean = 3.475, HDI =
[2.562, 4.498],  P  < 0.0001; PRC: mean
= 2.945, HDI = [1.954, 3.944],
 P  = 0.0074). In contrast, accuracy of the
hippocampus classifier across participants was not significantly greater than
the randomization test null distributions (mean = 2.166, HDI =
[1.188, 2.962],  P  = 0.159). Thus,
whereas classifiers trained on pre-exposure data in PHC and PRC accurately
classified above empirically defined chance levels, hippocampal classifiers did
not. As such, subsequent classification analyses were restricted to PHC and
PRC. 
 After assessing classifier performance during the pre-exposure phase, a
SVM classifier was trained on all data from the pre-exposure phase for each ROI
and used to predict evidence for face and place information during the delay
period of the DMTM trials. This analysis was limited to correct trials. To
account for the hemodynamic lag, the trained classifier was applied to data
acquired at time points 4–7s during the delay period of the DMTM trials
(i.e., the dataset was time shifted by 4s). This range was selected a priori to
capture the peak of the hemodynamic response to the delay period. Probability
estimates for the face and place labels were extracted from the SVM classifier
and used to index the amount of classifier evidence for the two categories at
each time point during the tested range. Each evidence estimate was averaged
across the time points within a trial, relabeled as correct versus incorrect
category according to the retrieval category of the trial, and averaged across
memory test trials for each participant (Figure
3). Finally, the difference in classifier evidence for correct versus
incorrect category was evaluated across participants with a paired
 t -test based on the BEST procedure ( Kruschke, 2012 ), with separate tests for memory test
trials with face and place retrieval targets. For these particular tests, a mean
paired difference was considered significant if the 95% HDI did not
include zero. We have included a  P  statistic in the Results
section that corresponds to the proportion of the sampling posterior probability
distribution of mean differences that fell below zero. Finally, regional
interactions between regions demonstrating significant category reinstatement
were assessed with an analysis of variance that compared factors of region,
retrieval category, and classifier category evidence. 
 
 
 Multivariate pattern similarity 
 The goal of the similarity analysis was to assess the extent that
item-level information was reinstated in different MTL subregions during memory
retrieval (Figure 4). In contrast to
classification techniques that are used to decode activation patterns associated
with relatively small number of stimulus classes or conditions, pattern
similarity methods allow one to evaluate activation patterns at the level of
single events or stimuli. For example, instead of training a classifier to
dissociate activation patterns for places and faces, as is the case with
classification methods, pattern similarity methods can measure the degree that
an activation pattern associated with a single trial of retrieving the Taj Mahal
is similar to activation patterns associated with viewing the Taj Mahal versus
other places. Pattern similarity methods offer a greater sensitivity in
detecting between individual experimental events than is afforded by
multivariate classification. 
 Pattern similarity analyses were implemented using PyMVPA ( Hanke et al., 2009 ) and custom Python
routines. First, activation patterns for visual and memory-related responses in
each of the ROIs for each of the eight famous faces and places were estimated
using an event-specific univariate general linear model (GLM) approach employing
the least squares single (LSS) method ( Mumford
et al., 2012 ;  Xue et al.,
2010 ). In contrast to the classification approach that leverages the
variance in neural patterns to learn voxel weights that best discriminate
conditions, pattern similarity analyses require stable estimates of neural
representations for the conditions of interest. In the current study, the
condition of interest was at the level of specific items. Thus, we took a GLM
approach to model stable estimates of visual and memory-related neural patterns
for each of the eight famous faces and places. For each pre-exposure run,
separate GLMs were conducted for each of the eight faces and places, such that
each GLM included one regressor for the face or place modeled as 1s boxcar
convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF), separate
regressors for the remaining events collapsed according to the event categories
(e.g., face, place, object, and fixation) that were also convolved with a HRF,
and nuisance regressors that included six head motion parameters. These
individual GLMs resulted in voxelwise parameter estimates to each of the
stimuli. The resulting beta values consisted of four visually-evoked activation
patterns across the runs for each of the eight faces and places. A similar GLM
approach was conducted on the DMTM functional data to extract memory
retrieval-based activation patterns for the faces and places. Specifically, for
each DMTM functional run, separate GLMs were conducted for the individual trials
such that each GLM included a single regressor for the current trial modeled as
a 9s boxcar convolved with a canonical HRF, separate regressors that combined
the remaining events according to category and match condition (face match, face
mismatch, place match, and place mismatch), and nuisance regressors that
included six head motion parameters. These GLMs resulted in voxelwise parameter
estimates of activation related to retrieving each of the faces and places. The
resulting beta values consisted of five memory-retrieval activation patterns
across the runs for each of the eight faces and places. In total, we estimated
four visually-evoked and five retrieval-based activation activation patterns for
each of the eight faces and places. 
 The pre-exposure and DMTM test activation patterns were used to
characterize the degree of item-specific information reinstated within the ROIs
during memory retrieval (Figure 4). Pearson
correlations were computed to assess the similarity between DMTM test patterns
of retrieving an item and pre-exposure patterns of viewing that same item (e.g.,
retrieving Taj Mahal and viewing Taj Mahal,  self similarity ) or
viewing other items within the same category (retrieving Taj Mahal and viewing
Eiffel Tower,  category similarity ). Self similarity and
category similarity values were calculated for every DMTM test trial for each
participant in the hippocampus, PRC, and PHC. For the hippocampal regions
demonstrating an item reinstatement effect, we performed follow up exploratory
analyses in CA subfields (see  Supplemental Materials ). Correlation coefficients were Fisher
transformed to more closely conform to the assumptions of normality underlying
standard statistical tests. 
 To assess the degree of item-level reinstatement within each ROI, we
compared average self versus category similarity across participants for face
and scene retrieval trials separately. Only correct trials with response times
faster than or equal to 1000ms were included in the participant averages. Given
the visual nature of the materials and the implementation of the analysis, which
emphasizes visual similarity, we expected that right hemisphere might be more
likely to demonstrate item reinstatement effects ( Glosser et al., 1995 ;  Golby et al., 2001 ). We therefore first assessed differences in the
similarity measures between left and right hemispheres for each ROI by
conducting an analysis of variance that included factors of hemisphere (left vs.
right), retrieval target (face vs. place), and similarity (self vs. category).
If an ROI showed a significant interaction that included hemisphere, subsequent
analyses analyzed the ROI separated by hemisphere; otherwise, similarity
measures were collapsed across hemisphere. Pairwise comparisons between self and
category similarity were conducted with BEST  t -tests. Reported
BEST  P  values are corrected to control for false discovery rate
with an alpha = 0.05. Regional interactions between MTL regions showing
item reinstatement were evaluated with an analysis of variance that compared
factors of region, retrieval category, and similarity level. Any item
reinstatement effects found in the hippocampus were followed up with exploratory
pattern similarity analyses in subfield CA 1  and the combined
subfields DG/CA 2,3  (see  Supplemental Materials ). 
 Additionally, we identified regions in occipito-temporal cortices (OTC)
that showed item-level reinstatement with a searchlight analysis extension of
the pattern similarity approach. This analysis was performed as part of the
connectivity analysis described in the next section. Specifically, we targeted
OTC regions that selectively coded for items from one category (face or place)
more than the other to assess the functional connectivity between stimulus
representation regions and MTL regions associated with item reinstatement. We
used a searchlight approach due to the relatively large volume of OTC. The
spatial sensitivity of a searchlight approach allowed us to identify only those
regions across all of OTC that reinstated item information during memory
retrieval. The same pattern similarity analysis performed within the
anatomically-defined MTL ROIs described previously was employed for the
searchlight analysis with the following exceptions. For each searchlight sphere
(radius = 3 voxels), an item reinstatement index was calculated by
subtracting the category similarity from the item similarity. This item
reinstatement index was compared to a null distribution of reinstatement indices
calculated from randomly shuffled trial orderings. This permutation test was
conducted for each searchlight sphere resulting in a probability map. 
 The searchlight analysis was conducted separately for face and place
item reinstatement measures and was restricted to occipito-temporal cortex as
defined by Freesurfer anatomical parcellations. The resulting probability maps
were converted to  z -scores. For group analysis, the
 z -scored maps were normalized to MNI space and voxelwise
nonparametric permutation testing (5000 permutations) was performed using FSL
Randomise ( Winkler et al., 2014 ) to
compare face and place item reinstatement. The resulting statistical maps were
voxelwise thresholded at  p  = 0.01 and cluster corrected
at  p  = 0.05 which corresponded to a cluster extent
threshold of greater than 29 voxels as determined by AFNI 3dClustSim (estimated
smoothness of FWHM = 6.27). Significant face and place item
reinstatement clusters are reported in Table
1 and were used to create ROI masks for the connectivity analysis
described next (Figure 5A). 
 
 
 Functional connectivity analysis 
 We assessed the functional coupling ( Rissman et al., 2004 ) between MTL regions showing item-level
reinstatement and item-reinstatement regions in OTC identified in the pattern
similarity searchlight analysis described in the previous section (Figure 5). For each trial, average
delay-period activation within these face and place reinstatement regions, as
well as the MTL ROIs exhibiting item reinstatement (right hippocampus and left
PRC, see  Supplemental
Materials  for right CA 1 ), were extracted from the
event-specific univariate GLM described in the pattern similarity analysis
section (Figure 5A). For each participant,
we estimated the degree of connectivity between the MTL ROIs and OTC face and
place reinstatement regions separately for face and place retrieval trials using
robust regression (Figure 5B). Connectivity
differences across different retrieval conditions (see Figure 5C) were assessed with a repeated measure
analysis of variance of retrieval type (face vs. place) and OTC reinstatement
region (face vs. place). In particular, we looked for a significant interaction
as evidence of connectivity modulated by retrieval type. We also performed
paired comparisons within each MTL ROI for connectivity with OTC face and place
reinstatement regions for each retrieval condition separately using the BEST
methods described previously. 
 
 
 Diffusion modeling analysis 
 One key theoretical claim of pattern completion is that the mnemonic
content reinstated in the hippocampus serves as evidence for memory based
decisions. We sought to evaluate this prediction by linking our pattern
similarity measure of item reinstatement to participants’ match/mismatch
decisions with a computational model of decision making. Specifically, we fit
participants’ choice behavior in the DMTM task with variants of the
drift diffusion model ( Ratcliff, 1978 )
that were differently informed by the neural item reinstatement measure. By
doing so, we evaluated whether or not the fidelity of internally generated item
reinstatement predicts how quickly responses to the retrieved memory are made on
a trial-by-trial basis. This analysis extends beyond correlation methods (e.g.,
 Gordon et al., 2014 ) by assessing the
role of item reinstatement within a computational framework of memory-based
decision making. 
 The DDM posits that decisions are made by sequentially sampling noisy
evidence. Over time, this evidence accumulates towards a threshold. Once the
threshold is reached, the response associated with the threshold is made. With
this conceptualization, the DDM is able to account for both response
probabilities and response time distributions. The DDM is based on three core
parameters: drift rate  v  – the rate of evidence
accumulation, threshold  a  – the distance between the
starting point of the evidence and the decision thresholds, and non-decision
time  t  – the time required for perceptual encoding and
motor response execution. These parameters uniquely affect predictions for
response probabilities and response time distributions. Typical applications of
the DDM seek to decompose effects of experimental conditions on choice behavior
onto one or more of the DDM parameters to gain insight into the latent
mechanisms of decision making ( Ratcliff and
Rouder, 1998 ). Here, we used the DDM to investigate if and how the
neural measure of item reinstatement predicts, for every trial, response choice
and speed. 
 The DDM analysis was implemented with the Hierarchical Drift Diffusion
Model toolbox (HDDM version 0.5.3;  Wiecki et
al., 2013 ). HDDM performs hierarchical Bayesian parameter estimation
for the DDM using Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling methods. By doing so,
the HDDM allows for simultaneous estimation of participant and group parameters
such that participant parameters are sampled from group distributions, multiple
parameters to be estimated for different conditions, and the estimation of
trial-by-trial effects from external variables (e.g., neural measures) on
different DDM parameters. 
 We fit a family of DDM variants to participant behavior, with different
model variants representing different hypotheses about how neural item
reinstatement influences decision making (Figure
6). First, we calculated a trial-by-trial item reinstatement score by
subtracting the category from the item similarity values as computed in the
neural pattern similarity analyses described previously. To remove the potential
confound of trial-by-trial BOLD activation on choice behavior within each ROI,
overall BOLD response within each ROI was computed for each trial and regressed
out of the trial-by-trial item reinstatement score. We then used this modified
item reinstatement score in the DDM analyses. Specifically, in separate models,
we estimated the relationship between trial-by-trial item reinstatement in MTL
regions showing evidence for item reinstatement, as well as OTC regions
identified in the searchlight analysis, and the three core DDM parameters. This
relationship was modeled as a linear effect between item reinstatement and a DDM
parameter. Thus, the result of one model fit was two regression coefficients
that describe the linear relationship between the neural measure of item
reinstatement and the DDM parameter for match and mismatch trials. 
 For example, fitting a model with item reinstatement linked to drift
rate (Figure 6A) results in linear
regression coefficients that characterize the effect of item reinstatement on
drift rate separately for match and mismatch trials. Positive valued
coefficients would indicate that a higher item reinstatement is associated with
a higher drift rate. Negative valued coefficients would indicate that higher
item reinstatement is associated with a lower drift rate. Because parameter
estimation in the HDDM is implemented in a hierarchical Bayesian framework with
MCMC sampling, a distribution of regression coefficients is estimated for any
one model fit (Figure 6B). To assess the
linear effect of item reinstatement on the model parameters, we calculated a
 P  statistic that quantified the proportion of the
regression coefficient distribution that was less than zero.  P 
values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Separate models
were fit to behavior associated with face and place retrieval trials, and all
three DDM parameters ( v ,  a ,
 t ) were free to vary across match and mismatch conditions. 
 All models were estimated with 30,000 MCMC samples with the first 10,000
samples discarded for burn-in. We assessed model fits with two analyses. First,
model convergence was evaluated with the Gelman-Rubin  R-hat 
statistic computed over three independently estimated chains of each model. All
parameters in all models had a  R-hat  less than 1.1, suggesting
the chains of MCMC sampling reached convergence. Second, we performed model
comparison by calculating a deviance information criterion (DIC) measure for
each model. Critically, we compared the item reinstatement models to baseline
DDM models that did not include effects of item reinstatement. An item
reinstatement model was considered as representing a meaningful relationship
between behavior and item reinstatement if the model provided a better fit
(smaller DIC value) than the corresponding baseline model (Table 2). If more than one item reinstatement model
provided a better fit than the baseline model, the item reinstatement model with
the smaller DIC value was selected as the winning model. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Behavioral performance 
 For the pair encoding phase, learning performance was defined as the
average number of correct responses during each test block. A criterion of
85% accuracy was used to determine when to move on to the DMTM phase. Of
the 23 participants, 10 reached the learning criterion after one study-test
repetition, 11 after two study-test repetitions, and 2 after three study-test
repetitions. 
 For the DMTM phase, memory performance in each of the four conditions
(face match, face mismatch, place match, and place mismatch) was measured with
the mean probability of a correct response and the median response times for
correct responses ( Figure 2 ). Trials were
excluded from all analyses if no response was provided (1.1% of all
trials) or if the trial response time was greater than 1000ms (5.1% of
all trials). An analysis of variance of probability of correct responses that
included the factors of probe match (match vs. mismatch) and retrieval category
(face vs. place) revealed a significant effect of retrieval category
( F 1,22  = 4.34,  p 
= 0.049,  η p 2  =
0.165), but no effect of probe match ( F 1,22 
= 0.576,  p  = 0.456,
 η p 2  = 0.026) nor
an interaction ( F 1,22  = 0.167,
 p  = 0.687,
 η p 2  = 0.008). A
similar analysis of variance conducted on response times revealed significant
main effects of probe match ( F 1,22  = 15.793,
 p  = 0.0006,
 η p 2  = 0.418) and
retrieval category ( F 1,22  = 78.661,
 p  = 1×10 −8 ,
 η p 2  = 0.781), but
no interaction ( F 1,22  = 0.197,
 p  = 0.661,
 η p 2  = 0.009).
Thus, participants were overall more accurate and faster in responding to
associative pairs that included faces relative to places, as well as faster to
respond when the probe item matched relative to mismatched the face or place
paired with the cue object. 
 
 
 Category reinstatement in the MTL 
 We first targeted evidence of category reinstatement with a
commonly-used decoding approach (e.g.,  Kuhl and
Chun, 2014 ;  Zeithamova et al.,
2012 ). Separate classifiers were trained on fMRI data from the
pre-exposure phase for each bilateral MTL ROI (PHC, PRC, and hippocampus) to
dissociate neural patterns for the four stimulus categories: objects, faces,
places, and fixation. Only classifiers trained on PHC and PRC pre-exposure data
showed above chance classification. Hippocampus did not differentiate category
information during pre-exposure, thus this region was excluded from subsequent
classification analyses for the DMTM test phase. The trained PHC and PRC
classifiers were then applied to data recorded during the DMTM test phase to
predict evidence for face and place information during the delay period of the
DMTM trials ( Figure 3A ). This analysis was
restricted to correct DMTM trials. There was a difference in category
reinstatement across MTL cortex as revealed by an analysis of variance that
showed a significant interaction of region × stimulus category ×
retrieval category ( F 1,22  = 29.18,
 p  = 0.00002,
 η p 2  = 0.57).
Within PRC ( Figure 3B ), we found
category-specific evidence of face reinstatement
( μ diff  = 0.0162, 95%
HDI = [0.0051, 0.0281],  P  =
0.002), but not place reinstatement ( μ diff 
= 0.00158, 95% HDI = [−0.012,
0.015],  P  = 0.41). Within PHC, we found
evidence of place reinstatement ( μ diff 
= 0.0414, 95% HDI = [0.0197, 0.0653],
 P  < 0.0001), and a trending effect for face
reinstatement ( μ diff  = 0.011,
95% HDI = [−0.0014, 0.024],
 P  = 0.076). 
 
 
 Item reinstatement in the MTL 
 We next targeted the specific item-level contents of memory by comparing
memory-based activation patterns within the hippocampus and surrounding cortex
to visually-evoked activation patterns with neural pattern similarity analyses.
Specifically, the degree of item-specific reinstatement was measured by
correlating activation patterns present during retrieval of a specific face or
place in DMTM trials with the corresponding activation patterns present when
viewing that face or place prior to associative learning ( Figure 4A ). This  self similarity 
measure was compared to a  category similarity  measure defined
as the correlation between memory retrieval patterns for the faces and places
and pre-exposure patterns for other items within the same stimulus class. 
 First, we assessed differences in the similarity measures between left
and right hemispheres for each ROI by conducting an analysis of variance that
included factors of hemisphere (left vs. right), retrieval target (face vs.
place), and similarity (self vs. category). Given the visual nature of the
experimental materials and the established laterality effects for stimulus
modality in MTL ( Glosser et al., 1995 ;
 Golby et al., 2001 ), we expected
differences across hemispheres. If an ROI showed a significant interaction that
included hemisphere, subsequent analyses analyzed the ROI separated by
hemisphere; otherwise, similarity measures were collapsed across hemisphere.
Both PRC and hippocampus showed significant interactions with hemisphere (PRC:
hemisphere × target × similarity -
 F 1,22  = 9.87,  p 
= 0.0044,  η p 2  =
0.291; hippocampus: hemisphere × target -
 F 1,22  = 7.42,  p 
= 0.0012,  η p 2  =
0.25), thus corresponding ROIs in left and right hemispheres for these regions
were analyzed separately. 
 Within right hippocampus ( Figure
4C ), we found evidence of item-specific reinstatement as indicated by a
main effect of item versus category similarity
( F 1,22  = 6.99,  p 
= 0.015,  η p 2  =
0.241). Paired BEST comparisons revealed this main effect was driven by item
reinstatement for places ( μ diff  =
0.0085, 95% HDI = [0.0002, 0.017],
 P  = 0.024), but not faces
( μ diff  = 0.0044, 95%
HDI = [−0.006, 0.0143],  P 
= 0.184). Left hippocampus showed no significant item reinstatement
effects ( p  > 0.16). In MTL cortex, only left PRC showed
evidence of item-specific reinstatement as revealed by an interaction of
similarity and retrieval target ( F 1,22  =
5.41,  p  = 0.029,
 η p 2  = 0.184).
Paired BEST comparisons indicated significant reinstatement for faces
( μ diff  = 0.0099, 95%
HDI = [0.0002, 0.02],  P  =
0.022), but not places ( μ diff  =
−0.001, 95% HDI = [−0.0112,
0.0092],  P  = 0.86). An analysis of variance
assessing regional differences in reinstatement between right hippocampus and
left PRC showed no significant interactions with region (all  F s
< 1). Right PRC and bilateral PHC did not show evidence of item reinstatement
(all  F s < 1). See the  Supplemental Materials  for an
exploratory item reinstatement analysis of CA subfields in right
hippocampus. 
 
 
 MTL connectivity with item reinstatement regions in occipito-temporal
cortex 
 We next examined the key theoretical component of pattern completion
that the hippocampus guides reinstatement in behaviorally-relevant cortical
regions ( Marr, 1971 ). We used a
functional connectivity approach ( Rissman et
al., 2004 ) to examine the coupling between hippocampal processes and
task-related cortical regions during retrieval. We identified regions throughout
occipito-temporal cortex (OTC) that exhibited item-specific reinstatement
exclusively for faces or places with a searchlight analysis extension of the
item reinstatement analysis ( Table 1  and
 Figure 5A ). Average delay-period
activation within these face and place reinstatement regions, as well as right
hippocampus and left PRC, were extracted for each correct trial. We estimated
the degree of correlation between the MTL ROIs and face/place reinstatement
regions separately for correct face and place retrieval trials ( Figure 5B ). We found that the connectivity pattern
between right hippocampus and face and place reinstatement regions ( Figure 5C ) was modulated by the type of
retrieval such that there was greater coupling with face regions during face
retrieval and place regions during place retrieval
( F 1,22  = 11.56,  p 
= 0.0026,  η p 2  =
0.344; see  Supplemental
Materials  for exploratory analysis with right CA 1 ). In
contrast, left PRC connectivity was not modulated by retrieval
( F 1,22  = 0.038,  p 
= 0.85,  η p 2  =
0.002). 
 
 
 Modeling the influence of item reinstatement on decision making 
 We next sought to assess the behavioral significance of reinstated
hippocampal and PRC patterns, specifically testing the hypothesis that
reinstated episodic information in hippocampal and PRC patterns serves as the
critical evidence for memory-based decision making. We fit participants’
choice behavior to the memory probe with the drift diffusion model (DDM). The
DDM simultaneously accounts for response choices and times across different
experimental conditions by operationally defining decision making as an evidence
accumulation process ( Ratcliff, 1978 ). We
linked the neural signatures of item reinstatement in right hippocampus and left
PRC to the computational mechanisms of decision making in the DDM ( Figure 6A  and  Table 2 ). 
 Specifically, on a trial-by-trial basis, we estimated in separate models
the degree that item-specific neural reinstatement predicted evidence
accumulation, decision threshold, or non-decision time for match and mismatch
probe decisions in the DMTM task using Bayesian parameter estimation ( Wiecki et al., 2013 ). We found that
item-specific reinstatement in right hippocampus significantly predicted the
rate of evidence accumulation to matching place probes on a trial-by-trial basis
(baseline model:  DIC  = −400.12; hippocampus
model:  DIC  = −406.32,
 P match  = 0.021;  Figure 6B ). The relationship between hippocampal
reinstatement and evidence accumulation was such that reinstating more
place-specific information led to faster evidence accumulation, resulting in
faster response times. This relationship was not present for mismatching place
probes ( P mismatch s > 0.4). Item-specific
reinstatement in PRC also showed a relationship to evidence accumulation, with
greater reinstatement of face-specific information leading to faster
accumulation as a general effect across both match and mismatch probes (baseline
model:  DIC  = −843.09; PRC model:
 DIC  = −852.02,  P  =
0.024). See the  Supplemental
Materials  for additional analyses of the relationship between
hippocampal reinstatement and response times ( Figure S1 ), the generative nature
of the neurally-informed DDM results ( Figure S2 ), and an exploratory
analysis with right CA 1 . 
 We also tested item reinstatement in the OTC regions identified in the
searchlight analysis (see  Table 1 ) using
the DDM framework. However, none of models that included trial-by-trial
reinstatement from OTC place reinstatement regions fit better than the baseline
scene model ( DIC s > −395). One model including
reinstatement from a face region in left lingual gyrus as a factor on drift rate
did fit slightly better than the face baseline model ( DIC 
= −845.44); however, the regression coefficient between item
reinstatement and drift rate was not significant ( P s > 0.2).
All other models including OTC face reinstatement regions did not fit better
than the baseline model ( DIC s > −843). Although
accuracy was near ceiling in the DMTM task, thereby limiting the DDM models to
accounting mostly for differences in response time distributions, these results
suggest a trial-by-trial link between the fidelity of reinstated memories in the
MTL and decisions about the specific contents of those memories. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 Taken together, our results suggest that the specific contents of episodic
memories are reinstated in the activation patterns of hippocampal subfields and
subregions of MTL cortex. In particular, our findings that reinstated neural
patterns in the hippocampus contain item-level information are consistent with
computational theories that point specifically to CA 3  and CA 1 
as critical for reinstating complete memory representations from partial sensory
input through pattern completion ( Marr, 1971 ;
 Norman and O’Reilly, 2003 ;  Rolls, 2013 ). 
 Importantly, our study extends beyond the existing evidence for hippocampal
pattern completion from rodent and human studies that rely on representations of
spatial locations ( Kyle et al., 2015 ;  Leutgeb et al., 2007 ;  Miller et al., 2013 ;  Neunuebel and Knierim, 2014 ;  Stokes et
al., 2015 ). In particular, such work has been limited in demonstrating
the link between hippocampal-based spatial codes and choice behavior. It has been
shown that single unit place cell responses can predict direction choices made by
rodents in maze tasks ( Pastalkova et al.,
2008 ;  Singer et al., 2013 );
however, these findings are not based on pattern completion processes  per
se . One recent rodent study measured both CA 3  input from DG
and CA 3  output, finding direct evidence for pattern completion processes
in CA 3 , but without a link to behavior ( Neunuebel and Knierim, 2014 ). Finally, none of this research has indexed
specific memory content beyond spatial locations (i.e., place fields). By linking a
continuous neural measure of memory to a prominent mathematical model of decision
making, our results provide support for theories of hippocampal function that link
retrieval of specific memory elements to reinstatement of hippocampal
representations that themselves are critical for subsequent decisions ( Lisman and Grace, 2005 ;  Marr, 1971 ;  Norman and
O’Reilly, 2003 ;  O’Reilly
and Rudy, 2001 ;  Rolls, 2013 ). 
 Evidence of memory reinstatement in human hippocampus has been limited to
electrophysiological studies of epilepsy patients (e.g.,  Gelbard-Sagiv et al., 2008 ;  Paz et al., 2010 ;  Rutishauser et al., 2015 ). By recording single cells within the
hippocampus, it has been demonstrated that a subset of cells show item-specific
selectivity during visual presentation ( Quiroga et
al., 2007 ,  2005 ), and that
selective firing for specific episodes during memory encoding reoccurred during free
recall of the same episodes ( Gelbard-Sagiv et al.,
2008 ). Furthermore, the strength of episodic encoding in single
hippocampal cells, measured as a correlation in temporal patterns of
encoding-related firing rates, has been shown to predict subsequent recall
performance ( Paz et al., 2010 ). Single cell
firing patterns in the hippocampus have also been tied to memory decisions during
retrieval, with evidence that a subset of hippocampal cells fire proportionally to
graded responses of memory strength and confidence ( Rutishauser et al., 2015 ). This work offers compelling demonstrations of
hippocampal memory reinstatement with links to behavior, yet such findings are
limited to characterizing the reinstatement signatures of single cells. Moreover,
although this work suggest some hippocampal cells represent memory information that
is correlated with decision making, the existing findings are limited to a general
level of memory information and cannot speak to item-specific pattern
completion. 
 In contrast to electrophysiological studies, fMRI-based findings in support
of memory reinstatement in the hippocampus are considerably lacking. One recent fMRI
study found evidence for reinstatement of specific memories in hippocampus ( Wimber et al., 2015 ). However, that finding
does not address the critical questions set forth in the current study:
reinstatement of specific memory contents and their impact on decisions. In
particular, the fact that reinstatement in that study was measured by comparing
retrieval patterns to episode-specific templates acquired after both encoding and
retrieval necessarily reflects retrieval of entire experiences rather than
individual event elements. Thus, similar to other studies ( Chadwick et al., 2014 ,  2010 ), the  Wimber et al. (2015) 
study measured the distinctiveness of individual composite events during retrieval,
but not retrieval of the individual memory contents themselves, which is the
critical theoretical prediction of pattern completion. More importantly, they failed
to link episode-specific hippocampal patterns to behavior, which is the second key
theoretical test. In the current study, by comparing reinstated memory
representations to visual representations recorded before associative learning, we
provide fundamental evidence that hippocampus and perirhinal cortex uniquely
reinstate the specific contents of episodic memories. We not only relate this
reinstatement to behavior, but also use reinstatement to make trial-by-trial
predictions about decisions in a generative fashion. 
 We observed behaviorally relevant content-specific reinstatement in the
hippocampus and PRC. This finding is consistent with proposals that the hippocampus,
PRC, and PHC play unique roles in encoding and retrieval depending on the content of
memories (e.g.,  Bird and Burgess, 2008 ;  Diana et al., 2007 ). For example, the
observation that reinstatement of specific faces in PRC influenced memory decisions
converges with prior studies of lesion patients that suggest a selective role for
PRC in processing faces ( Mundy et al., 2013 ).
Similar research has also implicated the hippocampus in spatial processing with
hippocampal lesions leading to deficits in place but not face processing ( Bird and Burgess, 2008 ). Such a functional role
for hippocampus is consistent with our findings of item-reinstatement in the
hippocampus guiding memory decisions for places. 
 PHC is also known to be content-selective, with a preference for processing
places ( Diana et al., 2007 ). A recent study
with a pattern similarity approach similar to the current study found evidence of
episode-specific reinstatement of place images in PHC, but not the hippocampus
( Staresina et al., 2012 ). However, PHC is
known to code for scene subcategories ( Walther et
al., 2009 ) and the restricted set of four place images each
representative of disparate place categories (home, office, city, and nature) used
in this work suggests these findings could be due to reinstatement of place
subcategory rather than episode-specific information. Such an interpretation is
consistent with our findings of category, but not item reinstatement in PHC.
Although the current study is limited to eight place images, we selected famous
landmarks that were not representative of separate place subcategories to better
target item rather that category representations. 
 The relationship between the item-level reinstatement and category-level
decoding findings within individual regions also has important implications for the
nature of memory representations in each region. Significant category-level
reinstatement in PRC and PHC suggests MTL cortical representations are categorically
organized such that items from the same category are represented in similar parts of
the network, resulting in functional memory modules ( Diana et al., 2008 ;  Huffman and Stark,
2014 ;  LaRocque et al., 2013 ;  Liang et al., 2013 ). This finding stands in
clear contrast to the lack of category reinstatement in the hippocampus. The failure
of prior decoding approaches to identify hippocampal reinstatement may be due to the
relatively category-agnostic nature of the hippocampus such that items from the same
category are uniquely represented ( Huffman and
Stark, 2014 ;  Kuhl and Chun, 2014 ;
 LaRocque et al., 2013 ;  Liang et al., 2013 ). 
 Hippocampal coding is generally thought to be sparse in nature, a
theoretical position with much empirical support ( Quiroga et al., 2008 ;  Waydo et al.,
2006 ). Although several fMRI-based studies, in addition to the current
study, have successfully measured episodic-specific neural representations in the
hippocampus ( Bonnici et al., 2012 ;  Chadwick et al., 2014 ,  2010 ;  Hassabis et al.,
2009 ;  Wimber et al., 2015 ), the
sparse representations of the hippocampus are a high methodological hurdle for
BOLD-based empirical investigations and may have been a limiting factor in previous
attempts to uncover item-specific reinstatement signatures in the hippocampus. An
additional factor to consider is that our study included relatively more associative
pair training (average of 3.5 presentations of each pair during training across
participants) compared to previous studies potentially leading to stronger
representations. It may be that more training during encoding is required to observe
BOLD-based signatures of hippocampal item reinstatement. However, the extensive
associative pair training and the intentional nature of the encoding demands during
training is a limitation of the current study; such strong associative
representations may have been observable with fMRI methods, but may involve more
learning related rather than episodic memory related processes. Nonetheless, the
findings in the current study suggest that whereas a hierarchy of category and
item-specific information is represented in PRC, hippocampal representations code
for the specific contents of memories in a non-modular fashion. 
 By targeting MTL and OTC regions that exhibit item-specific reinstatement,
we were able to uncover a hippocampal-OTC network that demonstrated connectivity
patterns that are modulated by current retrieval demands. This finding is consistent
with recent rodent studies employing optogenetics to examine functional coupling
between hippocampus and behaviorally-relevant cortical regions. In one such study,
cortical neurons active during fear conditioning failed to reactivate when
CA 1  neurons were silenced during retrieval ( Tanaka et al., 2014 ). Moreover, another study found that
CA 1  neurons exhibited distinct projections to different target brain
areas depending on the type of task performed by the animal ( Ciocchi et al., 2015 ). One recent human fMRI study
examined the connectivity between the hippocampus and MTL cortex with dynamic causal
modeling, finding that hippocampal activation mediates successful retrieval of
associative information from content-specific regions of MTL ( Staresina et al., 2013 ). The hippocampus has also been
implicated in several fMRI studies examining cortical reinstatement. Hippocampal
activation during both encoding and retrieval scales with task ( Leiker and Johnson, 2015 ), category ( Gordon et al., 2014 ;  Horner et al., 2015 ) and item ( Ritchey
et al., 2012 ;  Wing et al., 2015 )
reinstatement signatures in neocortex. In particular,  Ritchey et al. (2012)  found a relationship between
hippocampal univariate activation and the degree of encoding-retrieval pattern
similarity in cortical regions, consistent with the notion that hippocampus mediates
memory reinstatement in cortex. However, because the same visual input was present
at both encoding and retrieval, it is unknown whether their findings are related to
reinstatement processes or to perceptual processes acting on the same visual input
during both encoding and retrieval. 
 The current findings build upon and extend these previous results by
demonstrating that during retrieval, hippocampus is preferentially coupled with OTC
regions that reinstate item-level representations of memory content. It should be
noted that the current connectivity findings are limited by their correlative
nature; specifically, the task-dependent correlation between hippocampal and OTC
neural activity cannot be used to infer the existence or directionality of a causal
relationship between the brain regions ( Friston,
2011 ). However, the current findings, together with the existing
literature, are consistent with the theoretical proposal that the hippocampus plays
an important role in the re-experiencing of mnemonic content through cortical
reinstatement and may route behaviorally-relevant information to task-specific
cortical areas during memory retrieval. 
 It is worth noting that although the current work has focused on
reinstatement as arising from pattern completion, pattern separation is also
functionally tied to memory reinstatement. In particular, overlapping experiences
that share content must be encoded in orthogonal representations in order to
retrieve distinct memory traces of these experiences ( Marr, 1971 ;  Norman and
O’Reilly, 2003 ;  O’Reilly
and Rudy, 2001 ). This separation process is driven by competition between
incoming sensory information from the current experience and reinstated information
from related previously encoded memories ( Hulbert
and Norman, 2014 ;  Norman and
O’Reilly, 2003 ;  O’Reilly
and Rudy, 2001 ). The current study was designed to target reinstatement
signatures arising from pattern completion processes. The object cues during the
DMTM task provided partial information for retrieving the correctly paired face or
place associate through pattern completion. It is likely that pattern separation was
involved both during encoding of the paired associates and potentially influenced
what information was available during retrieval ( Kyle et al., 2015 ). However, the specificity of the item reinstatement
signatures we observed during retrieval is consistent with a “filling
in” of item-specific mnemonic information through pattern completion. Future
studies could extend these findings by parametrically varying the degradation or
similarity between a cue and the associative memory (e.g.,  Bakker et al., 2008 ;  Kirwan and Stark, 2007 ) to characterize how degraded cues lead to
reinstatement of item specific information through pattern completion. 
 The present findings provide a critical demonstration for the theorized role
of reinstated hippocampal representations in mnemonic decision making ( Lisman and Grace, 2005 ;  Norman and O’Reilly, 2003 ), while further
revealing important information about the organization of the underlying mnemonic
codes. Theoretical accounts posit that reinstated representations in CA 3 
and CA 1  act as predictions about present events derived from past
knowledge. Limited support for this proposal is found in existing neuroimaging work
that suggests the magnitude of hippocampal activation during retrieval is correlated
with the speed of memory decisions ( Gordon et al.,
2014 ) and confidence judgments ( Leiker
and Johnson, 2015 ;  Thakral et al.,
2015 ). In the current study, we provided a direct test of the role of the
hippocampus in memory retrieval by linking trial-by-trial item reinstatement
signatures to the accumulation of evidence in a computational model of memory-based
decisions. Indeed, the computational modeling analysis showed that the fidelity of
reinstated item-level representations is directly predictive of the speed of memory
decisions. The relationship between reinstatement and behavior was specific to
MTL-based item reinstatement; reinstatement in occipito-temporal regions was not
predictive of mnemonic decisions. Mechanistically, these findings are consistent
with a memory-based decision process whereby the memory evidence internally
generated during retrieval in the hippocampus and perirhinal cortex is compared to
the sensory input of the probe stimulus. The fidelity of the memory evidence
influences this comparison such that more evidence leads to fast accumulation of
decision evidence towards a match/mismatch response. 
 It is interesting to note that although the DDM has been leveraged more
recently as a model of perceptual decision making ( Ratcliff and Rouder, 1998 ), its original conception was an account of
memory retrieval that linked internally-generated information to the accumulation of
evidence for memory-based decisions ( Ratcliff,
1978 ). Our results bridge brain measures and behavior to ground this
classic theory’s mechanisms in neural evidence and show that internally
generated content from past experiences guides decision making. Moreover, our
approach opens the door to answering long-standing questions about memory function
at the resolution of individual memories in healthy individuals. For instance, how
do specific memories emerge over learning experiences? When are the details of the
past forgotten versus successfully consolidated into robust memory networks? How are
the specific elements of memories flexibly integrated to create new knowledge? The
current study also paves the way towards a unified computational approach in which
the neural representations supporting our memories are quantitatively linked to the
formal mechanisms that underlie decision making. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 supplement 
 
 
 
 
 
 This study was supported by NIH (F32-MH100904), NSF CAREER Award (1056019), and NIH
(R01-MH100121). We wish to thank A. Huk for helpful comments on an earlier version
of this report; J. Mumford for advice on optimizing the experimental design for RSA;
B. Love for helpful comments on the DDM analysis; and M. Schlichting, E. Stein, B.
Gelman, and K. Nguyen for their help with data collection. Thank you also to the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC;  http://www.tacc.utexas.edu )
at The University of Texas at Austin for providing high-performance computing
resources critical for the work presented within this report. 
 
 
 
 The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript
that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are
providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Avants 
 BB 
 
 
 Tustison 
 NJ 
 
 
 Song 
 G 
 
 
 Cook 
 PA 
 
 
 Klein 
 A 
 
 
 Gee 
 JC 
 
 
 2011 
 A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance
in brain image registration 
 Neuroimage 
 54 
 2033 
 2044 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.025 
 20851191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bakker 
 A 
 
 
 Kirwan 
 CB 
 
 
 Miller 
 M 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 2008 
 Pattern Separation in the Human Hippocampal CA3 and Dentate
Gyrus 
 Science 
 319 
 1640 
 1642 
 10.1126/science.1152882 
 18356518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bird 
 CM 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 2008 
 The hippocampus and memory: insights from spatial
processing 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 182 
 194 
 10.1038/nrn2335 
 18270514 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bogacz 
 R 
 
 
 Wagenmakers 
 EJ 
 
 
 Forstmann 
 BU 
 
 
 Nieuwenhuis 
 S 
 
 
 2010 
 The neural basis of the speed-accuracy tradeoff 
 Trends Neurosci 
 33 
 10 
 16 
 10.1016/j.tins.2009.09.002 
 19819033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bollimunta 
 A 
 
 
 Totten 
 D 
 
 
 Ditterich 
 J 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural Dynamics of Choice: Single-Trial Analysis of
Decision-Related Activity in Parietal Cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 12684 
 12701 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5752-11.2012 
 22972993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonnici 
 HM 
 
 
 Chadwick 
 MJ 
 
 
 Kumaran 
 D 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Weiskopf 
 N 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2012 
 Multi-voxel pattern analysis in human hippocampal
subfields 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 6 
 1 
 13 
 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00290 
 22279433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bosch 
 SE 
 
 
 Jehee 
 JFM 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 Doeller 
 CF 
 
 
 2014 
 Reinstatement of associative memories in early visual cortex is
signaled by the hippocampus 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 7493 
 500 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0805-14.2014 
 24872554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chadwick 
 MJ 
 
 
 Bonnici 
 HM 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2014 
 CA3 size predicts the precision of memory recall 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 111 
 10720 
 5 
 10.1073/pnas.1319641111 
 25002463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chadwick 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2011 
 Decoding overlapping memories in the medial temporal lobes using
high-resolution fMRI 
 Learn Mem 
 8 
 742 
 746 
 10.1101/lm.023671.111 
 22086391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chadwick 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Weiskopf 
 N 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2010 
 Decoding Individual Episodic Memory Traces in the Human
Hippocampus 
 Curr Biol 
 1 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 J 
 
 
 Olsen 
 RK 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2011 
 Associative retrieval processes in the human medial temporal
lobe: hippocampal retrieval success and CA1 mismatch
detection 
 Learn Mem 
 18 
 523 
 528 
 10.1101/lm.2135211 
 21775513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ciocchi 
 S 
 
 
 Passecker 
 J 
 
 
 Malagon-Vina 
 H 
 
 
 Mikus 
 N 
 
 
 Klausberger 
 T 
 
 
 2015 
 Selective information routing by ventral hippocampal CA1
projection neurons 
 Science 
 348 
 560 
 563 
 25931556 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diana 
 RA 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2008 
 High-resolution multi-voxel pattern analysis of category
selectivity in the medial temporal lobes 
 Hippocampus 
 18 
 536 
 541 
 10.1002/hipo.20433 
 18446830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diana 
 RA 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe:
a three-component model 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 379 
 386 
 10.1016/j.tics.2007.08.001 
 17707683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 2004 
 Hippocampus: Cognitive processes and neural representations that
underlie declarative memory 
 Neuron 
 44 
 109 
 120 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.08.028 
 15450164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Dieterich 
 M 
 
 
 Haselgrove 
 C 
 
 
 Van Der Kouwe 
 A 
 
 
 Killiany 
 R 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 D 
 
 
 Klaveness 
 S 
 
 
 Montillo 
 A 
 
 
 Makris 
 N 
 
 
 Rosen 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2002 
 Whole brain segmentation: Automated labeling of neuroanatomical
structures in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 33 
 341 
 355 
 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00569-X 
 11832223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Functional and Effective Connectivity: A Review 
 Brain Connect 
 1 
 13 
 36 
 10.1089/brain.2011.0008 
 22432952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gelbard-Sagiv 
 H 
 
 
 Mukamel 
 R 
 
 
 Harel 
 M 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 2008 
 Internally generated reactivation of single neurons in human
hippocampus during free recall 
 Science 
 322 
 96 
 101 
 10.1126/science.1164685 
 18772395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glosser 
 G 
 
 
 Saykin 
 AJ 
 
 
 Deutsch 
 GK 
 
 
 O’Connor 
 MJ 
 
 
 1995 
 Neural organization of material-specific memory functions in
temporal lobe epilepsy patients as assessed by the intracarotid amobarbital
test 
 Neuropsychology 
 9 
 449 
 456 
 10.1037/0894-4105.9.4.449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Golby 
 AJ 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Spencer 
 D 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Aron 
 AP 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 Material-specific lateralization in the medial temporal lobe and
prefrontal cortex during memory encoding 
 Brain 
 124 
 1841 
 1854 
 10.1093/brain/124.9.1841 
 11522586 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 JI 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 2007 
 The neural basis of decision making 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 30 
 535 
 574 
 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113038 
 17600525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gordon 
 AM 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Kiani 
 R 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2014 
 Cortical reinstatement mediates the relationship between
content-specific encoding activity and subsequent recollection
decisions 
 Cereb Cortex 
 24 
 3350 
 64 
 10.1093/cercor/bht194 
 23921785 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hanke 
 M 
 
 
 Halchenko 
 YO 
 
 
 Sederberg 
 PB 
 
 
 Hanson 
 SJ 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Pollmann 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 PyMVPA: A python toolbox for multivariate pattern analysis of
fMRI data 
 Neuroinformatics 
 7 
 37 
 53 
 10.1007/s12021-008-9041-y 
 19184561 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hanks 
 TD 
 
 
 Kiani 
 R 
 
 
 Shadlen 
 MN 
 
 
 2014 
 A neural mechanism of speed-accuracy tradeoff in macaque area
LIP 
 Elife 
 2014 
 1 
 17 
 10.7554/eLife.02260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Chu 
 C 
 
 
 Rees 
 G 
 
 
 Weiskopf 
 N 
 
 
 Molyneux 
 PD 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2009 
 Decoding Neuronal Ensembles in the Human
Hippocampus 
 Curr Biol 
 19 
 546 
 554 
 10.1016/j.cub.2009.02.033 
 19285400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Marrett 
 S 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2008 
 The neural systems that mediate human perceptual decision
making 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 467 
 479 
 10.1038/nrn2374 
 18464792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heit 
 G 
 
 
 Smith 
 ME 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 1988 
 Neural encoding of individual words and faces by the human
hippocampus and amygdala 
 Nature 
 333 
 773 
 775 
 10.1038/333773a0 
 3386719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Horner 
 AJ 
 
 
 Bisby 
 JA 
 
 
 Bush 
 D 
 
 
 Lin 
 WJ 
 
 
 Burgess 
 N 
 
 
 2015 
 Evidence for holistic episodic recollection via hippocampal
pattern completion 
 Nat Commun 
 6 
 7462 
 10.1038/ncomms8462 
 26136141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huffman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 2014 
 Multivariate pattern analysis of the human medial temporal lobe
revealed representationally categorical cortex and representationally
agnostic hippocampus 
 Hippocampus 
 10 
 1 
 10 
 10.1002/hipo.22321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hulbert 
 JC 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 2014 
 Neural Differentiation Tracks Improved Recall of Competing
Memories Following Interleaved Study and Retrieval Practice 
 Cereb Cortex 
 1 
 15 
 10.1093/cercor/bhu284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 McDuff 
 SGR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 2009 
 Recollection, Familiarity, and Cortical Reinstatement: A
Multivoxel Pattern Analysis 
 Neuron 
 63 
 697 
 708 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.08.011 
 19755111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kamitani 
 Y 
 
 
 Sawahata 
 Y 
 
 
 2010 
 Spatial smoothing hurts localization but not information:
Pitfalls for brain mappers 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 1949 
 1952 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.040 
 19559797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirwan 
 CB 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 2007 
 Overcoming interference: an fMRI investigation of pattern
separation in the medial temporal lobe 
 Learn Mem 
 14 
 625 
 633 
 10.1101/lm.663507 
 17848502 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knierim 
 JJ 
 
 
 Neunuebel 
 JP 
 
 
 Deshmukh 
 SSBPTRS 
 
 
 2014 
 cortex: objects, path integration and local - global reference
frames Functional correlates of the lateral and medial entorhinal cortex:
objects, path integration and local – global reference
frames 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Mur 
 M 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 P 
 
 
 2008 
 Representational similarity analysis - connecting the branches of
systems neuroscience 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 2 
 4 
 10.3389/neuro.06.004.2008 
 19104670 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kruschke 
 JK 
 
 
 2012 
 Bayesian Estimation Supersedes the t Test 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 142 
 573 
 603 
 10.1037/a0029146 
 22774788 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kuhl 
 BA 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 2014 
 Successful remembering elicits event-specific activity patterns
in lateral parietal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 8051 
 60 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4328-13.2014 
 24899726 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kyle 
 CT 
 
 
 Stokes 
 JD 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 JS 
 
 
 Hassan 
 AS 
 
 
 Ekstrom 
 AD 
 
 
 2015 
 Successful retrieval of competing spatial environments in humans
involves hippocampal pattern separation mechanisms 
 Elife 
 4 
 160 
 10.7554/eLife.10499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lacy 
 JW 
 
 
 Yassa 
 MA 
 
 
 Stark 
 SM 
 
 
 Muftuler 
 LT 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 2011 
 Distinct pattern separation related transfer functions in human
CA3/dentate and CA1 revealed using high-resolution fMRI and variable
mnemonic similarity 
 Learn Mem 
 18 
 15 
 18 
 10.1101/lm.1971111 
 21164173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaRocque 
 KF 
 
 
 Smith 
 ME 
 
 
 Carr 
 VA 
 
 
 Witthoft 
 N 
 
 
 Grill-Spector 
 K 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2013 
 Global Similarity and Pattern Separation in the Human Medial
Temporal Lobe Predict Subsequent Memory 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 5466 
 5474 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4293-12.2013 
 23536062 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leiker 
 EK 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 2015 
 Pattern reactivation CO-varies with activity in the core
recollection network during source memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 75 
 88 
 98 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.05.021 
 26004057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leutgeb 
 JK 
 
 
 Leutgeb 
 S 
 
 
 Moser 
 MB 
 
 
 Moser 
 EI 
 
 
 2007 
 Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus and CA3 of the
hippocampus 
 Science 
 315 
 961 
 966 
 10.1126/science.1135801 
 17303747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liang 
 JC 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2013 
 Content representation in the human medial temporal
lobe 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 80 
 96 
 10.1093/cercor/bhr379 
 22275474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lisman 
 JE 
 
 
 Grace 
 AA 
 
 
 2005 
 The hippocampal-VTA loop: Controlling the entry of information
into long-term memory 
 Neuron 
 46 
 703 
 713 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.05.002 
 15924857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marr 
 D 
 
 
 1971 
 Simple memory: a theory for archicortex 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 262 
 23 
 81 
 10.1098/rstb.1971.0078 
 4399412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 McNaughton 
 BL 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 1995 
 Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus
and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist
models of learning and memory 
 Psychol Rev 
 102 
 419 
 457 
 10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419 
 7624455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 JF 
 
 
 Neufang 
 M 
 
 
 Solway 
 A 
 
 
 Brandt 
 A 
 
 
 Trippel 
 M 
 
 
 Mader 
 I 
 
 
 Hefft 
 S 
 
 
 Merkow 
 M 
 
 
 Polyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 J 
 
 
 Kahana 
 MJ 
 
 
 Schulze-Bonhage 
 A 
 
 
 2013 
 Neural activity in human hippocampal formation reveals the
spatial context of retrieved memories 
 Science 
 342 
 1111 
 1114 
 10.1126/science.1244056 
 24288336 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mumford 
 JA 
 
 
 Turner 
 BO 
 
 
 Ashby 
 FG 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2012 
 Deconvolving BOLD activation in event-related designs for
multivoxel pattern classification analyses 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 2636 
 2643 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.076 
 21924359 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mundy 
 ME 
 
 
 Downing 
 PE 
 
 
 Dwyer 
 DM 
 
 
 Honey 
 RC 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 2013 
 A critical role for the hippocampus and perirhinal cortex in
perceptual learning of scenes and faces: complementary findings from amnesia
and FMRI 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 10490 
 502 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2958-12.2013 
 23785161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neunuebel 
 JP 
 
 
 Knierim 
 JJ 
 
 
 2014 
 CA3 retrieves coherent representations from degraded input:
Direct evidence for CA3 pattern completion and dentate gyrus pattern
separation 
 Neuron 
 81 
 416 
 427 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11.017 
 24462102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ng 
 AY 
 
 
 Jordan 
 MI 
 
 
 2002 
 On Discriminative vs. Generative Classifiers: A comparison of
Logistic Regression and Naive Bayes, Neural Information Processing
Systems 
 Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 
 14 
 841 
 849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nienborg 
 H 
 
 
 Cumming 
 BG 
 
 
 2009 
 Decision-related activity in sensory neurons reflects more than a
neuron’s causal effect 
 Nature 
 459 
 89 
 92 
 19270683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 K 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 R 
 
 
 2003 
 Modeling Hippocampal and Neocortical Contributions to Recognition
Memory: A Complementary-Learning-Systems Approach 
 Psychol Rev 
 110 
 611 
 646 
 14599236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Rudy 
 JW 
 
 
 2001 
 Conjunctive Representations in Learning and Memory: Principles of
Cortical and Hippocampal Function 
 Psychol Rev 
 108 
 311 
 345 
 11381832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Op de Beeck 
 HP 
 
 
 2010 
 Against hyperacuity in brain reading: Spatial smoothing does not
hurt multivariate fMRI analyses? 
 Neuroimage 
 49 
 1943 
 1948 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.02.047 
 19285144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pastalkova 
 E 
 
 
 Itskov 
 V 
 
 
 Amarasingham 
 A 
 
 
 Buzsáki 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 Internally generated cell assembly sequences in the rat
hippocampus 
 Science 
 321 
 1322 
 1327 
 10.1126/science.1159775 
 18772431 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paz 
 R 
 
 
 Gelbard-Sagiv 
 H 
 
 
 Mukamel 
 R 
 
 
 Harel 
 M 
 
 
 Malach 
 R 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 2010 
 A neural substrate in the human hippocampus for linking
successive events 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 107 
 6046 
 6051 
 10.1073/pnas.0910834107 
 20231430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Polyn 
 SM 
 
 
 Natu 
 VS 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 2005 
 Category-specific cortical activity precedes retrieval during
memory search 
 Science 
 310 
 1963 
 1966 
 10.1126/science.1117645 
 16373577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quiroga 
 RQ 
 
 
 Kreiman 
 G 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 2008 
 Sparse but not “Grandmother-cell” coding in the
medial temporal lobe 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 12 
 87 
 91 
 10.1016/j.tics.2007.12.003 
 18262826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quiroga 
 RQ 
 
 
 Reddy 
 L 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 2007 
 Decoding visual inputs from multiple neurons in the human
temporal lobe 
 J Neurophysiol 
 98 
 1997 
 2007 
 10.1152/jn.00125.2007 
 17671106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quiroga 
 RQ 
 
 
 Reddy 
 L 
 
 
 Kreiman 
 G 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 2005 
 Invariant visual representation by single neurons in the human
brain 
 Nature 
 435 
 1102 
 1107 
 10.1038/nature03687 
 15973409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ratcliff 
 R 
 
 
 1978 
 A theory of memory retrieval 
 Psychol Rev 
 85 
 59 
 108 
 10.1037/0033-295X.85.2.59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ratcliff 
 R 
 
 
 Rouder 
 JN 
 
 
 1998 
 Modeling response times for two-choice decisions 
 Psychol Sci 
 9 
 347 
 356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a
cognitive task 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 752 
 763 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ritchey 
 M 
 
 
 Wing 
 EA 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural Similarity Between Encoding and Retrieval is Related to
Memory Via Hippocampal Interactions 
 Cereb Cortex 
 23 
 2818 
 2828 
 10.1093/cercor/bhs258 
 22967731 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rolls 
 ET 
 
 
 2013 
 The mechanisms for pattern completion and pattern separation in
the hippocampus 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 7 
 74 
 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00074 
 24198767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rutishauser 
 U 
 
 
 Ye 
 S 
 
 
 Koroma 
 M 
 
 
 Tudusciuc 
 O 
 
 
 Ross 
 IB 
 
 
 Chung 
 JM 
 
 
 Mamelak 
 AN 
 
 
 2015 
 Representation of retrieval confidence by single neurons in the
human medial temporal lobe 
 Nat Neurosci 
 1 
 12 
 10.1038/nn.4041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schapiro 
 AC 
 
 
 Kustner 
 LV 
 
 
 Turk-Browne 
 NB 
 
 
 2012 
 Shaping of object representations in the human medial temporal
lobe based on temporal regularities 
 Curr Biol 
 22 
 1622 
 1627 
 10.1016/j.cub.2012.06.056 
 22885059 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlichting 
 ML 
 
 
 Mumford 
 JA 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2015 
 Learning-related representational changes reveal dissociable
integration and separation signatures in the hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex 
 Nat Commun 
 6 
 8151 
 10.1038/ncomms9151 
 26303198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlichting 
 ML 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2014 
 Memory reactivation during rest supports upcoming learning of
related content 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 111 
 15845 
 15850 
 10.1073/pnas.1404396111 
 25331890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 AC 
 
 
 Carr 
 MF 
 
 
 Karlsson 
 MP 
 
 
 Frank 
 LM 
 
 
 2013 
 Hippocampal SWR Activity Predicts Correct Decisions during the
Initial Learning of an Alternation Task 
 Neuron 
 77 
 1163 
 1173 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.027 
 23522050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Drobnjak 
 I 
 
 
 Flitney 
 DE 
 
 
 Niazy 
 RK 
 
 
 Saunders 
 J 
 
 
 Vickers 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
implementation as FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 Suppl 1 
 S208 
 19 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051 
 15501092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 2004 
 Memory systems of the brain: A brief history and current
perspective 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 82 
 171 
 177 
 10.1016/j.nlm.2004.06.005 
 15464402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staresina 
 BP 
 
 
 Cooper 
 E 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 2013 
 Reversible Information Flow across the Medial Temporal Lobe: The
Hippocampus Links Cortical Modules during Memory Retrieval 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 14184 
 14192 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1987-13.2013 
 23986252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staresina 
 BP 
 
 
 Henson 
 RNA 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Alink 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Episodic reinstatement in the medial temporal
lobe 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 18150 
 6 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4156-12.2012 
 23238729 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stokes 
 J 
 
 
 Kyle 
 C 
 
 
 Ekstrom 
 AD 
 
 
 2015 
 Complementary Roles of Human Hippocampal Subfields in
Differentiation and Integration of Spatial Context 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 27 
 546 
 559 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00736 
 25269116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 KZ 
 
 
 Pevzner 
 A 
 
 
 Hamidi 
 AB 
 
 
 Nakazawa 
 Y 
 
 
 Graham 
 J 
 
 
 Wiltgen 
 BJ 
 
 
 2014 
 Cortical Representations Are Reinstated by the Hippocampus during
Memory Retrieval 
 Neuron 
 84 
 347 
 354 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.037 
 25308331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 PP 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2015 
 Cortical reinstatement and the confidence and accuracy of source
memory 
 Neuroimage 
 109 
 118 
 129 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.003 
 25583615 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Walther 
 DB 
 
 
 Caddigan 
 E 
 
 
 Fei-Fei 
 L 
 
 
 Beck 
 DM 
 
 
 2009 
 Natural scene categories revealed in distributed patterns of
activity in the human brain 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 10573 
 10581 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0559-09.2009 
 19710310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waydo 
 S 
 
 
 Kraskov 
 A 
 
 
 Quian Quiroga 
 R 
 
 
 Fried 
 I 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 2006 
 Sparse representation in the human medial temporal
lobe 
 J Neurosci 
 26 
 10232 
 10234 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2101-06.2006 
 17021178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiecki 
 TV 
 
 
 Sofer 
 I 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 2013 
 HDDM: Hierarchical Bayesian estimation of the Drift-Diffusion
Model in Python 
 Front Neuroinform 
 7 
 14 
 10.3389/fninf.2013.00014 
 23935581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wimber 
 M 
 
 
 Alink 
 A 
 
 
 Charest 
 I 
 
 
 Kriegeskorte 
 N 
 
 
 Anderson 
 MC 
 
 
 2015 
 Retrieval Induces Adaptive Forgetting of Competing Memories via
Cortical Pattern Suppression 
 Nat Publ Gr 
 18 
 582 
 589 
 10.1038/nn.3973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wing 
 EA 
 
 
 Ritchey 
 M 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2015 
 Reinstatement of Individual Past Events Revealed by the
Similarity of Distributed Activation Patterns during Encoding and
Retrieval 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 27 
 679 
 691 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00740 
 25313659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winkler 
 AM 
 
 
 Ridgway 
 GR 
 
 
 Webster 
 MA 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 2014 
 Permutation inference for the general linear
model 
 Neuroimage 
 92 
 381 
 397 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.01.060 
 24530839 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xue 
 G 
 
 
 Dong 
 Q 
 
 
 Chen 
 C 
 
 
 Lu 
 Z 
 
 
 Mumford 
 JA 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 2010 
 Greater neural pattern similarity across repetitions is
associated with better memory 
 Science 
 330 
 97 
 101 
 10.1126/science.1193125 
 20829453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zeithamova 
 D 
 
 
 Dominick 
 AL 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2012 
 Hippocampal and Ventral Medial Prefrontal Activation during
Retrieval-Mediated Learning Supports Novel Inference 
 Neuron 
 75 
 168 
 179 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.05.010 
 22794270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic of experimental task and depiction of brain regions of interest (ROIs).
 (A)  Eight famous face and eight famous place images were used
as stimuli in the experiment.  (B)  Analyses were conducted in MTL
subregions: PHC (light blue), PRC (yellow), and the hippocampus (red).
 (C)  The experiment consisted of three phases. In the
pre-exposure phase, participants viewed images of faces, places, objects, and
fixation points in isolation. During the pair learning phase, participants
learned to criterion eighty paired associates consisting of a common real-world
object and either a famous face or place through repetitions of first studying
all pairs followed 3AFC tests on associate memory. Finally, participants were
tested on each of the eighty pairs during a delayed match-to-memory (DMTM) test.
Each test trial consisted of: an object cue (1s), a delay period (9s), a probe
face or place (1s) followed by an inter-trial interval (5–11s, mean
7.5s). The probe item was either the correct paired associate (a match) or a
same-category foil drawn from another pair (a mismatch). Participants indicated
match or mismatch status with a button response. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Behavioral performance in the delayed match-to-memory (DMTM) test. Average
probability correct (left plot) and median correct response times (right plot)
are depicted for face and place retrieval trials where the probe was either a
match (dark) or mismatch (light). Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals of the mean. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Schematic of category-level reinstatement decoding analysis and results in PHC
and PRC.  (A)  For each ROI, a linear SVM pattern classifier was
first trained on activation patterns acquired during the pre-exposure phase. The
classifier was trained to discriminate patterns associated with faces and places
and then applied to the data acquired during the delay period of the DMTM
trials. Probability estimates for the face and place labels were extracted from
the SVM classifier and used to index the amount of classifier evidence for the
two categories. Finally, the evidence was relabeled as correct versus incorrect
category according to the retrieval category of the trial (in the depicted
example, scene would be the correct category).  (B) 
Category-specific reinstatement was observed in MTL cortex, with PRC showing
significantly more face than place evidence during face retrieval and PHC
showing significantly more place than face evidence during place retrieval. The
hippocampus showed no evidence for category reinstatement (see Methods). Error
bars represent 95% high density intervals of the paired BEST comparisons
between correct and incorrect category classifier evidence. Significant paired
differences ( p  < 0.05) are noted with asterisks
(*). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Schematic of item reinstatement neural pattern similarity analyses and results
for each of the ROIs.  (A)  Within each ROI (perirhinal cortex is
depicted in the figure and inset), the pattern of neural activation was
extracted for every trial, here represented as a matrix grid.  (B) 
Item-level reinstatement was measured by calculating the similarity between
activation patterns during DMTM trials for specific faces and places and
activation patterns of viewing the same face or place during the pre-exposure
phase ( r self ) relative to activation patterns of
viewing other within-category items ( r category ).
 (C)  Item reinstatement similarity analysis results. For each
ROI, self (darker bars) versus category (lighter bars) similarity is plotted for
face (blue) and place (green) retrieval trials. Both hippocampus and PRC showed
significant differences across hemispheres, thus left and right ROIs within
these regions were considered separately. Right hippocampus and left PRC showed
item-level reinstatement for place and face retrieval, respectively. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals of the means. Asterisks (*)
note significant paired comparisons of self greater than category similarity
corrected for false discovery rate ( α  =
0.05). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Schematic of the functional connectivity analysis and the results for right
hippocampus and left PRC.  (A)  Trial-by-trial average activation was
extracted from the three MTL ROIs (hippocampus is shown in red on the right) and
regions within occipito-temporal cortex (OTC) that exhibited item-reinstatement
signatures exclusively for faces or places (face regions shown in dark gray,
place regions in white; see  Table 1  for a
list of all OTC item reinstatement regions).  (B)  Functional
connectivity between the three MTL ROIs and OTC reinstatement regions was
assessed with robust regression for face and place retrieval trials separately.
In the depicted example, average activation within the right hippocampus (red
line) correlates more with average activation in OTC place reinstatement regions
(dotted line) during place (top plot) than face retrieval trials (bottom plot).
 (C)  Results for each MTL ROI are plotted in separate graphs
that depict average connectivity to OTC regions exhibiting face (darker colors)
and place (lighter colors) reinstatement during face (blue) and place (green)
retrieval trials. Error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals of
the interaction between retrieval type and OTC region. Significant interactions
are noted with a tensor symbol, and significant pairwise BEST comparisons with
an asterisk. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Schematic of the drift diffusion modeling (DDM) analysis and the results for
right hippocampus, right CA 1 , and left PRC.  (A)  An
item-level reinstatement index was calculated on a trial-by-trial basis by
taking the difference between the self and category similarity on each trial
(r s -r c ). This trial-by-trial item reinstatement index
was then entered in a DDM analysis of response choices and times to the probe
stimulus. Specifically, the item reinstatement index was modeled as a linear
effect on the drift rate (v) parameter of the DDM, thereby influencing the rate
of evidence accumulation. For example, the top trial depicts a situation where
reinstatement of the place associated with the boot, Taj Mahal, is high. This
results in a faster accumulation of evidence and a shorter response time. When
item reinstatement is low, as depicted in the bottom trial, evidence accumulates
gradually and the response time is longer.  (B)  The plotted
distributions represent the Bayesian posterior densities of the interaction of
drift rate and item reinstatement for right hippocampus (left), right
CA 1  (middle) and left PRC (right). Higher item reinstatement in
right hippocampus and CA 1  increased drift rates on place match trials
(solid green), but had no effect on place mismatch trials (dotted green). Item
reinstatement in left PRC showed a main effect of facilitation on drift rates
for both match and mismatch face trials (blue lines). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Item reinstatement regions in occipito-temporal cortices. Regions were identified
from the paired comparison of face versus place reinstatement with a voxelwise
threshold of  p  = 0.01 and cluster extent threshold of
 p  = 0.05 (extent greater than 29 voxels). In the
table, clusters that survived correction are described by their corresponding
region (region), the number of voxels in the cluster (voxels), the
 t  value of the peak voxel in the cluster
( t  value), and the location of the peak voxel in MNI
coordinates (location). 
 
 
 
 
 region 
 voxels 
 t  value 
 location (x, y, z) 
 
 
 
 
 
 face regions 
 
 
 
  left lingual gyrus 
 87 
 3.49 
 −24, −54, −2 
 
 
  right middle temporal 
 49 
 2.84 
 62, −8, −16 
 
 
  left temporal pole 
 49 
 3.24 
 −50, 6, −40 
 
 
 
 scene
regions 
 
 
 
  left lateral occipital 
 727 
 5.44 
 −16, −94, 8 
 
 
  right lateral occipital 
 566 
 3.77 
 36, −76, 6 
 
 
 
 89 
 3.6 
 44, −80, −10 
 
 
  left ventral temporal 
 143 
 3.31 
 −44, −22, −18 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Drift diffusion model (DDM) results. Separate models that included trial-by-trial
effects of item reinstatement from the three regions that showed significant
item reinstatement in the pattern similarity analysis (right hippocampus and
left PRC) on the three core DDM parameters (drift rate  v ,
threshold  a , and nondecision time  t ) were fit
and compared to baseline models with no item reinstatement effects (top row). In
the table, models are labeled according to their reinstatement-parameter
relationship (e.g., the  v  ~ r hipp  model included an
effect of hippocampal item reinstatement on drift rate  v ).
Behavior from face (left two columns) and place (right two columns) retrieval
conditions were fit in separate models. Rows in bold text note item
reinstatement models with a significantly better account of the behavior data
than the corresponding baseline models. 
 
 
 
 
 face retrieval trials 
 DIC 
 place retrieval trials 
 DIC 
 
 
 
 
 
 baseline model 
 
 
 −843.09 
 
 
 baseline model 
 
 
 −400.12 
 
 
 
 v  ~ r hipp 
 −842.47 
 
 v  ~
r hipp 
 
 
 −406.32 
 
 
 
 a  ~ r hipp 
 −844.74 
 a  ~ r hipp 
 −387.15 
 
 
 t  ~ r hipp 
 −830.79 
 t  ~ r hipp 
 −399.13 
 
 
 
 v  ~
r PRC 
 
 
 −853.02 
 
 v  ~ r PRC 
 −393.14 
 
 
 a  ~ r PRC 
 −844.25 
 a  ~ r PRC 
 −400.79 
 
 
 t  ~ r PRC 
 −848.36 
 t  ~ r PRC 
 −399.93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Neural pattern similarity reveals item-specific rather than category
neural coding 
 
 
 Item-specific memories are reinstated in the hippocampus and PRC
during retrieval 
 
 
 Hippocampus functionally coupled with occipito-temporal cortex
during retrieval 
 
 
 The fidelity of item reinstatement predicts subsequent memory-based
decisions 
 
 
 
 
