
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101541838 
 38415 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Developmental cognitive neuroscience 
 
 1878-9293 
 1878-9307 
 
 
 26746624 
 4834229 
 10.1016/j.dcn.2015.11.003 
 NIHMS748865 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Functional connectivity of the amygdala and subgenual cingulate
during cognitive reappraisal of emotions in children with MDD history is
associated with rumination 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 Eric R. 
 
 Ph.D 
 murphye@wustl.edu 
 a 
 * 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 Deanna M. 
 
 Ph.D 
 a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
 
 
 
 Pagliaccio 
 David 
 
 b 
 c 
 
 
 
 Luby 
 Joan L. 
 
 M.D. 
 a 
 
 
 
 Belden 
 Andy C. 
 
 Ph.D 
 a 
 
 
 a Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in St.
Louis, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA 
 b The Program in Neuroscience, Washington University in St.
Louis, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA 
 c Department of Psychology, Washington University in St.
Louis, One Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO, 63130, USA 
 d Department of Radiology, Washington University in St.
Louis, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA 
 
 Phone: 1 314-747-0001, fax: 1 314 286 2732 
 
 
 6 
 1 
 2016 
 
 
 28 
 11 
 2015 
 
 
 4 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 4 
 2017 
 
 18 
 89 
 100 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is characterized by poor emotion
regulation. Rumination, a maladaptive strategy for dealing with negative
emotions, is common in MDD, and is associated with impaired inhibition and
cognitive inflexibility that may contribute to impaired emotion regulation
abilities. However, it is unclear whether rumination is differently associated
with emotion regulation in individuals with MDD history (MDD-ever) and healthy
individuals. In this study, children (8–15 years old) performed a
cognitive reappraisal task in which they attempted to decrease their emotional
response to sad images during fMRI scanning. Functional connectivity (FC)
between both the amygdala and subgenual anterior cingulate (sACC) increased with
cortical control regions during reappraisal as rumination increased in MDD-ever,
while connectivity between those regions decreased during reappraisal as
rumination increased in healthy controls. As the role of cortical control
regions is to down-regulate activity of emotion processing regions during
reappraisal, this suggests that rumination in MDD-ever, but not controls, is
associated with inefficient regulation. This finding suggests that rumination
may be particularly associated with poor emotion regulation in MDD-ever, and may
also indicate qualitative group differences in whether rumination is
maladaptive. These differences in rumination may provide important insight into
depressive risk and potential avenues for treatment. 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity 
 Rumination 
 Cognitive reappraisal 
 Amygdala 
 Subgenual cingulate 
 
 
 
 
 1. Background 
 A growing body of literature suggests that Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is
associated with impaired cognitive control processes necessary for effective emotion
regulation [ 1 ]. These impairments are often
coupled with ineffective or maladaptive regulation strategies that may exacerbate
reactivity to, and the impact of, negative or distressing emotions [ 2 ]. Rumination, or brooding, is one such
maladaptive regulation strategy that involves recurring thoughts about self-relevant
negative emotional states or situations [ 3 ].
Rumination has been associated with MDD, including the development, severity, and
chronicity of depressive episodes [ 4 ], [ 5 ]. It has been hypothesized that rumination in
MDD stems from deficits in cognitive control functions such as inhibition [ 6 ] and disengagement [ 7 ], leading to excessive processing and preoccupation with
self-relevant negative emotion [ 8 ]. 
 The period of late childhood and early adolescence is one in which the
incidence of MDD increases [ 9 ], and
corresponds with significant development of cognitive emotional regulation
strategies, which begin to supplant more rudimentary behavioral strategies (e.g.
covering ears) from middle childhood [ 10 ]–[ 12 ]. This period
also marks increased use of cognitive emotion regulation strategies, which increase
over a protracted period, with even late adolescents using fewer strategies than
adults [ 13 ], though patterns of cognitive
strategy use are similar between late childhood and early adolescence [ 12 ]. However, use of rumination as a regulation
strategy also peaks in early adolescence, with higher rates than in late childhood
[ 14 ], which then decrease from early- to
mid-adolescence [ 15 ]. Rumination and
depression are more closely associated in adolescents compared to younger children
[ 16 ]. It has been suggested that
rumination may contribute to psychopathology by interfering with the use of
effective self-regulation techniques [ 17 ],
though the mechanism by which this occurs is unclear. Thus, it is important to
understand the association between maladaptive regulation strategies such as
rumination and ineffective use of adaptive regulation strategies in this critical
developmental period. 
 In contrast to rumination, cognitive reappraisal is considered to be an
adaptive emotion regulation strategy shown to effectively minimize the excessive
experience of negative emotions [ 18 ].
Cognitive reappraisal is the reinterpretation of the meaning of affective stimuli or
events in a way that may change the magnitude and valence of affective responses.
Research has shown that reappraisal modulates the emotional experience of a negative
event or stimulus [ 18 ], and that habitual use
of reappraisal is associated with improved well being, interpersonal functioning,
and overall greater positive emotion [ 19 ].
Neurally, studies have shown that use of cognitive reappraisal is associated with
increased activity of prefrontal and parietal cognitive control regions and semantic
and perceptual regions of the lateral temporal cortex, as well as with modulation of
amygdala activity [ 20 ]. Importantly, this
pattern has been shown in healthy school aged children [ 21 ] as well as in adults [ 22 ], [ 23 ]. 
 The neuroimaging literature on reappraisal indicates less effective
modulation of emotion processing regions, such as the amygdala, by prefrontal
control regions in adult MDD. One study found greater activation of right amygdala,
insula, temporal pole, and dorsal cingulate in MDD adults compared to controls
during reappraisal [ 24 ]. A study of
medication-free MDD adults showed increased activation of right lateral middle
frontal gyrus during a “reappraise” condition compared to an
“attend” condition while controls showed the opposite pattern [ 25 ]. A separate study of MDD adults found a
different pattern in which controls showed greater dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) activation and greater down-regulation of amygdala activity than MDD adults
during reappraisal [ 26 ]. Additionally, during
negative emotion reappraisal, MDD adults fail to reduce activity in a number of
regions in the default mode network (DMN), including ventromedial prefrontal cortex
and anterior cingulate cortex, that show reduced activity in controls [ 27 ]. As the DMN is associated with
self-referential thought [ 28 ], this may
indicate difficulty in regulating self-referential activity in the context of
negative emotions. In children with MDD history (many of whom overlapped with the
current sample), deficits in emotion regulation abilities were associated with
decreased activity of left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and inferior temporal sulcus
(ITS) during reappraisal, while increased MDD severity was associated with increased
amygdala activation during passive viewing of sad images [ 29 ]. Together, these findings suggest that MDD is characterized
by increased activation of emotional reactivity regions during reappraisal of
negative emotions, and that this reactivity may be associated with abnormal function
of prefrontal control regions (whether hyper- or hypoactive), leading to deficient
emotional regulation. 
 Evidence that further clarifies the deficient regulation of emotional
reactivity by prefrontal control regions in MDD comes from studies of task-based
functional connectivity (FC). Rather than examining which regions are more active in
one task than another, FC examines the correlation of activity between brain regions
over time (either during tasks or during rest), with the assumption that strong
correlations across time are indicative of communication between those regions in
the performance of some function. Task-based FC measures, such as
psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses [ 30 ], examine how FC between regions changes across different
psychological task states. In the case of emotion regulation, this technique can
demonstrate how the functional relationship between response and regulation regions
changes between passive and effortful regulation states. If, during regulation,
increased prefrontal activation is associated with decreased amygdala activation,
this negative correlation may indicate prefrontal regulation of amygdala activity
– an interpretation that is directly supported if task-based FC data shows
that this pattern is more pronounced during regulation trials than passive viewing
trials. 
 Task-based FC studies of emotion regulation in MDD reveal a pattern of
altered regulation of bottom-up processing regions, particularly the amygdala. One
study found that during emotional reappraisal, adults with MDD showed a positive
correlation between amygdala and VMPFC activity during reappraisal while controls
showed the more typical negative correlation [ 25 ]. In another study, adolescents with MDD showed more positive
connectivity between the right amygdala and left MFG, hippocampus, posterior
cingulate, and sACC than controls during emotional reappraisal. However, during
maintenance of a negative emotion (no down-regulation necessary), control subjects
showed more positive FC between amygdala and bilateral insula and right prefrontal
regions than MDD [ 31 ]. Further, another study
found that healthy adults showed strong coupling between the amygdala and right
DLPFC during reappraisal, such that increased DLPFC activation was associated with
decreased amygdala activation during reappraisal. In contrast, medicated MDD
patients showed reduced coupling between those regions, with less DLPFC activation
and less of a decrease in amygdala activity during reappraisal [ 26 ]. Together, these task-based FC studies
suggest that the negative correlation between prefrontal and amygdala activation
that normally accompanies effective emotion regulation is diminished in MDD. 
 While the above literature suggests the existence of differences between MDD
and healthy groups in neural correlates of reappraisal, understanding individual
differences in emotion regulation within MDD may further elucidate the factors
underlying impaired reappraisal processes in this illness. In other words, although
on average individuals with MDD are more likely to use maladaptive emotion
regulation strategies such as rumination, there is important variation across
individuals with MDD. As described above, brooding rumination is associated with
attentional inflexibility [ 32 ] and impaired
emotional disengagement [ 33 ] – both
key aspects of reappraisal. In healthy adults, greater use of brooding rumination
has been associated with increased DLPFC activity during emotional disengagement,
consistent with the hypothesis that increased attentional control may be required
for disengagement in high ruminators [ 33 ]. In
non-emotional conflict monitoring tasks, rumination in MDD adults has been
associated with decreased amplitude of the N2 ERP component associated with
recruiting cognitive control [ 34 ]. Further,
induced brooding rumination in MDD adults is associated with greater activation in
DLPFC, orbitofrontal cortex, and subgenual anterior cingulate (sACC) than in
controls [ 35 ], as rumination may make emotion
regulation more difficult. The sACC is associated with self-referential thinking
[ 36 ] and is considered part of the
default-mode network. It is more active in the absence of cognitive tasks [ 37 ], when individuals are more likely to focus
on autobiographical thoughts [ 38 ], but is
down-regulated during cognitive tasks. Excessive sACC activity has been associated
with symptom severity in MDD [ 39 ], while deep
brain stimulation inhibiting sACC activity in treatment-resistant MDD can lead to
remission of depression [ 40 ]. Thus, the
association of increased DLPFC and sACC activation with rumination in MDD suggests
that trait measures of rumination may be particularly closely associated with
altered regulation of emotion in MDD. 
 While brooding rumination may be associated with atypical emotion regulation
in MDD, It has been suggested that rumination may take a more adaptive form in
healthy non-depressed individuals. In particular “reflective
pondering” - a type of rumination with an emphasis on problem solving and
addressing or alleviating negative emotions – is more prevalent than
brooding rumination in healthy individuals [ 41 ]. Further, unlike brooding rumination, it is not associated with
depressive measures in healthy individuals [ 41 ]. In contrast, in MDD brooding rumination is more prevalent than
reflective pondering [ 41 ] and both types of
rumination are associated with increased depression [ 37 ][ 38 ], though reflective
pondering is associated with decreases in depressive symptoms at follow-up [ 42 ]. If reflective pondering is indeed adaptive
in healthy subjects, it is possible that greater use of this form of rumination in
the absence of brooding rumination may be associated with more effective emotion
regulation in healthy subjects. As the use of brooding rumination appears to
decrease following peak use in late childhood and early adolescence [ 14 ]–[ 16 ], it is possible that healthy development in this period involves
decreasing ruminative thought and/or shifting to a more adaptive reflective style of
rumination. In this context, the continued use of brooding rumination may contribute
to MDD risk. 
 It is important to note that prefrontal activity has regularly been
associated with  both  effective emotion regulation as well as
rumination, both of which involve reflecting upon and interpreting emotional
content. As such, simply measuring activity of prefrontal regions during a
reappraisal task may provide incomplete evidence as to whether that activity
represents effective emotional regulation. Rather, a stronger indicator of effective
regulation is whether such increased prefrontal activity is associated with
decreased activity of regions associated with reactivity to emotional stimuli. PPI
is an ideal method to evaluate this question, as it measures changes in the strength
and direction of functional connectivity across task states, indicating, for
example, whether reappraisal leads to stronger negative connectivity between
prefrontal cortex and amygdala than is seen during passive viewing of negative
stimuli. The current study used PPI functional connectivity analyses to specifically
evaluate how FC of the amygdala and of the sACC change between passively viewing and
reappraising sad images, and how differences in rumination influences those changes
in children with a history of MDD (MDD-ever) and healthy control (HC) children. If
rumination is indicative of ineffective emotion regulation in MDD-ever, individuals
with greater tendency to ruminate should show less moderation of amygdala activity
during reappraisal. As rumination is also associated with increased activation of
prefrontal regions, it may also be associated with increased FC between amygdala and
frontal regions in MDD-ever, indicating inefficient or ineffective control by those
regions. We further hypothesized that rumination would be associated with increased
FC of the sACC during reappraisal in MDD-ever, as ineffective regulation of the sACC
could lead to increased attention to the effort to reappraise, including
self-referential attention to one’s emotional response [ 35 ]. For control subjects, we hypothesized that
to the extent that this group endorsed rumination, these measures might index
reflective pondering, and would thus be associated with greater FC anti-correlations
between amygdala and prefrontal control regions during reappraisal, as indicative of
effective regulation. 
 
 
 1. Methods 
 
 1.1. Participants 
 Forty-six children between 8 and 15 years old participated in the
current imaging study after providing consent according to the guidelines of the
Washington University School of Medicine Institutional Review Board. Child
participants and their primary caregivers were a sub-sample of participants
enrolled in a larger longitudinal study examining the course of preschool-onset
depression and brain development. Subjects in the current study were a subset of
a larger group that participated in the reappraisal fMRI study [ 29 ] that met strict motion criteria
necessary for functional connectivity analysis. There were nineteen children
with a history of clinically diagnosed major depressive disorder diagnosis
(MDD-ever), as well as recent significant levels of depression, defined as
either MDD diagnosis or Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI) score that
met a clinical threshold for depression (total score ≥ 65) within 24
months of the scan (10 male; mean age: 12.27 (1.14)). Twenty-seven
psychiatrically healthy children (13 male; mean age: 11.33 (1.95)) were also
included in the current analyses.  Table 1 
summarizes demographic and clinical data for healthy and MDD groups. An
additional 36 children were scanned, but were excluded from the current analysis
for one or more of the following: excessive movement during fMRI (n=3), errors
in data collection or processing (n=8), child unwilling to start or finish the
fMRI protocol (n=4), child fell asleep during the fMRI (n=3), child did not meet
MDD threshold within 24 months of scan but met criteria at an earlier time in
development (n=8), child had other psychiatric diagnosis but not MDD (n=9),
extreme outlier values of FC data (n=1). Non-included subjects did not differ
significantly (p < .05) from children with useable fMRI data in relation
to their age at scan, IQ, gender, ethnicity, or MDD history (healthy vs MDD
ever). 
 
 
 1.1. Materials 
 The Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (CERQ) is a parent-report
and child self-report measure that assesses the child’s cognitive
emotion regulation strategies typically used after a negative event [ 12 ]. Only the self-report of the child
version (CERQ-k) was examined here. Subjects indicate the frequency with which
they use a given reappraisal strategy on a 5 point Likert scale [1: (almost)
never; 5: (almost) always]. The questionnaire divides regulation strategies into
nine factors, with four questions contributing to each factor. The current study
focused on the Rumination subscale, given hypotheses about the relationship
between rumination and alterations in connectivity outlined above [ 7 ], [ 35 ]. 
 
 
 Task Design 
 Using a previously validated task [ 21 ], children were instructed to decrease their experience of
negative emotions in response to viewing sad images using positive cognitive
reappraisal strategies. The trial structure was similar to investigations of
cognitive reappraisal conducted with older children and adults (Ochsner et al.,
2004; Perlman et al., 2012; Perlman and Pelphrey, 2011; Pitskel et al., 2011a;
Wager et al., 2008), modified for use with school-age children. As shown in
 Supplemental Fig.
1 , at the start of each trial, a neutral or sad photo was presented for a
4-second interval. Next an instruction appeared below the photo,
‘VIEW’ appeared to indicate non-regulation trials,
‘MAKE-POSITIVE’ appeared to indicate regulation trials
(regulation trials only occurred for sad photos). The instruction and photo
remained on the screen together for 4 seconds, after which the photo disappeared
while the instruction remained onscreen for an additional 4 seconds. Following
each picture, children were prompted to answer the question ‘How do you
feel?’. Children had 4 seconds to rate their negative affect, on a scale
from 1 to 4. Responses were made on a 4-button box. The continuation of
reappraisal instructions following the presentation of the image allows for
modeling of reappraisal both during and after the experience of a social
stimulus – a key aspect of the design, as rumination is characterized by
impaired disengagement from thoughts about negative stimuli even after the
experience has ended. This extended period of reappraisal and self-evaluation of
emotional state increases the likelihood of uncovering associations between
reappraisal and rumination. After the affect rating period, the word
‘RELAX’ appeared on the screen for 4 to 8 seconds
(pseudo-randomly determined). The combinations of neutral and sad photos with
non-regulate or regulate instructions resulted in 3 conditions: View Neutral
(non-emotional), View Sad (sadness inducing but no reappraisal), and Reappraise
(instructed to engage in reappraisal while viewing sad photo). 
 Stimuli were taken from the International Affective Picture System
(Bradley et al., 2001; Bradley et al., 2008), supplemented with an in-house set
of images selected to be appropriate for viewing by children (e.g., photos of
other children crying). IAPS stimuli have been rated for valence (1 to 9;
extremely negative to extremely positive) and arousal (1 to 9; no arousal to
extreme arousal). The images used had valence scores less than 4 and arousal
scores greater than 4. We used 20 neutral and 40 sad pictures during the fMRI
task. 
 Each run presented 12 trials divided equally among view neutral (4 per
run), view sad (4 per run), and reappraise sad (4 per run). Trial orders were
pseudo-randomized to allow for estimates of BOLD responses to each trial type.
Stimuli used for the “View Sad” versus
“Reappraise” conditions were counterbalanced so that stimuli
were not confounded with condition. In its entirety, the reappraisal task
included 5 runs of 12 trials each (60 trials total, 20 in each condition). Each
trial lasted 16 seconds (followed by a 4–8 second jitter) and each run
lasted approximately 4 minutes and 40 seconds. 
 
 
 1.1. Procedure 
 A comprehensive pre-scan training procedure was used to assure that
children understood the fMRI reappraisal task. Reappraisal training details are
identical to those in Belden et al. (2014), and are provided in the  Supplementary
Material . 
 
 
 1.1. Behavioral Data Analysis 
 To evaluate whether groups differed in whether rumination scores were
associated with brooding or reflective pondering (as the CERQ rumination scale
does not differentiate these measures), rumination scores for each group were
correlated with CERQ subscores associated with reappraisal, including Positive
Reappraisal, Positive Refocusing, Refocusing on Planning, and Putting Into
Perspective. Further, a multiple regression was run to determine whether CDI
scores predicted rumination, and whether prediction differed by group. To
evaluate reappraisal success during the fMRI task, behavioral reports of
emotional state during View Sad and Reappraise conditions were compared between
groups using a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test for
diagnostic group differences. Correlations between rumination scores and
emotional state ratings as well as age were also assessed across and within
diagnostic group. 
 
 
 1.1. fMRI Data Acquisition and Preprocessing 
 Functional images were collected with a 12-channel head coil in runs
using an asymmetric spin-echo echo-planar sequence sensitive to BOLD contrast
(T2*) (TR=2000ms, TE=27ms, FOV=256mm, flip=90°). During each functional
run, sets of 32 contiguous axial images with isotropic voxels
(3×3×3mm) were acquired parallel to the anterior-posterior
commissure plane. Further details on structural image acquisition parameters can
be found in  Supplemental
Material . 
 fMRI data was reconstructed into images and normalized across runs by
scaling whole-brain signal intensity to a fixed value and removing the linear
slope on a voxel-by-voxel basis to counteract effects of drift. The MR data was
aligned to correct for head motion using rigid-body rotation and translation
correction algorithms. These algorithms provided estimated movement parameters
that allowed us to quantitatively evaluate movement differences across children.
We also quantitatively compared signal-to-noise ratios (SNR=mean/variance). All
MR data (structural and functional) was registered to a common space optimized
for children’s heads (Talairach Space) using 12 parameter linear
(affine) transformations of the participant’s average MP-RAGE structural
images to a target image in Talairach atlas space. Previous research has shown
that this procedure can be validly applied to the brains of children in this age
range (e.g. (Burgund et al., 2002; Kang et al., 2003) and our average image in
Talairach space was optimized for this age range. Frames with excessive movement
were identified and excluded from further analysis, particularly those where the
sum frame-wise displacement across all 6 rigid body movement correction
parameters exceeded 0.9 mm, following a modified procedure suggested by (Siegel
et al., 2013). Subjects with more than 20% of frames removed by this
procedure were not included in current analyses (N=3). 
 
 
 1.1. PPI Construction and Statistical Analysis 
 To assess the relationship between rumination and functional
connectivity of reappraisal, PPI analyses were performed. In this method,
correlations of activity in an  a priori  region of interest and
voxels in the rest of the brain are compared between psychological task states
to assess task-related changes in functional connectivity. The magnitude of a
PPI value therefore indicates the difference in functional connectivity between
a given voxel and the seed region in the two task states. 
 Seed regions for PPI analysis were created for left and right amygdala,
and subgenual anterior cingulate. To create each seed region, automated
parcellations of each region of interest (from cortical parcellations using the
Destrieux atlas [ 43 ] for sACC and the
FreeSurfer subcortical parcellations for amygdala) were created from structural
T1 images of 116 subjects from a larger subject pool using FreeSurfer v4.5.0
software. These parcellated regions were then summed across the 116 subjects and
thresholded to only include voxels within the individual parcellations of 25 or
more subjects at a cluster threshold of at least 10 voxels ( Fig. 1 ). 
 For each subject, the first eigenvariate time series of activity was
extracted for all of the voxels in each seed region, concatenated across all
runs that met motion criteria. A General Linear Model (GLM), in which each event
type (View Neutral, View Sad, Reappraise; jittered between-task rest periods
were not explicitly modeled) was modeled as a 12 second task block, with onsets
corresponding to the appearance of the specific task instructions (View or Make
Positive) following the initial 4 seconds of passive viewing (see  Supplemental Fig. 1 ).
This GLM was then convolved with a canonical HRF function (SPM canonical model).
A design matrix was then created in which three regressors represented the seed
region timecourse, the HRF-convolved task model, and an interaction term between
the first two regressors: the PPI regressor. The PPI regressor was then used as
a template to interrogate patterns of similar task-related activity across the
brain. 
 Whole-brain multiple regression analyses were run with CERQ rumination
scores, diagnostic group, and their interaction as predictors of voxel-wise PPI
with each seed, using a PPI contrast of Reappraise > View Sad. All
regression analyses were thresholded at z>2.5, 35 contiguous voxels,
yielding a significance level of  P <0.05, corrected for
multiple comparisons based on a Monte Carlo simulation of random noise
distribution. To determine whether subject age influenced regression results,
regression analyses were run with and without subject age included as a
covariate of no interest. Regions showing a significant group ×
rumination interaction were transformed to ROIs. Reappraise > View Sad
PPI values for each interaction ROI were then separately correlated with
rumination scores within each diagnostic group, To further illustrate which
conditions drove the interaction, separate PPIs for Reappraise >
baseline and View Sad > baseline were correlated with rumination scores
separately by group. Regions showing a main effect of rumination were
transformed to ROIs and tested for correlation with rumination scores within
each diagnostic group separately. Regions showing a main effect of group were
transformed to ROIs and average PPI values for Reappraise vs baseline and View
Sad vs baseline contrasts were compared between groups to determine whether a
single condition was driving group differences in the Reappraise > View
Sad contrast. To aid interpretation of main effects, regions showing a group
× rumination interaction were masked out of main effects maps, ensuring
that significant regions would only show main effects. 
 
 
 
 1. Results 
 
 1.1. Group Differences in Rumination Measures 
 CERQ Rumination scores were correlated with CERQ subscores for Positive
Reappraisal, Positive Refocusing, Refocusing on Planning, and Putting into
Perspective separately by group. Neither group showed significant correlations
between rumination and positive reappraisal, positive refocusing, or putting
into perspective. However, healthy controls showed a significant positive
correlation between rumination and refocusing on planning scores (r = 0.412, p=
0.033), which was not seen in the MDD-ever group (r = 0.055, p=0.824). A group
comparison of correlation strengths using a Fisher r-to-z transform found that
the z values did not fall outside the 95% confidence interval (z-obs =
1.19, p=0.117) indicating that the group difference for this correlation did not
reach significance in this sample. A multiple regression evaluating whether CDI
scores, diagnostic group, or a group × CDI interaction predicted
rumination scores found that rumination scores were not significantly predicted
by CDI (B = .293, p=.298), diagnostic group (B = −3.204, p=.087), or by
a group × CDI interaction (B = 3.130, p=.075), though the trend-level
interaction was driven by a marginal positive correlation between CDI and
rumination in MDD-ever (r−.461, p=.054), but not in healthy controls
(r=−.171, p=.485). While neither of these tests directly indicate that
rumination is qualitatively different between the healthy and MDD-ever subjects,
the strong correlation with focusing on planning in controls and with CDI scores
in MDD-ever subjects gives some support to the hypothesis that rumination may
indeed be more closely associated with “reflective pondering” in
controls and with “brooding” in MDD-ever children. 
 
 
 1.1. Self-Report of Negative Affect 
 Emotional state ratings measured in the scanner after each trial showed
no significant main effect of condition between View Sad and Reappraise trials,
F(1,42)=1.77, p =0.191. No diagnostic group differences were seen in behavioral
ratings, F(1,42)=0.49, p=0.486, and no group × condition interaction was
seen F(1,42)=2.14, p=0.151. However, in paired t-tests of View Sad and
Reappraise ratings separated by group, HC children showed a trend towards more
positive ratings for Reappraise than View Sad trials, t(25)=1.95, p=0.062, while
MDD-ever children showed no difference in ratings by trial type, t(17)=0.11,
p=0.914. To confirm that sad images did influence emotional state ratings in
both groups, a group × condition (View Neutral, View Sad) ANOVA was
performed, which showed a main effect of condition, F(1,42)=82.09,
p<0.001, but no main effect of group (p=0.686) or group ×
condition interaction (p=0.588). No significant correlation was seen between
rumination scores and emotional state ratings for either condition, which was
true within the full group (View Sad: R= −0.218, p=0.155; Reappraise: R=
−0.164, p=0.286), as well as for groups separated by diagnosis
([MDD-ever View Sad: R= −0.016, p=0.949; Reappraise: R=0.091, p= 0.720]
[HC View Sad: R= −0.288, p=0.153; Reappraise: R= −0.202,
p=0.323]). Age was not correlated with rumination measures or reappraisal affect
difference scores (Reappraise – View Sad affect ratings) in either group
([MDD-ever rumination: R=−0.003, p=0.991; reappraisal:
R=−0.053,p=0.834] [HC rumination: R=0.098, p=0.627; reappraisal:
R=0.233, p=0.251]). As behavioral measures showed no association with variables
of interest, they were not used in subsequent fMRI analyses. 
 
 
 1.1. fMRI Data 
 A whole-brain mask was used to assess group × rumination
interactions for each seed region. For main effects, regions that showed
significant group × rumination interactions for the respective seed
regions were masked out of whole-brain masks. All regression analyses were run
both with and without age included as a covariate of no interest. No difference
was seen between models that did and did not control for age for any seed for
main effects of rumination, group × rumination interactions, or main
effects of group. 
 
 
 Main Effect of Rumination 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 A main effect of rumination on left amygdala connectivity was seen
in left superior temporal gyrus and in right middle temporal gyrus. For both
regions, PPI values were positively correlated with rumination scores ( Table 2 ,  Supplemental Fig. 2 ),
meaning that greater rumination was associated with stronger amygdala FC
during Reappraise than View Sad trials. No main effects of rumination were
seen for the right amygdala or sACC seeds. 
 
 
 
 1.1. Group × Rumination Interactions 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 The map of left amygdala connectivity showed group ×
rumination interactions in a distributed network of frontal, temporal,
occipital and subcortical regions, including the caudate and thalamus ( Table 3 ;  Fig. 2a ). Of the 11 regions showing an interaction, only the
left postcentral gyrus showed significant correlations between PPI values
and rumination scores for both groups, with HC children showing a negative
correlation and MDD-ever children showing a positive correlation. In nine
regions, the interaction was driven by significant positive correlations in
the MDD-ever group but no significant correlations in the control group.
Positive correlations between PPI values and rumination scores in MDD-ever
were seen in left inferior frontal gyrus, left thalamus, left superior
temporal gyrus, bilateral cuneus, right middle temporal gyrus, right middle
occipital gyrus, right middle temporal gyrus, and right middle frontal
gyrus. One region, the right fusiform gyrus, showed an interaction despite
no significant correlation between PPI values and rumination scores in
either group. 
 
 
 Right Amygdala 
 The map of right amygdala connectivity showed group ×
rumination interactions in eleven regions ( Table 3 ;  Fig. 2b ). All
regions showed significant correlations between PPI values and rumination
scores in both HC and MDD-ever children, with HC showing negative
correlations, and MDD-ever showing positive correlations. Those regions
included left superior temporal gyrus, left cuneus, left postcentral gyrus,
left middle temporal gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus, left insula,
bilateral thalamus, right middle temporal gyrus, right insula, right medial
frontal gyrus, and right paracentral lobule. 
 
 
 Subgenual Cingulate 
 Maps of subgenual cingulate connectivity showed group ×
rumination interactions in a narrowly defined network of prefrontal and
parietal regions. All clusters, which included two regions in the right
precuneus and one in the right middle frontal gyrus showed significant
positive correlation between PPI values and rumination scores in MDD-ever
children and negative correlation in HC children ( Table 3 ;  Fig.
2c ). 
 Overlap Across Seed Regions: Regions showing group ×
rumination interactions with multiple seed ROIs are described in the  supplementary
materials . 
 
 
 
 1.1. Main Effect of Group 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 A main effect of group on left amygdala connectivity was seen in
nine clusters, including the left anterior cingulate, left thalamus, left
middle cingulate, right superior temporal gyrus, right insula, right
precuneus, right postcentral gyrus, right precentral gyrus, and right
superior frontal gyrus. All regions showed more positive PPI values for HC
than MDD-ever children ( Table 4 ,
 Fig. 3 ). 
 
 
 Right Amygdala 
 A main effect of group on right amygdala connectivity was seen in
bilateral temporal and occipito-parietal regions, with clusters in left
middle temporal gyrus, left inferior parietal lobule, right superior
temporal gyrus, and right precuneus. All regions showed more positive PPI
values for HC than MDD-ever children ( Table
4 ;  Fig. 3 ). 
 
 
 Subgenual Cingulate 
 A main effect of group was seen in bilateral fronto-parietal
regions, including bilateral inferior parietal lobule, left superior
parietal lobule, left superior frontal gyrus, right medial frontal gyrus,
and right posterior cingulate gyrus. All regions showed more positive PPI
values for HC than MDD-ever children ( Table
4 ;  Fig. 3 ). 
 All regions showing a main effect of group showed greater PPI values
for HC than MDD-ever for the contrast of Reappraise > View Sad. This
was an opposite pattern to that seen when evaluating group ×
rumination interactions, in which PPI values were greater in MDD-ever. To
determine what might account for this shift, FC values for the Reappraise
and View Sad conditions were compared separately against baseline for each
region showing a main effect of group, to determine whether these PPI
differences were driven by a particular group or condition. Between-group
t-tests showed that no regions showed significant group differences in FC
values for the Reappraise condition for any seed region (all p values
> .13) but as shown in  Table
4 , a number of regions showed significant between-group
differences in the View Sad condition. For each region showing significant
differences, MDD-ever showed stronger positive FC than controls in the View
Sad condition. As PPI values are based on Reappraise > View Sad FC
differences, a more positive FC value in the View Sad condition in MDD
subjects would decrease the value of the difference in the PPI, resulting in
lower PPI values for MDD-ever than control subjects. Further, within-group
paired t-tests showed no FC differences between View Sad and Reappraise
trials in HC children (all P values > .089), while MDD-ever children
showed significant condition differences in seven sACC-seed clusters, two
right amygdala-seed clusters, and one left amygdala seed cluster –
all of which showed greater FC in View Sad than Reappraise trials ( Table 4 ). Thus, main effects of group
appear to have been driven largely by greater FC in MDD-ever children in the
View Sad condition, rather than group differences in the Reappraise
condition. 
 
 
 
 
 1. Discussion 
 The goal of the current study was to examine the relationship between
individual differences in rumination and functional connectivity observed during
cognitive reappraisal of emotions in children with a history of MDD relative to
healthy controls. Overall, findings indicated a relationship between rumination and
functional connectivity of the amygdala and subgenual cingulate that was greater in
MDD-ever children than healthy children during emotion regulation (cognitive
reappraisal). In regions where a group by rumination interaction was found, children
with a history of MDD showed greater Reappraise > View Sad differences in
connectivity with amygdala and sACC as rumination increased. As effective
reappraisal would be expected to decrease connectivity with those regions, this
finding suggests that rumination is associated with inefficient regulation of
affect-processing regions in MDD-ever children, but not in healthy controls. This
may reflect group differences in rumination styles, with rumination in MDD-ever
children more closely fitting a maladaptive “brooding” pattern than
in healthy controls. Main effects of rumination were only seen in a few focal areas,
in which connectivity in HC and MDD-ever children were similarly associated with
rumination scores. Additionally, main effects of group were seen in several regions
that did not show an association with rumination, which were driven by FC
differences between MDD-ever and healthy children in passive viewing of sad
stimuli. 
 Behaviorally, self-reports of negative affect following View-Sad and
Reappraise trials did not show significant reduction in negative affect by
reappraisal. However, a trend level effect was seen in control children, similar to
that seen in a smaller and younger sample of healthy children in a previous study
[ 21 ], There was no such trend in MDD-ever
children, but the differences between the groups in the level of negative affect
change was not significant. Thus, this pattern hints at the MDD children showing
less reappraisal, but is not sufficient to make any strong conclusions. Given that
the self-reports in reappraisal tasks are likely strongly influenced by demand
characteristics (i.e., children know you want them to reduce their negative affect),
self-reports may not be a particularly sensitive indicator of reappraisal
efficacy. 
 A large constellation of regions showed group by rumination interactions in
FC related to viewing and reappraising sad images. For both left and right amygdala
seeds, regions showing a group by rumination interaction had positive correlations
between rumination and PPI values for reappraisal in children with a history of MDD
and negative correlations between rumination and PPI values for reappraisal in
control children. Regions showing this pattern included prefrontal, temporal,
parietal and occipital cortical areas, as well as bilateral thalamus ( Table 3 ). A number of these regions,
particularly frontal and lateral temporal regions, have been associated with emotion
regulation [ 20 ], [ 23 ], [ 44 ]. As the
typical influence of these control regions is to modulate amygdala activity during
reappraisal [ 21 ], increased FC between these
regions and amygdala in MDD-ever children may indicate that rumination is associated
with inefficiency in the abilities to modulate affect-processing regions. Increased
amygdala connectivity with areas associated with emotion and affect processing,
including thalamus, insula, and right middle and superior temporal gyri, further
suggests that rumination may be associated with less modulation of these regions
during emotional reappraisal in MDD-ever children. Increased connectivity was also
seen with bilateral cuneus, a region that has been associated with selective
attention to stimulus attributes, including emotional content [ 45 ], as well as emotional reappraisal [ 22 ]. This suggests that MDD-ever ruminators exert increased
effort with less effect in regulating their attention to the negative emotional
aspects of the stimuli that they are attempting to reappraise. These findings are in
line with findings in adult MDD, in which rumination is associated with patterns of
neural activity suggesting inefficient regulation [ 33 ], [ 35 ]. In addition, many of
these regions showed a negative correlation between rumination and PPI values for
the View Sad condition in MDD-ever children, but none showed a significant
correlation in controls. These findings are consistent with previous work examining
the influence of worry during the processing of negative emotional stimuli. Worry is
strongly associated with rumination in MDD [ 46 ], and acts as a cognitive avoidance technique that has been shown to
reduce autonomic arousal to negative images [ 47 ] and both inhibits amygdala activity and increases negative
connectivity between amygdala and prefrontal regions [ 48 ]. While worry was not measured in the current sample, a
speculative interpretation of these results may be that either rumination itself or
a closely related manifestation of repetitive negative thinking, such as worry, may
influence amygdala connectivity during passive viewing of negative images in the
absence of explicit reappraisal effort in children with a history of MDD. Overall,
these findings suggest that in children with a history of MDD, rumination is
associated with increased connectivity between affect and emotion processing regions
during attempts to reappraise emotional content, suggesting inefficient modulation
of affect and emotion processing in regions associated with cognitive reappraisal,
as well as decreased connectivity in these regions in the absence of conscious
effort to reappraise. 
 A similar pattern was seen in sACC connectivity. Children with a history of
MDD showed a positive correlation between rumination and Reappraise PPI values with
right middle frontal gyrus and bilateral precuneus, while HC children showed
negative correlations in these regions. The sACC is frequently implicated in
self-referential processing [ 49 ], and shows
increased activity [ 39 ] and resting
functional connectivity [ 50 ] in MDD, as well
as correlation with depressive symptoms [ 39 ].
Thus, it has been hypothesized that increased activity of the sACC in MDD may be
associated with inability to inhibit self-referential thoughts related to negative
emotions [ 39 ]. The increased correlation of
rumination with sACC connectivity during reappraisal in MDD is consistent with the
hypothesis that, in evaluating whether the act of reappraisal is improving
one’s emotional state, individuals with MDD may become more focused on
negative emotions with an inability to effectively regulate them. This is consistent
with previous findings of increased sACC activity in MDD during specifically
directed rumination [ 35 ]. 
 It is important to note that the pattern of connectivity seen in healthy
children, in whom rumination scores are negatively correlated with reappraisal PPI
values, at first appears counterintuitive when rumination is ostensibly associated
with maladaptive emotional regulation. This is because a negative correlation
between amygdala or sACC and prefrontal regions is more consistent with a pattern of
effective inhibition of amygdala and sACC activity during reappraisal. As such, this
finding suggests that in healthy individuals, as rumination increases, individuals
are more able to inhibit self-relevant processing during reappraisal relative to
viewing negative stimuli. This may be evidence that the reasons for endorsement of
rumination in healthy children are qualitatively different than those in MDD-ever
children. In particular, “reflective pondering” is thought to be an
adaptive form of rumination with an emphasis on problem solving and addressing or
alleviating negative emotions, as opposed to depressive “brooding”
rumination in which the focus is anxious or critical thoughts of one’s
negative mood or circumstances [ 42 ]. It is
possible that the rumination endorsed by healthy controls in the current study is
more closely aligned with adaptive self-referential thought than the brooding
rumination frequently associated with MDD. This hypothesis is supported by the
finding that rumination scores in control children, but not MDD-ever children, were
correlated with a measure of refocusing on planning – a process of
“thinking about what steps to take and how to handle the negative
event” [ 12 ]. However, this
interpretation is wholly speculative as the rumination measure collected did not
distinguish between brooding and reflective pondering styles of rumination, and such
a hypothesis would need direct testing in future studies using a more granular
assessment of rumination style. 
 Only a few regions showed main effects of rumination across MDD-ever and
control children. The left amygdala seed region showed main effects of rumination on
connectivity, and this was seen only with left superior temporal and right middle
temporal gyri. PPI values for both regions increased with rumination. The lateral
temporal lobes have been implicated in emotional reappraisal [ 20 ], as regions that underlie the reconstruction of semantic
and perceptual representations of emotional stimuli – a key aspect of
reappraisal [ 36 ], [ 51 ]. This may indicate that both adaptive and maladaptive types
of rumination are associated with increased representation of meaningful content of
emotional stimuli. 
 Main effects of group were seen for connectivity with each of the seed
regions. For all regions showing main effects of group, HC children showed greater
PPI values than MDD children – a result largely driven by greater FC during
the View Sad than Reappraise condition in MDD. As main effects analyses excluded
regions showing interactions with rumination, these regions represent group
differences that are not associated with rumination. Of note is the fact that, when
rumination is controlled for, there are no group differences in the Reappraise
> Baseline PPI, indicating that group differences not associated with
rumination are driven by differences in passive viewing of sad images. Further,
while rumination is correlated with decreased amygdala and sACC connectivity during
the View Sad condition, controlling for rumination highlights brain regions that
show greater connectivity with amygdala and sACC during View Sad in MDD-ever than
controls. Regions showing group differences in amygdala connectivity included areas
implicated in the orienting of visual attention, including the right precentral and
postcentral gyri, right precuneus, and medial superior frontal gyrus (supplementary
motor area) [ 52 ], [ 53 ], as well as areas associated with processing affect and
emotion, including left thalamus, right insula, rostral anterior cingulate, and
right superior temporal gyrus. Regions showing group differences in sACC
connectivity included bilateral dorsal and medial frontal regions, as well as
bilateral parietal and posterior cingulate regions. Many of the regions showing
group connectivity differences in right amygdala and sACC are associated with the
Task Positive Network (TPN) that is engaged in many cognitive processes, while the
posterior cingulate is a key node of the default mode network that is engaged during
both rest and self-referential processing [ 28 ]. Recent findings have suggested that abnormal resting-state connectivity
of DMN regions relative to TPN regions in MDD is associated with depressive
rumination [ 54 ]. While these findings are
main effects of group rather than related to rumination scores, they also suggest
that these networks may both exhibit abnormal connectivity during negative emotion
processing in children with MDD. As none of these regions showed significant FC
differences by condition in HC children, but did show reduced FC during reappraisal
in MDD, it is possible that these regions are automatically regulated in HC children
even in the absence of conscious desire to regulate emotions [ 55 ], while MDD children are able to regulate them only when
exerting conscious effort to do so, though this speculative hypothesis requires
further investigation. 
 
 
 1. Limitations 
 One limitation of the current study is that the measure of rumination used
did not differentiate between brooding and reflective rumination styles that may
differently correspond to adaptive or maladaptive behavior. However, findings of
significant interactions between group and rumination in terms of task-based
differences in connectivity indicate that rumination was differently associated with
FC in the two groups. A positive correlation between rumination and a measure of
adaptive refocusing in controls but not MDD-ever children further supports this
hypothesis, as does a positive correlation between rumination and CDI in MDD-ever
but not controls. Follow-up studies should evaluate the relationship of rumination
style on FC differences between the two groups. Additionally, while the current
sample size was not large enough to investigate whether age interacted with
rumination and reappraisal across groups, this is an important consideration for
future studies, as prefrontal development across adolescence may change the relative
influence of ruminative fixation and prefrontal regulation abilities. Finally, while
preschool-onset MDD shows evidence of homotypic continuity with later childhood and
early adolescent MDD [ 56 ], it is currently
unknown whether the neurobiology underlying depressive symptoms in early-onset
individuals differs meaningfully from adolescent- or adult-onset MDD. Future
research investigating the influence of MDD onset age on the relationship between
rumination and reappraisal, as well as the influence of an acute depressive episode
relative to a history of depression, may clarify the generalizability of the current
findings to a wider MDD population. 
 
 
 1. Conclusion 
 Rumination is a trait that is associated with maladaptive emotion regulatory
processes in MDD. In a task requiring cognitive reappraisal of sad stimuli,
rumination was correlated with increased functional connectivity of bilateral
amygdala and subgenual anterior cingulate in children with a history of MDD but with
decreased functional connectivity in healthy controls, and included areas associated
with both emotion regulation and emotional reactivity. This may be indicative of
group differences in using adaptive or maladaptive types of rumination. As the
amygdala and sACC are associated with processing emotional salience and
self-relevance respectively, the increased connectivity seen in MDD-ever high
ruminators during reappraisal suggests that rumination is associated with both
inefficient engagement of regulatory regions, and poor inhibition of emotion
processing regions. These findings parallel previous behavioral reports of
ruminators’ attempts to regulate negative emotions resulting in greater
attention to those emotions and may be indicative of an inability to inhibit
self-reflected attention to sad emotional content in children with a history of MDD.
Few regions showed main effects of rumination on FC across MDD-ever and healthy
children, suggesting there are likely significant overall differences in rumination
between the groups, possibly delineating differences in adaptive and non-adaptive
rumination in healthy individuals. Additionally, when controlling for rumination,
group differences were driven by differences in the passive viewing of sad images,
rather than in emotional reappraisal. These findings suggest that future studies are
warranted to focus more closely on the relationship between reappraisal of emotions
and rumination in MDD. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited
manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Diener 
 C 
 
 
 Kuehner 
 C 
 
 
 Brusniak 
 W 
 
 
 Ubl 
 B 
 
 
 Wessa 
 M 
 
 
 Flor 
 H 
 
 
 A meta-analysis of neurofunctional imaging studies of emotion and
cognition in major depression 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 Jul. 
 61 
 3 
 677 
 685 
 22521254 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Campbell-Sills 
 L 
 
 
 Barlow 
 DH 
 
 
 Incorporating Emotion Regulation into Conceptualizations and
Treatments of Anxiety and Mood Disorders 
 Handbook of emotion regulation 
 2007 
 New York, NY, US 
 Guilford Press 
 542 
 559 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of
depressive episodes 
 J Abnorm. Psychol 
 1991 
 Nov. 
 100 
 4 
 569 
 582 
 1757671 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 The role of rumination in depressive disorders and mixed
anxiety/depressive symptoms 
 J Abnorm. Psychol 
 2000 
 109 
 3 
 504 
 511 
 11016119 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Wisco 
 BE 
 
 
 Lyubomirsky 
 S 
 
 
 Rethinking Rumination 
 Perspect. Psychol. Sci 
 2008 
 Sep. 
 3 
 5 
 400 
 424 
 26158958 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 De Lissnyder 
 E 
 
 
 Derakshan 
 N 
 
 
 De Raedt 
 R 
 
 
 Koster 
 EHW 
 
 
 Depressive symptoms and cognitive control in a mixed antisaccade
task: Specific effects of depressive rumination 
 Cogn. Emot 
 2011 
 Aug. 
 25 
 5 
 886 
 897 
 21824026 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Koster 
 EHW 
 
 
 De Lissnyder 
 E 
 
 
 Derakshan 
 N 
 
 
 De Raedt 
 R 
 
 
 Understanding depressive rumination from a cognitive science
perspective: The impaired disengagement hypothesis 
 Clin. Psychol. Rev 
 2011 
 Feb. 
 31 
 1 
 138 
 145 
 20817334 
 
 
 
 8 
 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Emotion regulation in depression: Relation to cognitive
inhibition 
 Cogn. Amp Emot 
 2010 
 24 
 2 
 281 
 298 
 
 
 
 9 
 
 
 
 Angold 
 A 
 
 
 Costello 
 EJ 
 
 
 Puberty and Depression 
 Child Adolesc. Psychiatr. Clin. N. Am 
 2006 
 Oct. 
 15 
 4 
 919 
 937 
 16952768 
 
 
 
 10 
 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Weber 
 J 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Sokol-Hessner 
 P 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 The development of emotion regulation: an fMRI study of cognitive
reappraisal in children, adolescents and young adults 
 Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci 
 2012 
 Jan. 
 7 
 1 
 11 
 22 
 22228751 
 
 
 
 11 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 EL 
 
 
 Levine 
 LJ 
 
 
 Emotion Regulation Strategies That Promote Learning: Reappraisal
Enhances Children’s Memory for Educational
Information 
 Child Dev 
 2013 
 Jan. 
 84 
 1 
 361 
 374 
 22906113 
 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 
 Garnefski 
 N 
 
 
 Rieffe 
 C 
 
 
 Jellesma 
 F 
 
 
 Terwogt 
 MM 
 
 
 Kraaij 
 V 
 
 
 Cognitive emotion regulation strategies and emotional problems in
9–11-year-old children 
 Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 
 2007 
 16 
 1 
 1 
 9 
 16791542 
 
 
 
 13 
 
 
 
 Garnefski 
 N 
 
 
 Kraaij 
 V 
 
 
 Relationships between cognitive emotion regulation strategies and
depressive symptoms: A comparative study of five specific
samples 
 Personal. Individ. Differ 
 2006 
 Jun. 
 40 
 8 
 1659 
 1669 
 
 
 
 14 
 
 
 
 Hampel 
 P 
 
 
 Petermann 
 F 
 
 
 Age and Gender Effects on Coping in Children and
Adolescents 
 J Youth Adolesc 
 2005 
 Apr. 
 34 
 2 
 73 
 83 
 
 
 
 15 
 
 
 
 Hankin 
 BL 
 
 
 Stability of Cognitive Vulnerabilities to Depression: A
Short-Term Prospective Multiwave Study 
 J Abnorm. Psychol 
 2008 
 5 
 117 
 2 
 324 
 333 
 18489208 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 Rood 
 L 
 
 
 Roelofs 
 J 
 
 
 Bögels 
 SM 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Schouten 
 E 
 
 
 The influence of emotion-focused rumination and distraction on
depressive symptoms in non-clinical youth: A meta-analytic
review 
 Clin. Psychol. Rev 
 2009 
 Nov. 
 29 
 7 
 607 
 616 
 19682781 
 
 
 
 17 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 K 
 
 
 Hilt 
 L 
 
 
 
 
 Oettingen 
 G 
 
 
 Gollwitzer 
 Peter M 
 
 
 Rumination and Self-Regulation in Adolescence 
 Self-Regulation in Adolescence 
 2015 
 Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Chopra 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 For better or for worse: neural systems supporting the cognitive
down- and up-regulation of negative emotion 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 Oct. 
 23 
 2 
 483 
 499 
 15488398 
 
 
 
 19 
 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 John 
 OP 
 
 
 Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes:
Implications for affect, relationships, and well-being 
 J Pers. Soc. Psychol 
 2003 
 85 
 2 
 348 
 362 
 12916575 
 
 
 
 20 
 
 
 
 Buhle 
 JT 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Lopez 
 R 
 
 
 Onyemekwu 
 C 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 Weber 
 J 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Cognitive Reappraisal of Emotion: A Meta-Analysis of Human
Neuroimaging Studies 
 Cereb. Cortex 
 2013 
 Jun. 
 bht154 
 
 
 
 21 
 
 
 
 Belden 
 AC 
 
 
 Luby 
 JL 
 
 
 Pagliaccio 
 D 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Neural activation associated with the cognitive emotion
regulation of sadness in healthy children 
 Dev. Cogn. Neurosci 
 2014 
 Jul. 
 9 
 136 
 147 
 24646887 
 
 
 
 22 
 
 
 
 Goldin 
 PR 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Ramel 
 W 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 The Neural Bases of Emotion Regulation: Reappraisal and
Suppression of Negative Emotion 
 Biol. Psychiatry 
 2008 
 Mar. 
 63 
 6 
 577 
 586 
 17888411 
 
 
 
 23 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Davidson 
 ML 
 
 
 Hughes 
 BL 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Prefrontal-Subcortical Pathways Mediating Successful Emotion
Regulation 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 Sep. 
 59 
 6 
 1037 
 1050 
 18817740 
 
 
 
 24 
 
 
 
 Beauregard 
 M 
 
 
 Paquette 
 V 
 
 
 Levesque 
 J 
 
 
 Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotional self-regulation
in major depressive disorder 
 NeuroReport 
 2006 
 5 
 17 
 8 
 843 
 846 
 16708026 
 
 
 
 25 
 
 
 
 Johnstone 
 T 
 
 
 van Reekum 
 CM 
 
 
 Urry 
 HL 
 
 
 Kalin 
 NH 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Failure to Regulate: Counterproductive Recruitment of Top-Down
Prefrontal-Subcortical Circuitry in Major Depression 
 J Neurosci 
 2007 
 Aug. 
 27 
 33 
 8877 
 8884 
 17699669 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 
 Erk 
 S 
 
 
 Mikschl 
 A 
 
 
 Stier 
 S 
 
 
 Ciaramidaro 
 A 
 
 
 Gapp 
 V 
 
 
 Weber 
 B 
 
 
 Walter 
 H 
 
 
 Acute and Sustained Effects of Cognitive Emotion Regulation in
Major Depression 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 Nov. 
 30 
 47 
 15726 
 15734 
 21106812 
 
 
 
 27 
 
 
 
 Sheline 
 YI 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Rundle 
 MM 
 
 
 Vaishnavi 
 SN 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Wang 
 S 
 
 
 Coalson 
 RS 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The default mode network and self-referential processes in
depression 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 
 2009 
 Jan. 
 p. pnas.0812686106 
 
 
 
 28 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Essen 
 DCV 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 
 2005 
 Jul. 
 102 
 27 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 29 
 
 
 
 Belden 
 AC 
 
 
 Pagliaccio 
 D 
 
 
 Murphy 
 ER 
 
 
 Luby 
 JL 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Neural Activation During Cognitive Emotion Regulation in
Previously Depressed Compared to Healthy Children: Evidence of Specific
Alterations 
 J Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 
 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 G 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 R 
 
 
 Psychophysiological and Modulatory Interactions in
Neuroimaging 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 Oct. 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 31 
 
 
 
 Perlman 
 G 
 
 
 Simmons 
 AN 
 
 
 Wu 
 J 
 
 
 Hahn 
 KS 
 
 
 Tapert 
 SF 
 
 
 Max 
 JE 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 Brown 
 GG 
 
 
 Frank 
 GK 
 
 
 Campbell-Sills 
 L 
 
 
 Yang 
 TT 
 
 
 Amygdala response and functional connectivity during emotion
regulation: A study of 14 depressed adolescents 
 J Affect. Disord 
 2012 
 Jun. 
 139 
 1 
 75 
 84 
 22401827 
 
 
 
 32 
 
 
 
 Whitmer 
 AJ 
 
 
 Banich 
 MT 
 
 
 Inhibition Versus Switching Deficits in Different Forms of
Rumination 
 Psychol. Sci 
 2007 
 Jun. 
 18 
 6 
 546 
 553 
 17576269 
 
 
 
 33 
 
 
 
 Vanderhasselt 
 M-A 
 
 
 Kühn 
 S 
 
 
 Raedt 
 RD 
 
 
 Healthy brooders employ more attentional resources when
disengaging from the negative: an event-related fMRI study 
 Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci 
 2011 
 Mar. 
 11 
 2 
 207 
 216 
 21373973 
 
 
 
 34 
 
 
 
 Alderman 
 BL 
 
 
 Olson 
 RL 
 
 
 Bates 
 ME 
 
 
 Selby 
 EA 
 
 
 Buckman 
 JF 
 
 
 Brush 
 CJ 
 
 
 Panza 
 EA 
 
 
 Kranzler 
 A 
 
 
 Eddie 
 D 
 
 
 Shors 
 TJ 
 
 
 Rumination in major depressive disorder is associated with
impaired neural activation during conflict monitoring 
 Front. Hum. Neurosci 
 2015 
 269 
 26029086 
 
 
 
 35 
 
 
 
 Cooney 
 RE 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 Eugène 
 F 
 
 
 Dennis 
 EL 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Neural correlates of rumination in depression 
 Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci 
 2010 
 Dec. 
 10 
 4 
 470 
 478 
 21098808 
 
 
 
 36 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 The cognitive control of emotion 
 Trends Cogn. Sci 
 2005 
 5 
 9 
 5 
 242 
 249 
 15866151 
 
 
 
 37 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 
 2001 
 Jan. 
 98 
 2 
 676 
 682 
 11209064 
 
 
 
 38 
 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Zago 
 L 
 
 
 Mellet 
 E 
 
 
 Bricogne 
 S 
 
 
 Etard 
 O 
 
 
 Houdé 
 O 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Joliot 
 M 
 
 
 Petit 
 L 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Cortical networks for working memory and executive functions
sustain the conscious resting state in man 
 Brain Res. Bull 
 2001 
 Feb. 
 54 
 3 
 287 
 298 
 11287133 
 
 
 
 39 
 
 
 
 Matthews 
 S 
 
 
 Simmons 
 A 
 
 
 Strigo 
 I 
 
 
 Gianaros 
 P 
 
 
 Yang 
 T 
 
 
 Paulus 
 M 
 
 
 Inhibition-related activity in subgenual cingulate is associated
with symptom severity in major depression 
 Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 
 2009 
 Apr. 
 172 
 1 
 1 
 6 
 19239982 
 
 
 
 40 
 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 HS 
 
 
 Lozano 
 AM 
 
 
 Voon 
 V 
 
 
 McNeely 
 HE 
 
 
 Seminowicz 
 D 
 
 
 Hamani 
 C 
 
 
 Schwalb 
 JM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 SH 
 
 
 Deep Brain Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant
Depression 
 Neuron 
 2005 
 Mar. 
 45 
 5 
 651 
 660 
 15748841 
 
 
 
 41 
 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 Dkane 
 M 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Adaptive and Maladaptive Components of Rumination? Diagnostic
Specificity and Relation to Depressive Biases 
 Behav. Ther 
 2006 
 Sep. 
 37 
 3 
 269 
 280 
 16942978 
 
 
 
 42 
 
 
 
 Treynor 
 W 
 
 
 Gonzalez 
 R 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 Rumination Reconsidered: A Psychometric Analysis 
 Cogn. Ther. Res 
 2003 
 Jun. 
 27 
 3 
 247 
 259 
 
 
 
 43 
 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci using
standard anatomical nomenclature 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 Oct. 
 53 
 1 
 1 
 15 
 20547229 
 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 
 Kohn 
 N 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Scheller 
 M 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Habel 
 U 
 
 
 Neural network of cognitive emotion regulation — An ALE
meta-analysis and MACM analysis 
 NeuroImage 
 2014 
 Feb. 
 87 
 345 
 355 
 24220041 
 
 
 
 45 
 
 
 
 Sander 
 D 
 
 
 Grandjean 
 D 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 S 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Scherer 
 KR 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 Emotion and attention interactions in social cognition: Brain
regions involved in processing anger prosody 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 Dec. 
 28 
 4 
 848 
 858 
 16055351 
 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 PM 
 
 
 Watson 
 H 
 
 
 Watkins 
 ER 
 
 
 Nathan 
 P 
 
 
 The relationship between worry, rumination, and comorbidity:
Evidence for repetitive negative thinking as a transdiagnostic
construct 
 J Affect. Disord 
 2013 
 Oct. 
 151 
 1 
 313 
 320 
 23866301 
 
 
 
 47 
 
 
 
 Borkovec 
 TD 
 
 
 Alcaine 
 O 
 
 
 Behar 
 E 
 
 
 Avoidance theory of worry and generalized anxiety
disorder 
 Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice 
 2004 
 
 
 
 48 
 
 
 
 Hoehn-Saric 
 R 
 
 
 Lee 
 JS 
 
 
 McLeod 
 DR 
 
 
 Wong 
 DF 
 
 
 Effect of worry on regional cerebral blood flow in nonanxious
subjects 
 Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 
 2005 
 Dec. 
 140 
 3 
 259 
 269 
 16297605 
 
 
 
 49 
 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity:
Relation to a default mode of brain function 
 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 
 2001 
 Mar. 
 98 
 7 
 4259 
 4264 
 11259662 
 
 
 
 50 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Flores 
 BH 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Solvason 
 HB 
 
 
 Kenna 
 H 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Schatzberg 
 AF 
 
 
 Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Major Depression:
Abnormally Increased Contributions from Subgenual Cingulate Cortex and
Thalamus 
 Biol. Psychiatry 
 2007 
 Sep. 
 62 
 5 
 429 
 437 
 17210143 
 
 
 
 51 
 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Handbook of Emotion Regulation 
 2009 
 Guilford Press 
 
 
 
 52 
 
 
 
 Cavanna 
 AE 
 
 
 Trimble 
 MR 
 
 
 The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural
correlates 
 Brain 
 2006 
 Mar. 
 129 
 3 
 564 
 583 
 16399806 
 
 
 
 53 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: From Environment to
Theory of Mind 
 Neuron 
 2008 
 5 
 58 
 3 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 54 
 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 JP 
 
 
 Furman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Chang 
 C 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Dennis 
 E 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Default-Mode and Task-Positive Network Activity in Major
Depressive Disorder: Implications for Adaptive and Maladaptive
Rumination 
 Biol. Psychiatry 
 2011 
 Aug. 
 70 
 4 
 327 
 333 
 21459364 
 
 
 
 55 
 
 
 
 Mauss 
 IB 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Automatic Emotion Regulation 
 Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 
 2007 
 1 
 1 
 146 
 167 
 
 
 
 56 
 
 
 
 Luby 
 JL 
 
 
 Gaffrey 
 MS 
 
 
 Tillman 
 R 
 
 
 April 
 LM 
 
 
 Belden 
 AC 
 
 
 Trajectories of Preschool Disorders to Full DSM Depression at
School Age and Early Adolescence: Continuity of Preschool
Depression 
 Am. J. Psychiatry 
 2014 
 Jul. 
 171 
 7 
 768 
 776 
 24700355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 1 
 
 Seed regions for amygdala (A) and sACC (B) PPI analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 2 
 
 Regions showing group × rumination interactions in Reappraise
> View Sad PPI values with the left amygdala seed (A), right amygdala
seed (B), and sACC seed (C). All regions show greater PPI values as rumination
increases in MDD-ever, and lower PPI values as rumination increases in HC.
Scatterplots (D–F) illustrate a representative relationship between
group and rumination scores from a single cluster in each interaction. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 3 
 
 Regions showing a main effect of group in the Reappraise > View
Sad PPI contrast. All regions show greater PPI values for HC than MDD-ever
children. Main effects from the left amygdala seed are shown in red, from the
right amygdala seed are shown in green, and the sACC are shown in blue. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of Participants 
 
 
 
 
 
 HC Mean 
 SD 
 MDD Mean 
 SD 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 11.33 
 1.94 
 12.27 
 1.14 
 
 
 Sex (%Female) 
 51.80% 
 
 47.37% 
 
 
 
 IQ 
 109.56 
 13.47 
 99.67 
 16.78 
 
 
 CDI-P (t-scores) 
 53.84 
 9.04 
 67.82 
 5.09 
 
 
 CERQ Rumination 
 10.44 
 3.15 
 10.52 
 2.36 
 
 
 Age of MDD Onset 
 
 
 5.60 
 2.54 
 
 
 Number of past Episodes 
 
 
 3.47 
 1.92 
 
 
 
 
 
 Notes: Age of MDD Onset reflects age of first diagnosis as
clinically assessed in the course of the longitudinal study. Number of past
episodes reflects number of annual assessment waves in which child met
clinical criteria for MDD diagnosis, up to and including the date of the
current scan. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Regions showing a main effect of rumination 
 
 
 
 
 Seed 
 Hemi 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 B A 
 HC r 
 HC p 
 MDD -ever r 
 MDD- ever p 
 
 
 
 
 L Amyg 
 Left 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 −46 
 −35 
 0 
 22 
 0.325 
 
 0.049 
 
 0.671 
 
 0.001 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 59 
 −38 
 −2 
 21 
 0.361 
 
 0.032 
 
 0.605 
 
 0.003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: Coordinates and region labels represent cluster centers of
mass. Pearson r values and significance levels are shown for both groups for
the correlation between rumination scores and values for the Reappraise
> View Sad PPI. P values at or below .05 are in bold. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regions showing a group × rumination interaction in PPI
values 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reappraisal > View Sad PPI 
 Reappraise > Baseline PPI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seed 
 Hemi 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 BA 
 HC r 
 HC p 
 MDD- ever r 
 MDD- ever p 
 HC r 
 HC p 
 MDD- ever r 
 MDD ever 
 
 
 
 
 L Amyg 
 Left 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 −63 
 −18 
 29 
 1 
 −0.406 
 
 0.018 
 
 0.595 
 
 0.004 
 
 −0.492 
 
 0.005 
 
 0.137 
 0.289 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 −47 
 31 
 −3 
 47 
 −0.128 
 0.262 
 0.610 
 
 0.003 
 
 −0.422 
 
 0.014 
 
 0.433 
 
 0.032 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Thalamus 
 −7 
 −28 
 5 
 – 
 −0.224 
 0.131 
 0.688 
 
 0.001 
 
 −0.412 
 
 0.016 
 
 0.301 
 0.106 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Cuneus 
 −21 
 −87 
 22 
 18 
 −0.320 
 0.052 
 0.711 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.267 
 0.089 
 0.216 
 0.188 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 55 
 −29 
 −1 
 21 
 −0.197 
 0.162 
 0.656 
 
 0.001 
 
 −0.257 
 0.098 
 0.306 
 0.102 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 41 
 −83 
 3 
 19 
 −0.127 
 0.264 
 0.496 
 
 0.015 
 
 −0.026 
 0.448 
 0.081 
 0.371 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 43 
 −55 
 25 
 39 
 −0.251 
 0.103 
 0.725 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.403 
 
 0.019 
 
 0.510 
 
 0.013 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 39 
 16 
 27 
 9 
 −0.230 
 0.124 
 0.575 
 
 0.005 
 
 −0.367 
 
 0.030 
 
 0.779 
 
 0.000 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Cuneus 
 31 
 −82 
 31 
 19 
 −0.237 
 0.118 
 0.734 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.245 
 0.109 
 0.360 
 0.065 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 −36 
 −31 
 5 
 41 
 0.083 
 0.340 
 0.443 
 
 0.029 
 
 −0.147 
 0.232 
 0.026 
 0.458 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 33 
 −73 
 −9 
 19 
 −0.140 
 0.243 
 0.068 
 0.391 
 −0.034 
 0.433 
 −0.028 
 0.455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R Amyg 
 Left 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 −59 
 −21 
 29 
 2 
 −0.466 
 
 0.007 
 
 0.624 
 
 0.002 
 
 −0.489 
 
 0.005 
 
 0.189 
 0.219 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 −39 
 −49 
 20 
 22 
 −0.401 
 
 0.019 
 
 0.710 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.549 
 
 0.001 
 
 0.357 
 0.067 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Cuneus 
 −20 
 −83 
 28 
 18 
 −0.413 
 
 0.016 
 
 0.737 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.413 
 
 0.016 
 
 0.270 
 0.132 
 
 
 
 Bilat 
 Thalamus 
 0 
 −30 
 8 
 – 
 −0.460 
 
 0.008 
 
 0.738 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.495 
 
 0.004 
 
 0.388 
 
 0.050 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 34 
 −53 
 22 
 39 
 −0.429 
 
 0.013 
 
 0.782 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.490 
 
 0.005 
 
 0.535 
 
 0.009 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Insula 
 41 
 12 
 16 
 13 
 −0.381 
 
 0.025 
 
 0.711 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.400 
 
 0.019 
 
 0.717 
 
 0.000 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 2 
 52 
 20 
 9 
 −0.531 
 
 0.002 
 
 0.607 
 
 0.003 
 
 −0.459 
 
 0.008 
 
 0.652 
 
 0.001 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 3 
 −37 
 55 
 5 
 −0.425 
 
 0.014 
 
 0.698 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.473 
 
 0.006 
 
 0.092 
 0.354 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −52 
 −19 
 −3 
 21 
 −0.373 
 
 0.028 
 
 0.706 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.448 
 
 0.010 
 
 −0.086 
 0.364 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 −48 
 29 
 2 
 45 
 −0.369 
 
 0.029 
 
 0.656 
 
 0.001 
 
 −0.434 
 
 0.012 
 
 0.525 
 
 0.011 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Insula 
 −42 
 −3 
 11 
 13 
 −0.379 
 
 0.026 
 
 0.719 
 
 0.000 
 
 −0.379 
 
 0.026 
 
 0.306 
 0.101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 sACC 
 Right 
 Precuneus 
 6 
 −58 
 46 
 7 
 −0.548 
 
 0.002 
 
 0.608 
 
 0.003 
 
 −0.456 
 
 0.008 
 
 0.187 
 0.221 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 30 
 16 
 49 
 6 
 −0.584 
 
 0.001 
 
 0.601 
 
 0.003 
 
 −0.579 
 
 0.001 
 
 0.459 
 
 0.024 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Precuneus 
 39 
 −62 
 32 
 39 
 −0.379 
 
 0.026 
 
 0.590 
 
 0.004 
 
 −0.433 
 
 0.012 
 
 0.184 
 0.226 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: Coordinates and region labels represent cluster centers of
mass. PPI correlations by group are shown for regions showing a group
× rumination interaction for the Reappraise > View Sad PPI.
For illustrative purposes, correlations are shown for each condition
> baseline in the same regions to illuminate the source of the
interaction. HC r and MDD r columns indicate the Pearson r correlation
between PPI values and rumination scores for each group, HC p and MDD p
columns indicate the significance of each within-group correlation. P values
at or below .05 are in bold. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regions Showing a Main Effect of Diagnostic Group 
 
 
 
 
 Seed 
 Hemi 
 Region 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 B A 
 View Sad 
 Reap praise 
 HC Cond Diff 
 MDD- ever Cond Diff 
 
 
 
 
 L Amyg 
 Left 
 Anterior Cingulate 
 −8 
 40 
 1 
 32 
 0.720 
 0.429 
 0.180 
 0.943 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Thalamus 
 −16 
 −31 
 9 
 – 
 
 0.013 
 
 0.386 
 0.089 
 
 0.034 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 −7 
 −28 
 41 
 31 
 0.059 
 0.936 
 0.261 
 0.477 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 44 
 −54 
 15 
 22 
 
 0.009 
 
 0.351 
 0.117 
 0.072 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Insula 
 43 
 −12 
 18 
 13 
 0.612 
 0.137 
 0.958 
 0.076 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Precuneus 
 4 
 −57 
 49 
 7 
 
 0.028 
 
 0.395 
 0.181 
 0.106 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Postcentral Gyrus 
 50 
 −20 
 37 
 3 
 0.239 
 0.767 
 0.66 
 0.660 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 35 
 −8 
 47 
 6 
 0.291 
 0.613 
 0.385 
 0.424 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 1 
 20 
 52 
 8 
 
 0.033 
 
 0.892 
 0.096 
 0.712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R Amyg 
 Left 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −44 
 −62 
 9 
 37 
 0.205 
 0.255 
 0.221 
 0.082 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 −37 
 −55 
 46 
 40 
 0.147 
 0.868 
 0.775 
 0.210 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 59 
 −26 
 5 
 22 
 
 0.013 
 
 0.885 
 0.462 
 
 0.039 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Precuneus 
 18 
 −62 
 21 
 31 
 
 0.005 
 
 0.534 
 0.136 
 
 0.032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 sACC 
 Left 
 Cerebellum 
 −23 
 −62 
 −58 
 – 
 
 0.044 
 
 0.269 
 0.756 
 
 0.029 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Superior Parietal Lobule 
 −30 
 −57 
 40 
 7 
 0.085 
 0.414 
 0.401 
 0.110 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 −16 
 30 
 45 
 8 
 
 0.006 
 
 0.989 
 0.425 
 
 0.014 
 
 
 
 
 Left 
 Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 −44 
 −43 
 42 
 40 
 
 0.040 
 
 0.543 
 0.433 
 
 0.030 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 3 
 47 
 23 
 9 
 
 0.009 
 
 0.578 
 0.313 
 
 0.020 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 45 
 −54 
 36 
 40 
 
 0.017 
 
 0.901 
 0.911 
 
 0.011 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Medial Frontal Gyrus 
 12 
 32 
 45 
 8 
 
 0.001 
 
 0.346 
 0.593 
 
 0.006 
 
 
 
 
 Right 
 Cingulate Gyrus 
 5 
 −39 
 36 
 31 
 
 0.036 
 
 0.639 
 0.672 
 
 0.026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note: Coordinates and region labels represent cluster centers of
mass. View Sad and Reappraise columns show the p values of group differences
in PPI values for the View Sad > Baseline PPI and the Reappraise
> Baseline PPI respectively. HC Cond Diff and MDD-ever Cond Diff
shows within-group differences between Reappraise > Baseline and
View Sad > Baseline PPI differences. 
 
 
 
 
