
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0034461 
 4417 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 
 Journal of abnormal psychology 
 
 0021-843X 
 1939-1846 
 
 
 26845257 
 5132953 
 10.1037/abn0000137 
 NIHMS831727 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Frontal-Striatum Dysfunction During Reward Processing: Relationships to Amotivation in Schizophrenia 
 
 
 
 
 Chung 
 Yu Sun 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 Deanna M. 
 
 2 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA 
 2 Department of Psychology, Psychiatry, and Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA 
 
 Corresponding Author: Yu Sun Chung, Ph.D, Department of Psychology, Washington University in St.Louis, Box 1125, One Brookings Drive, St.Louis, MO 63130,  yschung@wustl.edu 
 
 
 23 
 11 
 2016 
 
 
 4 
 2 
 2016 
 
 
 4 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 4 
 2017 
 
 125 
 3 
 453 
 469 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Schizophrenia is characterized by deficits of context processing, thought to be related to dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) impairment. Despite emerging evidence suggesting a crucial role of the DLPFC in integrating reward and goal information, we do not know whether individuals with schizophrenia can represent and integrate reward-related context information to modulate cognitive control. To address this question, thirty-six individuals with schizophrenia ( n =29) or schizoaffective disorder ( n =7) and twenty-seven healthy controls performed a variant of response conflict task ( Padmala and Pessoa, 2011 ) during fMRI scanning, in both baseline and reward conditions, with monetary incentives on some reward trials. We used a mixed state-item design that allowed us to examine both sustained and transient reward effects on cognitive control. Different from predictions about impaired DLPFC function in schizophrenia, we found an intact pattern of increased sustained DLPFC activity during reward vs. baseline blocks in individuals with schizophrenia at a group level but blunted sustained activations in the putamen. Contrary to our predictions, individuals with schizophrenia showed blunted cue-related activations in several regions of the basal ganglia responding to reward-predicting cues. Importantly, as predicted, individual differences in anhedonia/amotivation symptoms severity were significantly associated with reduced sustained DLPFC activation in the same region that showed overall increased activity as a function of reward. These results suggest that individual differences in motivational impairments in schizophrenia may be related to dysfunction of the DLPFC and striatum in motivationally salient situations. 
 
 
 General Scientific Summary 
 This study found that individual differences in anhedonia and/or amotivation symptoms in schizophrenia were related to sustained brain activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during reward context. These findings suggest one of the potential neural mechanisms that may lead to motivational impairments in individuals with schizophrenia. 
 
 
 negative symptoms 
 reward 
 dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 schizophrenia 
 mixed fMRI design 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Amotivation, a “negative” symptom of schizophrenia, is often observed before the onset of psychosis and persists even after successful treatment with antipsychotics that reduce positive symptoms ( Ucok & Ergul, 2014 ). Despite the crucial impact of amotivation on functional outcomes in schizophrenia ( Best, Grossman, Oyewumi, & Bowie, 2014 ;  Robertson et al., 2014 ;  Ventura et al., 2014 ), the psychological and neural mechanisms contributing to motivational impairments in schizophrenia are still not clear. To date, separate lines of research have shown that individuals with schizophrenia display deficits in cognitive control (e.g.,  Cohen, Barch, Carter, & Servan-Schreiber, 1999 ) and both intact and impaired aspects of reward processing ( Gold, Waltz, Prentice, Morris, & Heerey, 2008 ). Deficits in cognitive control are thought to reflect, at least in part, impairments in the function of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), hypothesized to have dysregulated input from the midbrain dopamine system in schizophrenia ( Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, 1992 ). In terms of reward processing, a growing body of literature suggests that individuals with schizophrenia have intact “in-the-moment” responses to reward ( Cohen & Minor, 2010 ;  Dowd & Barch, 2012 ;  Gard, Kring, Gard, Horan, & Green, 2007 ;  Kring, Kerr, Smith, & Neale, 1993 ), but impaired ability to use rewards to guide learning and future behavior ( Gold et al., 2008 ;  Heerey, Bell-Warren, & Gold, 2008 ;  Heerey & Gold, 2007 ;  Kring & Barch, 2014 ;  Morris, Quail, Griffiths, Green, & Balleine, 2015 ). Importantly, recent evidence suggests that the DLPFC plays a crucial role in integrating cognitive and reward-related information ( Dixon & Christoff, 2014 ;  Jimura, Locke, & Braver, 2010 ;  Sakagami & Watanabe, 2007 ;  Watanabe & Sakagami, 2007 ) to guide behavior. However, little is known about whether individuals with schizophrenia can use reward-related information to modulate cognitive control function, and whether impairments in the ability to integrate incentive information with cognitive control might contribute to motivational impairments in this illness. To address these questions, the current study examined the effect of rewards on cognitive control in schizophrenia using a mixed state-item fMRI design. We also examined the relationship of amotivation severity to the ability to use rewards to modulate cognitive control. 
 
 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Function and Reward Processing 
 Emerging evidence from primate neurophysiological studies and human neuroimaging studies suggests that the lateral prefrontal cortex is involved in encoding reward-related information to enhance cognitive control functions ( Kouneiher, Charron, & Koechlin, 2009 ;  Krawczyk, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2007 ;  Szatkowska, Szymanska, Marchewka, Soluch, & Rymarczyk, 2011 ), potentially via internal representations of reward value (see  Botvinick & Braver, 2015 ;  Dixon & Christoff, 2014  for recent reviews). On a variety of cognitive control paradigms, individuals often perform better and faster when provided with cues that predict rewards for successful performance, referred to as the reward  cue  effects ( Bahlmann, Aarts, & D’Esposito, 2015 ;  Geier, Terwilliger, Teslovich, Velanova, & Luna, 2010 ;  Krawczyk et al., 2007 ;  Locke & Braver, 2008 ). Neural responses have been shown to be increased in several regions of the lateral PFC, especially DLPFC and other reward-related subcortical regions, including the nucleus accumbens and caudate, when responding to such reward-predicting cues. 
 In addition to the effects of incentive cues, recent work also suggests that contextual information about incentives can modulate cognitive control performance ( Chiew & Braver, 2013 ;  Jimura et al., 2010 ;  Locke & Braver, 2008 ). For example, in  Locke and Braver (2008) , healthy individuals performed an  AX  variant of the Continuous Performance Test (AX-CPT;  Beck, Bransome, Mirsky, Rosvold, & Sarason, 1956 ), which is known to measure cognitive control processes, in particular, the ability to utilize and maintain contextual cue information ( Braver, Barch, & Cohen, 1999 ) under different blocked-wised motivational contexts in a scanner. To be specific, a series of letters one at a time was presented to participants, asking them to make a target response on the letter  X  only when it follows the letter  A . Thus, cues either an  A  or non-A letters such as  B , serve as the context that participants should keep in mind by representing and sustaining to make subsequent target responses. The crucial point of this task is that the high proportion of the  AX  trials (70%) enables one to differentiate intact or impaired context processing ability. That is, people with intact context processing ability tend to show more errors on  AY  trials relative to  BX  trials due to a high expectation of an  X  probe following an  A  cue. On the other hand, people with impaired context processing are more likely to make more errors on  BX  trials than  AY  trials ( MacDonald, Carter, et al., 2005 ;  Servan-Schreiber, Cohen, & Steingard, 1996 ), as they are less able to use context information provided by the  B  (i.e., non-A) cue to inhibit a tendency to respond to the  X .  Locke and Braver (2008)  found that healthy individuals showed faster and better behavioral performances on the AX-CPT on trials with no incentive cues when those trials occurred during blocks that contained incentive cues on some trials versus blocks that contained no incentive information. This effect, referred to as the reward  context  effect, was hypothesized to reflect the use of proactive control to represent information about potential rewards in order to facilitate the processing of the upcoming target-related information. This reward context effect has been associated with increased sustained activation in the lateral prefrontal cortex ( Jimura et al., 2010 ;  Locke & Braver, 2008 ). 
 
 
 Dysfunctional Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex and Reward Processing in Schizophrenia 
 There is a resurgence of research interest in psychological and neural mechanisms of dysfunctional reward processing in schizophrenia, as motivational deficits, often categorized under negative symptoms, are more closely related to patients’ functioning outcome than cognitive deficits (see  Kring & Barch, 2014 ;  Reddy, Horan, & Green, 2015 ;  Salamone, Koychev, Correa, & McGuire, 2015  for recent reviews). Based on recent affective neuroscience research, Barch and colleagues ( Barch & Dowd, 2010 ;  Barch, Pagliaccio, & Luking, 2015 ;  Kring & Barch, 2014 ) proposed six major components influencing the ability to translate reward information into goal-directed behavioral responses. One of these components is an important ability for goal-directed behavior, which is to integrate reward values in order to generate action plans, thought to be supported by DLPFC function. Here, we will focus on this component as it may be potentially related to the anhedonic phenotype. The “anhedonic phenotype” collectively refers to the constructs of anhedonia and/or amotivation as distinct factors from diminished expression, comprising blunted affect and alogia ( Barch & Dowd, 2010 ;  Barch et al., 2015 ;  Kring & Barch, 2014 ;  Strauss, Hong, et al., 2012 ). Although there is a body of literature on impaired cognitive control function, thought to be due to abnormal DPLFC function in schizophrenia (e.g.,  Cohen et al.,1999 ), more information is needed on the ability of individuals with schizophrenia to integrate reward information with cognitive control, the neural mechanisms that support such integration, and the ways in which these may relate to anhedonia/amotivation symptoms in schizophrenia. 
 One of promising experimental paradigms to examine the construct of anhedonia/amotivation is to examine the effect of reward on cognitive control. For the most part, reward processing and cognitive control in schizophrenia have been examined in independent studies. Mixed findings exist in the reward processing literature in schizophrenia depending on task demands. On the one hand, individuals with schizophrenia show relatively intact reward-related behavioral and neural responses to the in-the-moment presentation of rewards, which presumably does not require the internal representation of reward value regardless of antipsychotic medication status ( Dowd & Barch, 2012 ;  Kirsch, Ronshausen, Mier, & Gallhofer, 2007 ;  Waltz et al., 2010 ). For example, individuals with schizophrenia showed intact brain responses at the receipt of the expected monetary incentives in the ventral striatum ( Dowd & Barch, 2012 ). However, when rewards were unexpectedly delivered, there is some evidence showing reduced responses in the lateral prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia ( Schlagenhauf et al., 2009 ;  Walter et al., 2010 ;  Waltz et al., 2009 ). Such results might suggest that individuals with schizophrenia would be able to use explicit reward cue information to modulate cognitive control, suggesting intact reward cue effects on cognitive control, even if their overall cognitive control level might be impaired (reviewed in  Kring & Barch, 2014 ). Recent behavioral work from our laboratory on a response conflict paradigm is consistent with this hypothesis, showing intact reward cue effects on reaction times in schizophrenia ( Mann, Footer, Chung, Driscoll, & Barch, 2013 ). Further, such findings might suggest that individuals with schizophrenia should show intact reward-cue related responses in striatal regions associated with the process of reward information. 
 In contrast, some studies have found that individuals with schizophrenia show reduced neural responses to reward-predicting cues in the ventral striatum ( Juckel et al., 2006 ;  Kapur, 2003 ;  Kirsch et al., 2007 ;  Robbins, 1976 ;  Schlagenhauf et al., 2008 ) and there is a growing body of literature suggesting that individuals with schizophrenia have difficulties maintaining reward or pleasure-related information over time ( Gold et al., 2008 ;  Heerey, Matveeva, & Gold, 2011 ;  Kring & Caponigro, 2010 ;  Morris et al., 2015 ;  Morris et al., 2012 ;  Schlagenhauf et al., 2014 ). Such results might suggest that individuals with schizophrenia should show impaired effects of incentives on cognitive control, especially incentive context effects that might require the maintenance of internal representations about reward information. Consistent with this hypothesis, our recent behavioral work showed reduced incentive context effects on reaction times in a response-conflict paradigm among individuals with schizophrenia ( Mann et al., 2013 ). As of yet, there is no data on the pattern of neural responses to incentive cues or incentive context among individuals with schizophrenia. However, these behavioral results and the literature on altered prefrontal cortex function in schizophrenia might suggest that individuals with schizophrenia should show reductions in the type of sustained DLPFC activation that has been thought to support reward context effects. 
 Importantly, it is possible that both behavioral and neural responses to incentives cues and incentive context might be influenced by individual differences in negative symptom severity. A number of studies have shown relationships between negative symptom severity in schizophrenia and neural activity during reward anticipation ( de Leeuw, Kahn, & Vink, 2015 ;  Gold et al., 2012 ;  Juckel et al., 2006 ;  Schlagenhauf et al., 2008 ;  Simon et al., 2010 ). For example,  Waltz and colleagues (2010)  found that patients with more severe negative symptoms showed reduced neural responses in the lateral PFC during obtained gain vs. neutral cues.  Dowd and Barch (2012)  found that patients with greater anhedonia severity tended to show reduced activations in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex during anticipation of reward. These reduced activations may reflect patients’ reduced internal representation of reward value. These findings provide evidence that patients’ negative symptoms, in particular, motivational deficits, may be related to impaired internal representations of reward value, potentially related to supported dorsolateral prefrontal cortex function. Taken together, these recent works suggest the possibility that abnormalities of motivational behavior in schizophrenia may be related to difficulty integrating reward-related information in the motivational context rather than reward-related experiences per se ( Gold et al., 2012 ;  Gold et al., 2008 ;  Strauss et al., 2011 ). 
 
 
 Hypotheses and Predictions 
 This study aimed to examine both reward context and cue effects on cognitive control in schizophrenia using a modified response conflict task paradigm ( Padmala & Pessoa, 2011 ) that incorporated a mixed state-item fMRI design. The job of participants was to categorize images as either houses or buildings with either congruent or incongruent overlaid words. First, participants performed no-reward baseline conditions, followed by reward conditions with monetary incentives on some trials (reward cue trials – REW-CUE), but not other trials (reward context trials – RCTX-CUE). The use of mixed state-item fMRI design allowed us to examine both sustained brain activity during the baseline condition (BASE) and during each task condition (i.e., baseline condition (BASE), reward condition (REWARD), as well as  cue  effects by comparing neural activity during cues occurring during the baseline condition (BASE-CUE), and cues during reward condition that either indicated that they could win a reward (REW-CUE) or reward context trials on which they could not get a reward (RCTX-CUE). Based on the literature reviewed above, we predicted that individuals with schizophrenia would show reduced incentive context effects in behavior and reduced sustained neural activity in the DLPFC during reward versus baseline blocks compared to the healthy controls (HC). In contrast, we predicted that they would show intact reward cue effects in behavior and that they would show intact transient neural activity in the ventral striatum in response to incentive cues. Further, we predicted that anhedonia and/or amotivaion in schizophrenia may reflect, at least in part, patients’ difficulty of translating reward value into goal representation towards goal-directed responses. In this context, we expected that individual differences in anhedonia and/or amotivation symptoms in schizophrenia would be negatively correlated with either or both sustained brain activations in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during reward contexts and transient cue-related activity in the ventral striatum during reward anticipations. 
 
 
 
 Method 
 
 Participants and Recruitment Information 
 Participants consisted of 27 HC and 36 outpatients with  DSM-IV-TR  schizophrenia ( n  = 29) or schizoaffective disorder ( n  =7), taking stable antipsychotic medication doses for at least two weeks before participating in the current study (see  Supplement Material  for details about recruitment, inclusion and exclusion criteria). All participants were recruited through the Conte Center for the Neuroscience of Mental Disorders at Washington University in St. Louis. A subset of data analyses from the HC ( n =27) only was reported in a prior publication (Chung and Barch, 2015). 
 Clinical symptoms were rated using the Scales for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS;  Andreasen, 1983b ), the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS;  Andreasen, 1983a ) by a trained master’s level clinician. Importantly, we included the Brief Negative Symptom Scale (BNSS;  Kirkpatrick et al., 2011 ) to investigate the relationship between individual differences in anhedonia and/or amotivation and neural responses (see  Supplement Methods  for details about the BNSS). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and all procedures were approved by the Washington University. 
 
 
 Task Stimuli and Paradigm 
 During the task, images-plus-words were presented to participants one at a time. The job of participants was to categorize each image as either a house or building regardless of the overlaid letters by pressing a “1” for a house image or “2” for a building image. The overlaid letters were used to create neutral, incongruent or congruent trials. For example, if a building picture was presented with a matching word, “ BLDNG ”, this is an example of congruent trial. However, if a building image was presented with non-matching word such as “ HOUSE ”, this is an example of incongruent trials. For neutral trials, “ XXXXX ” letters were presented with an image (see  Figure 1 (a)  for task stimuli). 
 We modified the cued response conflict processing developed by  Padmala and Pessoa (2011)  for the use of a mixed-state item design, as described in more details below (see  Supplement materials ). During the task, images-plus-words were presented to participants one at a time. The job of participants was to categorize each image as either a house or building regardless of the overlaid letters. 
 Each participant first performed two baseline runs without any knowledge of future rewards where each trial started with a “ XX ” cue with instruction saying these cues were irrelevant to task (BASE condition, with BASE-CUE trials). Then they completed four reward runs (REWARD condition) with instruction about possibility of obtaining incentive money on some trials (REW-CUE) but not other (RCTX-CUE). Reward runs includes 54 trials per each trial-type, resulting in a total of 162 trials where trials were preceded by a “ $20 ”, REW-CUE indicating that a fast and correct response would be rewarded by 2000 points or by a “ XX ”, RCTX-CUE, indicating zero points would be possible on the trial. The RT threshold to determine “fast” response was set individually for each subject based on the median RT from the second baseline run (see  Figure 1 ). 
 As presented in  Figure 1 (b) , each participant first performed two baseline runs without any knowledge of future rewards. In these runs, each trial started with a “ XX ” cue with instruction saying these cues were irrelevant to task (BASE condition, with BASE-CUE trials). Then, a jittered fixation period occurred, ranging from 2 to 6s before the onset of the stimuli, designed to allow estimates of event-related responses to the cues. The target stimulus was then presented for 1s, during which time participants responded. Then, visual feedback indicating accuracy of performance was presented to participants. Finally, an intertrial interval (ITI) that varied between 2,4, and 6s occurred. After the two baseline runs, participants completed four reward runs (REWARD condition) with instructions about the possibility of obtaining money on some trials (i.e., “ $20 ”, REW-CUE) but not other trials (i.e., “XX”, RCTX-CUE) for correct and fast responses (see  Figure 1(c)  for reward blocks). The RT threshold to determine a “fast” response was set individually for each subject based on the median RT from the second baseline run. During reward runs, half of the trials were preceded by a “ $20 ” reward cue (REW-CUE) indicating that a fast and correct response would be rewarded by 2000 points or by a “ XX ” (RCTX-CUE), indicating zero points would be possible on the trial. Equal numbers of congruent, incongruent, and neutral trials were presented for a total of 108 trials. After the target stimulus, participants received visual feedback indicating the number of reward points that they had earned on that trial as well as their cumulative earnings in points. At the end of experiment, the accumulated reward points were converted to real money. All participants received a maximum of $20 based on their accumulated points in addition to base money for completing the experiment ($25/h). 
 All BOLD scanning runs of this response conflict task were performed using a mixed block and event-related design, based on the recommendations of  Petersen and Dubis (2012) . Each run consisted of three blocks of 27 trials (9 trials per block), alternating with three fixation blocks (30 seconds per each) to examine how long sustained effect lasted during each task block. In both baseline and reward sections, each run was separated by pauses for rest. During task blocks, the inter-trial interval of 2 to 6 seconds was temporally jittered to ensure robust deconvolution of even-related fMRI responses. 
 
 
 Behavioral Data Analysis 
 Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted on correct trials for both median reaction times (RT) and error data with within-subject factors of a  Reward  (BASE-CUE, REW-CUE, RCTX-CUE) and  Trial type  (congruent, incongruent, and neutral trials) and  Diagnostic Group  (HC, schizophrenia) as a between-subject factor. Significant interactions were followed by post-hoc contrasts to determine the source of the interactions. For analyses of reward context effects, we calculated contrasts on RT data by subtracting the RT in RCTX-CUE trials cued by “ XX ” in the reward condition from RT in the BASE-CUE trials cued by the same cue, “ XX ” in the baseline condition across all three trial types. For analyses of reward cue effects, contrasts on RT data were estimated by subtracting the RT in REW-CUE trials (“ $20 ”) from RT in the RCTX-CUE trials (“ XX ”) from the  within  the same reward blocks, collapsing across all three trials-type. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Analysis 
 Additional details on fMRI acquisition and image analysis are presented in  Supplemental Methods and Materials . A voxel-wise general linear model (GLM) approach was used, which incorporated regressors for linear trend and baseline shifts. Using the mixed design, sustained and transient effects associated with reward enhancement on cognitive control can be simultaneously but independently coded within the same GLM, enabling dissociation of these two effects ( Friston et al., 1995 ). Baseline and reward task blocks were modeled by box-car functions lasting the length of each task block using an assumption of a fixed-shape response of long duration ( Fischl et al., 2002 ). The event-related transient effects were analyzed separately for each trial-type by estimating the values for eight time point regressors (starting at trial onset) within the hemodynamic response epoch, estimated to be 16 seconds (TR: 2 seconds, 8 scanning frames) using unassumed hemodynamic response shapes. Specifically, for event-related effects, three regressors for each reward-related cue-type (BASE-CUE, REW-CUE, RCTX-CUE) during cue phase, another set of three regressors for target-related trials (congruent, incongruent, neutral trials) during target phase were separately coded with start and done cues. 
 
 
 DLPFC and BG  A Priori  ROI Mask Analyses 
 To conduct hypothesis-driven regions of interest (ROI) analyses, we defined as  a priori  ROI regions within the DLPFC and the basal ganglia (BG). Exploratory whole brain analyses are presented in the  Supplement Materials . The anatomical DLPFC mask regions (Brodmann’s areas 9 and 46) were defined on an atlas-representative image using the boundaries described by  Rajkowska and Goldman-Rakic (1995)  and includes the bilateral middle and superior frontal gyri. The BG mask regions were derived from  Wang et al. (2008)  and generated by combining the caudate, nucleus accumbens, putamen, and globus pallidus. All statistical activation maps from each mask were appropriately corrected for multiple comparisons using combined  p -value and cluster thresholds determined using Monte Carlo simulations; an approach equivalent to that employed by the AlphaSim program in the AFNI software package. For DLPFC ROI mask regions,  z -value of 2.05 and a contiguous 13 voxels and for the BG ROI mask region,  z  -value of 2.05 and a contiguous 14 voxels were used. After the identification of group differences, for significant clusters, we extracted an average value of BOLD responses and imported them into SPSS for further post-hoc analyses to parse the source of significant effects. After the identification of group differences, for significant clusters, we extracted an average value of BOLD responses and imported them into SPSS for further post-hoc analyses to parse the source of significant effects. These analyses included independent and paired  t -test as appropriate (see  Supplemental Results ). For these post-hoc analyses of cue-related activity, given our use of unassumed GLMs, we focused on regions showing interactions with time points and the mean percent signal change across each region was extracted for each of the eight estimated time points to visualize general pattern of activity. Among all time points frames, we focused on the average of time point 3 and 4, as theses time points encompassed 5–8 seconds after stimulus onset, which would capture the initial peak in a stereotyped hemodynamic responses unconfounded by sustained activity. 
 
 
 Individual Difference Analyses 
 We conducted voxel-wise Pearson product-moment correlations between individual difference measures and BOLD contrasts in the ROIs that showed sustained reward and transient cue effects within each DLPFC and BG mask. In these analyses, REWARD - BASE conditions and the “$20” versus “XX” within reward blocks contrasts were correlated with individual difference scores described above using both the same small-volume correction mentioned above and Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. 
 
 
 Post-Scan Questionnaire of Analysis 
 Before the fMRI session, participants had two separate practice sessions in the scanner to ensure that they were familiar with what they were supposed to do in the baseline run and then before the reward task runs. After the fMRI session, a subset of participants [schizophrenia:  n =7, HC:  n =10] completed a post-scan questionnaire asking about self-reported motivation and difficulty levels during task. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Participants Characteristics 
 The two groups were similar in terms of most demographic variables except slightly higher participants’ education in the HC relative to the schizophrenia (see  Table 1 ), a typical finding in schizophrenia research. 
 
 
 Post-scan Questionnaire (see  Table S1 ) 
 Self-reported Motivation: A repeated-measures of ANOVA on self-reported motivation was conducted to make sure that motivational states were manipulated by monetary incentives. There was a significant main effect of  Motivation  [ F  (2,30) = 4.78,  p = .01,  η 2 p = .24]. We did not find a significant main effect of  Group  [ F  (1,15) = .68,  p  = .42,  η 2 p = .04] or a significant  Motivation  (RCTX-CUE, REW-CUE, BASE-CUE) x  Group  interaction [ F  (2,30) = .04,  p  = .95,  η 2 p = .003]. Three post-hoc paired  t -tests (REW-CUE - BASE-CUE, RCTX-CUE - BASE-CUE, REW-CUE - RCTX-CUE) were conducted to follow up a main effect of  Motivation . Both groups reported higher motivation on REW-CUE (“ $20 ”) than BASE-CUE (“ XX ”) [paired  t -test (16)=2.74,  p =0.01] and on REW-CUE (“ $20 ”) relative to RCTX (“ XX ”) within reward blocks [paired  t -test (16)=2.63,  p = .018]. However, there was no difference in self-reported motivation between RCTX-CUE and BASE-CUE [paired  t -test (16) = 0.23,  p = .87]. 
 Self-reported Task Difficulty: Another repeated-measures of ANOVA on difficulty was conducted. There was a significant main effect of  Difficulty  [ F  (1,15) = 5.38,  p = .03,  η 2 p = .26]. We did not find a significant main effect of  Group  [ F  (1,15) = .008,  p  = .92,  η 2 p = .001] or a significant  Difficulty  (reward, baseline blocks) x  Group  interaction [ F  (1,15) = 2.25,  p  = .15,  η 2 p = .13]. Post-hoc paired  t -test on difficulty between reward and baseline blocks indicates that both groups felt somewhat higher level of difficulty on reward than baseline blocks [paired  t -test (16)=2.52,  p = .02]. 
 
 
 Behavioral Data 
 Repeated measures ANOVAs on accuracy and reaction times were conducted as described above. The error data revealed only a significant main effect of  Trial type  [ F  (2,122) = 16.98,  p  = .00,  η 2 p = .21], reflecting more errors on incongruent compared to congruent trials [ F  (1,61) = 27.92,  p  = .000,  η 2 p = .31] and neutral compared to congruent trials at a trend level [ F  (1,61) = 3.48,  p  = .06,  η 2 p = .05] but not other interaction effects (all  ps  > .16). Thus, main behavioral analyses were focused on RT data (See  Supplement results ). 
 As presented in  Figure 2 , the repeated measure ANOVA for RTs revealed significant main effects of  Group  [ F  (1,61) = 10.38,  p  = .002,  η 2 p = .14],  Reward  [ F  (2,122) = 34.12,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .35], and  Trial type  [ F  (2,122) = 32.01,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .34]. Planned contrasts to determine the source of the main effect of  Trial type  indicated slower responses on incongruent compared to congruent trials [ F  (1,61)=51.93,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .46] and slower RTs on neutral compared with congruent trials [ F  (1,61)=18.66,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .23]. Planned contrasts to determine the source of the main effect of  Reward  reflected faster performance on RCTX-CUE compared to BASE-CUE trials [ F (1,61) = =12.93,  p  = .001,  η 2 p = .17], REW-CUE compared to BASE-CUE [ F  (1,61) = 60.98,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .50] as well as REW-CUE compared to RCTX-CUE [ F  (1,61) =26.32,  p  < .001,  η 2 p = .30]. As shown in  Figure 2 , the main effect of  Group  reflected overall slower RTs in schizophrenia group compared with the HC. We did not find a significant  Reward  by  Group  interaction ( p  = .22),  Trial type  by  Group  or  Reward  x  Trial type  or  Group  by  Reward  x  Trial type  interactions (all  p s > .44). 
 
 Behavioral Indices of Reward Context and Cue Effects 
 There were no significant group differences regarding behavioral indices of reward context and cue effects: individuals with schizophrenia showed similar reward context [ t  (61) = −0.44,  p  = .65] and cue effects compared with the HC [ t  (61) = 1.95,  p  = .06]. 
 
 Behavior-Negative Symptoms Relationships 
 There was no significant association between individual differences in negative symptoms and behavioral indices of reward context and cue effects on RT data (all  p s > .09). 
 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging Data 
 
 Sustained Context-dependent Reward Effects 
 The voxel-wise repeated measures ANOVAs within the DLPFC and BG masks with  Reward Condition  (BASE, REWARD) as a within-subject factor and  Group  (HC, schizophrenia) as a between-subject factor revealed significant main effects of  Reward Condition  and  Group , as well as of  Group  x  Reward Condition  (see  Table 2 ). In terms of the main effect of  Reward Condition , consistent with prior research, we found bilateral regions of DLPFC that showed increased sustained activity in the reward compared to the baseline blocks. In terms of the main effect of  Group , we found regions in the PFC and the putamen that showed increased activity in the schizophrenia versus the HC, but bilateral regions in the lateral globus pallidus that showed decreased activity in the schizophrenia compared to the HC. Most importantly, we found a region in the putamen that showed a  Group  X  Reward Condition  interaction (see  Figure 3 ), with HC, but not schizophrenia, showing greater activity in the reward blocks versus the baseline blocks. 
 
 
 Relation between Sustained Activation and Amotivation in Schizophrenia 
 Patients with greater negative symptoms scores as measured by a total score of the SANS showed more reduced sustained activity in the right DLPFC in the REWARD Condition ( Figure 4B ) but no such significant association was found in the left DLPFC ( Figure 4 A ). Existing research suggests that the SANS includes two independent factors, which includes diminished expression (i.e., the sum of affect flattening and alogia), and amotivation (i.e., the sum of anhedonia, avolition, and asociality) (e.g.,  Blanchard & Cohen, 2006 ;  Strauss, Hong, et al., 2012 ). Thus, we examined whether these relationships to the right DLPFC activity differed across the two subscales. Such significant association in the right DLPFC was driven by the association between individual differences in amotivation and sustained activity during the REWARD condition in the right DLPFC ( r  = .39  p = 0.01), an effect that passed Bonferroni correction. 
 
 
 Exploratory Whole Brain Analysis 
 
 Sustained Interaction of Reward and Group 
 A significant  Group  x  Reward  interaction was also found in the right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and right claustrum in the whole-brain analysis (see  Table S4  for exact coordinates of each region and the pattern shown in each region). To further identify the source of these  Reward  x  Group  interactions effects, we conducted post-hoc paired  t -tests to compare sustained activity during reward vs. baseline blocks for each group. As presented in  Figure S6 , the HC showed greater activity during reward vs. baseline blocks in both regions displaying a  Reward  x  Group  interaction [the right OFC: paired  t -test (26)=3.52,  p  =.002), the right claustrum: paired  t -test (26)= 3.51,  p  =.002]. In contrast, individuals with schizophrenia showed a weak effect in the opposite direction, with somewhat greater activity in baseline relative to reward blocks in the right OFC [paired  t -test (35)= −2.57,  p  = .01] and the right claustrum at a trend level [paired  t  -test (35)= −2.02,  p  =.05]. 
 
 
 
 Sustained Brain Activity and Negative Symptom Relation 
 There was no significant association between the sustained activity in the OFC activity during reward vs. baseline conditions and symptom severity as measured by a total score of the SANS ( r  = −.15,  p  =.35). For the right claustrum, the sustained activity contrast during reward vs. baseline was associated with the total score of the SANS ( r  = −.33,  p  =.04) but did not pass the Bonferroni correction. 
 
 
 Transient Cue-Related Reward Effects 
 The voxel-wise repeated measures ANOVAs with  Cue Type  (BASE-CUE, REW-CUE, RCTX-CUE) and  Time points  (frames 1–8 in a trial) as within-subject factors and  Group  (HC, schizophrenia) as a between-subject factor revealed several regions showing either significant  Cue Type  x  Time points  or  Cue Type  x  Group  x  Time points  interactions ( Table 3 ). All of the regions showing  Cue Type  x  Time points  interactions, including bilateral DLPFC, showed greater activity on REW-CUE as compared to both RCTX-CUE and BASE-CUE trials. There were two regions in the BG – putamen and lateral globus pallidus that showed further interactions with  Group . In both the ventral striatum and lateral globus pallidus, HC showed increased trial-by-trial activity on REW-CUE trials relative to RCTX-CUE and BASE-CUE trials while individuals with schizophrenia did not show significant differences in the trial-by-trial activity as a function of Cue Type ( Figure 5 ). 
 
 
 Transient Target- Related Effects 
 The voxel-wise repeated measures ANOVAs with  Cue Type  (BASE-CUE, REW-CUE, RCTX-CUE),  Trial Type  (Congruent, Neutral, Incongruent) and  Time points  as within-subject factors and  Group  as a between-subject factor were conducted to examine target-related activity as a function of rewards. Here, we focused on  Cue Type x Group x Time points  and  Cue Type  x  Trial type  x  Group  x  Time points  interaction effects as our main interests were to test whether individuals with schizophrenia could use and integrate reward-related context information to modulate their cognitive performance (see  Supplement Results  for the other interaction effects). 
 Several regions in the bilateral DLPFC, putamen and medial globus pallidus displayed  Cue Type x Group x Time points  interaction (see  Table 4 ). In the putamen and medial globus pallidus, the HC did not show a different degree of target-related activity as a function of reward, while individuals with schizophrenia showed greater target-related activity on BASE-CUE than on RCTX-CUE trials at a trend level ( p  =.05). In the right DLPFC ( x :25,  y :37,  z : 29), the HC showed reduced target-related activity during RCTX/REW-CUE trials vs. BASE-CUE while individuals with schizophrenia showed no different activity as a function of Cue Type in the same right DLPFC (see  Figure S2  for time course). 
 The only DLPFC  a priori  mask region revealed  Cue Type  x  Trial type  x  Group  x  Time points interaction . As a follow up, we first determined whether the  Cue Type  x  Trial type  x  time points  interaction was significant within each group, separately. This three-way interaction was significant in the schizophrenia at a trend level [ F  (4, 104)= 2.18,  p =.07,  η 2 p  =.05], but not the HC [ F (4, 104)= .78,  p =.53,  η 2 p  =.02]. Then we compared the magnitude of difference (incongruent - congruent trials) to targets during REW-CUE to RCTX-CUE in the schizophrenia and found a significantly smaller interference effect on REW-CUE trials compared to RCTX-CUE trials in the schizophrenia [paired  t -test (35) = 3.17,  p  = .003] (see  Figure 6 ). 
 
 
 Relation between Transient Activation and Amotivation in Schizophrenia 
 Another set of Pearson Product-Moment correlation analyses were also conducted to examine the relationship between transient cue-related reward context and/or cue effects and individual difference in amotivated symptom in the ventral striatum and lateral globus pallidus regions displaying  Cue Type x Group x Time point  interactions as well as in the DLPFC region displaying  Cue Type x Time points  interactions. We found that the transient cue effect during REW-CUE vs. RCTX-CUE trials in the left DLPFC was significantly correlated with individual difference in the BNSS, though this correlation did not pass Bonferroni correction (see  Figure 7 ). 
 
 
 Potential Effects of Medications or Depression on Behavior and Neural Data 
 We also examined whether the current results were affected either by antipsychotic medications or depressive symptoms. First, we estimated olanzapine equivalents for each individual based on  Gardner et al. (2010 )’s recommendations. Pearson’s Product-Moment correlations with olanzapine equivalent doses in schizophrenia ( n  =36) revealed no significant associations with either reward context effects ( r  = −0.03,  p  = .82) or reward cue effects ( r  =−0.09,  p  =.58) in behavior. Similarly, neither sustained nor transient neural activations as a function of rewards were associated with olanzapine equivalent doses. Furthermore, we examined the effect of antipsychotic type on activity in the regions showing significant group effects in the behavior and neural data by conducting one-way ANOVAs comparing individuals with schizophrenia taking atypical versus typical versus both medications. For sustained activity during reward vs. baseline blocks in the putamen and the DLPFC, there were no significant differences among the three groups [ F  (3,35) = 1.25,  p = .30;  F (3,35) =0.29,  p =.82, respectively]. Similarly, regarding transient cue-related activity as a function of rewards, there were no significant differences among three groups in the right putamen [ F (3,35) = 0.54,  p = .65] or the left lateral globus pallidus [ F  (3,35) = 1.61,  p = .20], Regarding the behavioral findings, one-way ANOVAs revealed that there were no significant differences among the three groups for behavioral reward context effects [ F (3,35) = 1.98,  p = .13] or for behavioral reward cue effects [ F (3,35) = 1.26,  p = .30]. We also did not find any significant relationships between depressive symptoms, as measured by the BDI ( Beck, Steer, & Garbin, 1988 ), and any of the behavioral or neural measures (all  ps  ≥ .05) (see  Tables 5  and  6 ). 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The goal of this study was to examine the effect of rewards on cognitive control at both behavioral and neural levels using a mixed state-item fMRI design with a special focus on the role of the DLPFC and basal ganglia system. The present results suggest dysfunctional cortico-striatal system in schizophrenia during processing reward-related context information, as evidenced by blunted sustained activations in the putamen and transient activations in the ventral striatum as a function of rewards. Importantly, patients with more severe anhedonia and/or amotivation symptoms tended to show more reduced sustained neural activations in the DLPFC as a function of rewards. These results are consistent with previous studies using various reward-processing task paradigms that might reflect deficits in integrating and transferring internal representation of reward value into action execution to guide goal-directed behavior presumably due to dysfunctional cortico-striatal system ( Barch & Dowd, 2010 ;  Gold et al., 2008 ;  Morris et al., 2015 ;  Waltz et al., 2009 ). 
 
 Behavioral Reward Context and Cue Effects 
 Different from our previous study ( Mann et al., 2013 ) showing a reduced reward context effect in schizophrenia but an intact reward cue effect, we found that individuals with schizophrenia showed no significant differences from the HC in either reward cue or reward context effects. The discrepancy between two studies may be due to methodological differences. The clearest difference in the current study from  Mann et al. (2013)  is a modification of the task paradigm by adopting a mixed state-item fMRI design. Thus, the current study included a jittered period between the presentation of cues and target phase while our prior behavioral study did not include such a jittered period; the target phase was followed right after the presentation of each cue. Thus, it is possible that due to such jittering after cue presentation, participants had some time to prepare for upcoming stimuli, which in turn may have resulted in relatively intact pattern of reward context effects for the individuals with schizophrenia in current study. Also, different from  Padmala and Pessoa (2011) , we did not find cognitive control modulation as a function of rewards. Rather, we found a general enhancement of reward on cognitive performance as evidenced by faster responses during reward relative to baseline contexts. 
 
 
 Sustained Context-dependent Activity and Relation to Amotivation in Schizophrenia 
 Emerging evidence suggests that the maintenance of reward value during the entire task supported by the DLPFC system ( Braver et al., 2014 ;  Jimura et al., 2010 ;  Kring & Barch, 2014 ) is crucial for the enhancement of cognitive control function. That is, keeping goals active in a sustained manner via proactive control in the DLPFC may facilitate preparatory processing and in turn, lead to enhanced cognitive performance ( Chiew & Braver, 2013 ;  Jimura et al., 2010 ;  Locke & Braver, 2008 ). Considering patients’ context processing deficits in non-incentive paradigms, thought to be due to a disturbance in DLPFC function (e.g.,  Barch et al., 2001 ), we expected to find reduced sustained activations during reward context in the DLPFC in schizophrenia compared with HC. However, contrary to the prediction, but paralleling the present behavioral findings, individuals with schizophrenia showed an intact pattern of greater sustained activation in the bilateral DLPFC during reward vs. baseline contexts, as did the HC. Interestingly, a diagnostic group difference was identified in the putamen where individuals with schizophrenia showed blunted sustained activation during the reward condition. 
 The basal ganglia complex is a major component of the neural circuitry that is involved in reward processing in addition to the lateral prefrontal cortex (reviewed in  Delgado, 2007 ). It should be noted that the dorsal striatum receives major input from cortical structures to execute motivated, goal-directed behaviors ( Haber, 2011 ). The dorsal striatum is thought to be one of the motivation-sensitive regions of which neural activity is modulated by reward-related contextual information ( Delgado, Locke, Stenger, & Fiez, 2003 ;  Delgado, Stenger, & Fiez, 2004 ). However, we did not see evidence for behavioral differences at the group level in the reward context effects. It is possible that these would be more apparent in a more challenging task, but that is a speculation that awaits empirical testing. 
 Consistent with our hypothesis about sustained activation, patients with greater anhedonia/amotivation showed more reduced sustained activity during reward vs. baseline blocks in the right DLPFC. Of note, this is the region where as a group, individuals with schizophrenia showed a similar pattern to the HC of greater sustained activity during the reward vs. the baseline condition. Thus, although not all individuals with schizophrenia may show impairments in sustained DLPFC activity, those individuals with more severe anhedonia/amotivation may reflect have difficulties in the ability to represent and  sustain  reward value during their cognitive control function potentially due to abnormal DLPFC-medicated context processing. However, we did not find parallel relationships between individual differences in anhedonia/amotivation and the behavioral indices of reward effects. Again, this may suggest that the behavioral indices were not as sensitive as the neural indices. 
 
 
 Transient Cue-related Activity and Relation to Amotivation in Schizophrenia 
 Contrary to the traditional notion that motivational impairments in schizophrenia may come from their inability to experience pleasure ( Meehl, 1989 ), accumulated evidence from behavioral and neuroimaging studies suggests that individuals with schizophrenia have an intact ability to experience positive events as positive in the moment. Rather, it has been argued that amotivation in schizophrenia may come from a different phase of reward processing. For example, regardless of antipsychotic medication status, several studies found less ventral striatal activation during the presentation of reward-predicting cues in individuals with schizophrenia relative to the HC ( Esslinger et al., 2012 ;  Juckel et al., 2006 ). In line with these findings, in the current study, individuals with schizophrenia showed blunted ventral striatal activations during reward-predicting cues. 
 Importantly, we predicted that individuals with schizophrenia who had greater anhedonia/amotivation would show less transient cue-related activation in the ventral striatum as a function of reward. Different from the prediction, we did not find any significant correlation between individual difference scores in anhedonia/amotivation as measured by the BNSS and neural activation in the ventral striatum. However, we did find such association in the DLPFC during REW-CUE (“ $20 ”) vs. RCTX-CUE (“ XX ”). However, this correlation did not pass Bonferroni correction. As such, these associations should be considered provisional and further research is needed to replicate this relevance of anhedonia/amotivation with the DLPFC function, especially by dissociating “liking” and “wanting” ( Berridge, 1996 ,  2007 ,  2012 ). 
 
 
 Implications of Cognitive Control, Motivation and Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Function in Schizophrenia 
 As noted in the Introduction, emerging evidence points to relatively intact in-the-moment pleasurable experiences, but converges on impairments of predicting reward and translating reward value into action execution in schizophrenia, processes thought to be supported by the DLPFC function (reviewed in  Barch et al., 2015 ). The recent focus on studying reward processing paradigms in schizophrenia has come from the hope for a better understanding of the pathophysiology of negative symptoms, in particular, motivational impairments (see  Barch & Dowd, 2010 ;  Strauss, Waltz, & Gold, 2014  for recent reviews). In this context, we have used a cognitive control paradigm (i.e., a variant of response conflict task) in reward context to infer to what extent individuals with schizophrenia would be able to use cognitive control to help them engage in real-world functioning, such as work or school activities, to achieve positive outcome. Through a mixed-state item fMRI design, we experimentally measured a presumed proxy of patients’ ability to process in-the-moment pleasurable experience (i.e., transient reward-cue effects) as well as a proxy of patients’ ability to sustain and use reward values during goal-directed behavior, such as working or school activities (i.e., sustained reward context effects). 
 Consistent with our predictions, the current findings suggest that motivational impairments in schizophrenia are related to dysfunctional DLPFC activity during cognitive control. Along with a body of literature showing cognitive control deficits in schizophrenia (e.g.,  Barch & Ceaser, 2012 ;  Cohen et al. 1999 ), we propose that motivational impairments in schizophrenia might reflect patients’ inefficient use of proactive control in potentially rewarding situations. Given our results, one potentially promising pathway for developing negative symptom treatments is to enhance DLPFC-mediated cognitive control function in rewarding situations in order to improve functioning outcomes in schizophrenia. As recently reviewed by  Reddy et al. (2015) , there are few effective negative symptom treatments and/or interventions in the field. Only a few preliminary studies exist on this topic (reviewed in  Elis, Caponigro, & Kring, 2013 ). For example, a preliminary study by  Favrod, Giuliani, Ernst, and Bonsack (2010)  found that five individuals with schizophrenia that had received between 10 hours and 25 hours of cognitive/pleasure skills training showed increased self-report anticipatory pleasure and daily activities. In recent work by  Velligan et al. (2015) , a nine-month motivation-enhancing treatment program using cognitive and behavioral principles showed moderate treatment effects on some negative symptom assessments, though the effect was not sustained through the full nine month period. 
 Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous and complex illness and not all individuals with schizophrenia show similar clinical presentations ( Lang et al., 2015 ;  Tsuang, Lyons, & Faraone, 1990 ). The current findings add to the body of literature suggesting that there are individual differences in anhedonia/amotivation symptoms in schizophrenia and that these are related to individual differences in DLPFC dysfunction during reward contexts. Such findings highlight the importance of a symptom-specific approach rather than only group-level comparisons. This symptom-specific approach may help to elucidate more homogeneous dimensions of this illness, which in turn can be used to define clearer psychopathologic endophenotypes of schizophrenia. 
 
 
 Overall Limitations 
 The primary limitation of the current study was that most individuals with schizophrenia were taking dopamine receptor blocking antipsychotic medications, which could affect reward-related neural responses ( Abler, Erk, & Walter, 2007 ;  Juckel et al., 2006 ;  Mathews et al., 2012 ;  Nielsen et al., 2012 ). Despite a potential impact of antipsychotic medication on reward processing, importantly, it is highly unlikely that current findings are purely related to antipsychotic action, as motivational deficits, as evidenced by abnormality of reward-related neural responses, have been observed even in unmedicated patients with first-episode schizophrenia ( Esslinger et al., 2012 ;  Schlagenhauf et al., 2009 ) and individuals at prodromal phase o f the illness ( Piskulic et al., 2012 ;  Wotruba et al., 2014 ;  Yung & McGorry, 1996 ). Importantly, however, our supplemental analysis did not find relationships between neural and behavioral results and antipsychotic medication doses (see  Table 5  and  Table 6 ). 
 Another limitation is that fixed-order task presentations may have impacted current pattern of results: non-incentive baseline conditions were always followed by reward conditions. Thus, there is a possibility that current results might include practice-related effects due to this fixed-order. However, we believe that it is unlikely given empirical evidence of no practice effects from prior work by  Chiew and Braver (2013)  where participants performed baseline and then reward blocks with reward and no-reward cues randomly intermixed, like our design. When they broke down each block into four epochs, potential practice effects after the first epoch disappeared, while incentive effects were sustained throughout. Additionally, our behavioral data shows general enhancement of rewards on enhancing speed of cognitive performances across groups, but did not show interaction effect of reward and cognitive control different from prior work by  Padmala and Pessoa (2011) . There is a possibility that task difficulty of current conflict processing was not challenging enough to require cognitive control for participants to yield such interaction effect. Future studies could use task paradigms with increased difficulty for participants. For example, switching between tasks may increase difficulty for participants. Also, it is possible to observe stronger effects for larger amount of rewards in future work. Finally, general negative symptom severity as measured by the BNSS for current participants was somewhat low compared to some other validation studies of the BNSS ( Mucci et al., 2015 ;  Strauss, Keller, et al., 2012 ). Thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that the relatively low level of negative symptom severity for our current participants may have contributed to our not finding diagnostic group differences in reward context effects. It would be useful to include participants with a wider range of negative symptom severity to address this in future studies. 
 
 
 Summary 
 At a behavioral level, individuals with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from controls in either reward cue or reward context behavioral effects. Further, at the neural level, individuals with schizophrenia, as a group, showed an intact pattern of greater sustained activity during reward context in the bilateral DLPFC like the HC. However, individual difference analyses revealed that greater amotivation symptoms were associated with reduced sustained context-dependent activity in the DLPFC as a function of rewards. Taken together, the current study provided neural evidence suggesting the relevance of patients’ DLPFC function during reward processing to amotivation symptoms of schizophrenia. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant Number R01-MH066031 (grant awardee: Deanna M. Barch, Ph.D). One of co-authors, Deanna M. Barch consults for Pfizer, Amgen Roche and Takeda. 
 
 
 
 All authors have no financial or conflicts of interest. 
 
 
 
 Abbreviations 
 
 
 BASE 
 
 Baseline conditions 
 
 
 
 BASE-CUE 
 
 Baseline cue cued by “ XX ” in baseline conditions 
 
 
 
 HC 
 
 Healthy controls 
 
 
 
 REWARD 
 
 Reward conditions 
 
 
 
 RCTX-CUE 
 
 Reward context trials cued by “ XX ” in reward conditions 
 
 
 
 REW-CUE 
 
 Reward cue trials cued by “ $20 ” in reward conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Abler 
 B 
 
 
 Erk 
 S 
 
 
 Walter 
 H 
 
 
 Human reward system activation is modulated by a single dose of olanzapine in healthy subjects in an event-related, double-blind, placebo-controlled fMRI study 
 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
 2007 
 191 
 3 
 823 
 833 
 17265148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andreasen 
 NC 
 
 
 The Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS) 
 1983a 
 Iowa City 
 University of Iowa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andreasen 
 NC 
 
 
 The Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS) 
 1983b 
 Iowa City 
 University of Iowa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bahlmann 
 J 
 
 
 Aarts 
 E 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Influence of motivation on control hierarchy in the human frontal cortex 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2015 
 35 
 7 
 3207 
 3217 
 25698755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 A 
 3rd 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Selective deficits in prefrontal cortex function in medication-naive patients with schizophrenia 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 2001 
 58 
 3 
 280 
 288 
 11231835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Dowd 
 EC 
 
 
 Goal Representations and Motivational Drive in Schizophrenia: The Role of Prefrontal-Striatal Interactions 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Ceaser 
 A 
 
 
 Cognition in schizophrenia: core psychological and neural mechanisms 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2012 
 16 
 1 
 27 
 34 
 22169777 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Pagliaccio 
 D 
 
 
 Luking 
 K 
 
 
 Mechanisms Underlying Motivational Deficits in Psychopathology: Similarities and Differences in Depression and Schizophrenia 
 Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences 
 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 Steer 
 RA 
 
 
 Garbin 
 MG 
 
 
 Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression Inventory: Twenty-five years of evaluation 
 Clinical Psychology Review 
 1988 
 8 
 1 
 77 
 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 LH 
 
 
 Bransome 
 ED 
 Jr 
 
 
 Mirsky 
 AF 
 
 
 Rosvold 
 HE 
 
 
 Sarason 
 I 
 
 
 A continuous performance test of brain damage 
 Journal of Consulting Psychology 
 1956 
 20 
 5 
 343 
 350 
 13367264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 
 1996 
 20 
 1 
 1 
 25 
 8622814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: the case for incentive salience 
 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
 2007 
 191 
 3 
 391 
 431 
 17072591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berridge 
 KC 
 
 
 From prediction error to incentive salience: mesolimbic computation of reward motivation 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2012 
 35 
 7 
 1124 
 1143 
 22487042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Best 
 MW 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Oyewumi 
 LK 
 
 
 Bowie 
 CR 
 
 
 Examination of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale factor structure and longitudinal relationships with functioning in early psychosis 
 Early Intervention in Psychiatry 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blanchard 
 JJ 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AS 
 
 
 The structure of negative symptoms within schizophrenia: implications for assessment 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2006 
 32 
 2 
 238 
 245 
 16254064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 M 
 
 
 Braver 
 T 
 
 
 Motivation and cognitive control: from behavior to neural mechanism 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 2015 
 66 
 83 
 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Cognition and control in schizophrenia: a computational model of dopamine and prefrontal function 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 1999 
 46 
 3 
 312 
 328 
 10435197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Krug 
 MK 
 
 
 Chiew 
 KS 
 
 
 Kool 
 W 
 
 
 Westbrook 
 JA 
 
 
 Clement 
 NJ 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Mechanisms of motivation-cognition interaction: challenges and opportunities 
 Cognitive,Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Head 
 D 
 
 
 Parker 
 J 
 
 
 Fotenos 
 AF 
 
 
 Marcus 
 D 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 A unified approach for morphometric and functional data analysis in young, old, and demented adults using automated atlas-based head size normalization: reliability and validation against manual measurement of total intracranial volume 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 2 
 724 
 738 
 15488422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapman 
 LJ 
 
 
 Chapman 
 JP 
 
 
 Problems in the measurement of cognitive deficit 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 1973 
 79 
 6 
 380 
 385 
 4707457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiew 
 KS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Temporal dynamics of motivation-cognitive control interactions revealed by high-resolution pupillometry 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 2013 
 4 
 15 
 23372557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Servan-Schreiber 
 D 
 
 
 Context, cortex, and dopamine: a connectionist approach to behavior and biology in schizophrenia 
 Psychological Review 
 1992 
 99 
 1 
 45 
 77 
 1546118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Carter 
 C 
 
 
 Servan-Schreiber 
 D 
 
 
 Context-processing deficits in schizophrenia: converging evidence from three theoretically motivated cognitive tasks 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 1999 
 108 
 1 
 120 
 133 
 10066998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 AS 
 
 
 Minor 
 KS 
 
 
 Emotional experience in patients with schizophrenia revisited: meta-analysis of laboratory studies 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2010 
 36 
 1 
 143 
 150 
 18562345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daniel 
 DG 
 
 
 Issues in selection of instruments to measure negative symptoms 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2013 
 150 
 2–3 
 343 
 345 
 23899996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 De Leeuw 
 M 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Vink 
 M 
 
 
 Fronto-striatal dysfunction during reward processing in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2015 
 41 
 1 
 94 
 103 
 25368371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delawalla 
 Z 
 
 
 Csernansky 
 JG 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex function in nonpsychotic siblings of individuals with schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2008 
 63 
 5 
 490 
 497 
 17631280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Locke 
 HM 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Dorsal striatum responses to reward and punishment: effects of valence and magnitude manipulations 
 Cognitive,Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2003 
 3 
 1 
 27 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Motivation-dependent responses in the human caudate nucleus 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 9 
 1022 
 1030 
 15115748 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Reward-related responses in the human striatum 
 Annuals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2007 
 1104 
 70 
 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dixon 
 ML 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 The lateral prefrontal cortex and complex value-based learning and decision making 
 Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2014 
 45c 
 9 
 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dowd 
 EC 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Pavlovian reward prediction and receipt in schizophrenia: relationship to anhedonia 
 PLoS One 
 2012 
 7 
 5 
 e35622 
 22574121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elis 
 O 
 
 
 Caponigro 
 JM 
 
 
 Kring 
 AM 
 
 
 Psychosocial treatments for negative symptoms in schizophrenia: current practices and future directions 
 Clinical Psychology Review 
 2013 
 33 
 8 
 914 
 928 
 23988452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Esslinger 
 C 
 
 
 Englisch 
 S 
 
 
 Inta 
 D 
 
 
 Rausch 
 F 
 
 
 Schirmbeck 
 F 
 
 
 Mier 
 D 
 
 
 Zink 
 M 
 
 
 Ventral striatal activation during attribution of stimulus saliency and reward anticipation is correlated in unmedicated first episode schizophrenia patients 
 Schizophrenia Resesarch 
 2012 
 140 
 1–3 
 114 
 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faust 
 ME 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Spieler 
 DH 
 
 
 Ferraro 
 FR 
 
 
 Individual differences in information-processing rate and amount: implications for group differences in response latency 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 1999 
 125 
 6 
 777 
 799 
 10589302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Favrod 
 J 
 
 
 Giuliani 
 F 
 
 
 Ernst 
 F 
 
 
 Bonsack 
 C 
 
 
 Anticipatory pleasure skills training: a new intervention to reduce anhedonia in schizophrenia 
 Perspectives in Psychiatric Care 
 2010 
 46 
 3 
 171 
 181 
 20591125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Busa 
 E 
 
 
 Albert 
 M 
 
 
 Dieterich 
 M 
 
 
 Haselgrove 
 C 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 33 
 3 
 341 
 355 
 11832223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold 
 Magnetic Resonances in Medicine 
 1995 
 33 
 5 
 636 
 647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AP 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Grasby 
 PJ 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Analysis of fMRI time-series revisited 
 Neuroimage 
 1995 
 2 
 1 
 45 
 53 
 9343589 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gard 
 DE 
 
 
 Kring 
 AM 
 
 
 Gard 
 MG 
 
 
 Horan 
 WP 
 
 
 Green 
 MF 
 
 
 Anhedonia in schizophrenia: distinctions between anticipatory and consummatory pleasure 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2007 
 93 
 1–3 
 253 
 260 
 17490858 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gardner 
 DM 
 
 
 Murphy 
 AL 
 
 
 O’Donnell 
 H 
 
 
 Centorrino 
 F 
 
 
 Baldessarini 
 RJ 
 
 
 International consensus study of antipsychotic dosing 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 2010 
 167 
 6 
 686 
 693 
 20360319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gradin 
 VB 
 
 
 Kumar 
 P 
 
 
 Waiter 
 G 
 
 
 Ahearn 
 T 
 
 
 Stickle 
 C 
 
 
 Milders 
 M 
 
 
 Steele 
 JD 
 
 
 Expected value and prediction error abnormalities in depression and schizophrenia 
 Brain 
 2011 
 134 
 Pt 6 
 1751 
 1764 
 21482548 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geier 
 CF 
 
 
 Terwilliger 
 R 
 
 
 Teslovich 
 T 
 
 
 Velanova 
 K 
 
 
 Luna 
 B 
 
 
 Immaturities in reward processing and its influence on inhibitory control in adolescence 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 7 
 1613 
 1629 
 19875675 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Prentice 
 KJ 
 
 
 Morris 
 SE 
 
 
 Heerey 
 EA 
 
 
 Reward processing in schizophrenia: a deficit in the representation of value 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2008 
 34 
 5 
 835 
 847 
 18591195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Matveeva 
 TM 
 
 
 Kasanova 
 Z 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Herbener 
 ES 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 Negative symptoms and the failure to represent the expected reward value of actions: behavioral and computational modeling evidence 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 2012 
 69 
 2 
 129 
 138 
 22310503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 
 
 Gottfried 
 JA 
 
 
 Frontiers in Neuroscience Neuroanatomy of Reward: A View from the Ventral Striatum 
 Neurobiology of Sensation and Reward 
 2011 
 Boca Raton (FL) 
 CRC Press.Llc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heerey 
 EA 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate dissociation between affective experience and motivated behavior 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 2007 
 116 
 2 
 268 
 278 
 17516760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heerey 
 EA 
 
 
 Bell-Warren 
 KR 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Decision-making impairments in the context of intact reward sensitivity in schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2008 
 64 
 1 
 62 
 69 
 18377874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heerey 
 EA 
 
 
 Matveeva 
 TM 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Imagining the future: degraded representations of future rewards and events in schizophrenia 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 2011 
 120 
 2 
 483 
 489 
 21171727 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jimura 
 K 
 
 
 Locke 
 HS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Prefrontal cortex mediation of cognitive enhancement in rewarding motivational contexts 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 19 
 8871 
 8876 
 20421489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Juckel 
 G 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Koslowski 
 M 
 
 
 Filonov 
 D 
 
 
 Wustenberg 
 T 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Heinz 
 A 
 
 
 Dysfunction of ventral striatal reward prediction in schizophrenic patients treated with typical, not atypical, neuroleptics 
 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
 2006 
 187 
 2 
 222 
 228 
 16721614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kapur 
 S 
 
 
 Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a framework linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 2003 
 160 
 1 
 13 
 23 
 12505794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirkpatrick 
 B 
 
 
 Fenton 
 WS 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 WT 
 Jr 
 
 
 Marder 
 SR 
 
 
 The NIMH-MATRICS consensus statement on negative symptoms 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2006 
 32 
 2 
 214 
 219 
 16481659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirkpatrick 
 B 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 L 
 
 
 Fischer 
 BA 
 
 
 Daniel 
 DG 
 
 
 Cienfuegos 
 A 
 
 
 Marder 
 SR 
 
 
 The brief negative symptom scale: psychometric properties 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2011 
 37 
 2 
 300 
 305 
 20558531 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirsch 
 P 
 
 
 Ronshausen 
 S 
 
 
 Mier 
 D 
 
 
 Gallhofer 
 B 
 
 
 The influence of antipsychotic treatment on brain reward system reactivity in schizophrenia patients 
 Pharmacopsychiatry 
 2007 
 40 
 5 
 196 
 198 
 17874350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koch 
 K 
 
 
 Schachtzabel 
 C 
 
 
 Wagner 
 G 
 
 
 Schikora 
 J 
 
 
 Schultz 
 C 
 
 
 Reichenbach 
 JR 
 
 
 Schlosser 
 RG 
 
 
 Altered activation in association with reward-related trial-and-error learning in patients with schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 1 
 223 
 232 
 20006717 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kouneiher 
 F 
 
 
 Charron 
 S 
 
 
 Koechlin 
 E 
 
 
 Motivation and cognitive control in the human prefrontal cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2009 
 12 
 7 
 939 
 945 
 19503087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krawczyk 
 DC 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Reward modulation of prefrontal and visual association cortex during an incentive working memory task 
 Brain Research 
 2007 
 1141 
 168 
 177 
 17320835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kring 
 AM 
 
 
 Kerr 
 SL 
 
 
 Smith 
 DA 
 
 
 Neale 
 JM 
 
 
 Flat affect in schizophrenia does not reflect diminished subjective experience of emotion 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 1993 
 102 
 4 
 507 
 517 
 8282918 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kring 
 AM 
 
 
 Caponigro 
 JM 
 
 
 Emotion in Schizophrenia: Where Feeling Meets Thinking 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 2010 
 19 
 4 
 255 
 259 
 22557707 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kring 
 AM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 The motivation and pleasure dimension of negative symptoms: Neural substrates and behavioral outputs 
 European Journal of Neuroscience 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lang 
 FU 
 
 
 Walther 
 S 
 
 
 Stegmayer 
 K 
 
 
 Anderson-Schmidt 
 H 
 
 
 Schulze 
 TG 
 
 
 Becker 
 T 
 
 
 Jager 
 M 
 
 
 Subtyping schizophrenia: A comparison of positive/negative and system-specific approaches 
 Comprrehensive Psychiatry 
 2015 
 61 
 115 
 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lesh 
 TA 
 
 
 Westphal 
 AJ 
 
 
 Niendam 
 TA 
 
 
 Yoon 
 JH 
 
 
 Minzenberg 
 MJ 
 
 
 Ragland 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Proactive and reactive cognitive control and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex dysfunction in first episode schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage: Clinical 
 2013 
 2 
 590 
 599 
 24179809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Locke 
 HS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Motivational influences on cognitive control: behavior, brain activation, and individual differences 
 Cognitive,Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2008 
 8 
 1 
 99 
 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 AW 
 3rd 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Kerns 
 JG 
 
 
 Ursu 
 S 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Holmes 
 AJ 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Specificity of prefrontal dysfunction and context processing deficits to schizophrenia in never-medicated patients with first-episode psychosis 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 2005 
 162 
 3 
 475 
 484 
 15741464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 AW 
 3rd 
 
 
 Goghari 
 VM 
 
 
 Hicks 
 BM 
 
 
 Flory 
 JD 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Manuck 
 SB 
 
 
 A convergent-divergent approach to context processing, general intellectual functioning, and the genetic liability to schizophrenia 
 Neuropsychology 
 2005 
 19 
 6 
 814 
 821 
 16351357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mann 
 CL 
 
 
 Footer 
 O 
 
 
 Chung 
 YS 
 
 
 Driscoll 
 LL 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Spared and impaired aspects of motivated cognitive control in schizophrenia 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 2013 
 122 
 3 
 745 
 755 
 23834064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mathews 
 J 
 
 
 Newcomer 
 JW 
 
 
 Mathews 
 JR 
 
 
 Fales 
 CL 
 
 
 Pierce 
 KJ 
 
 
 Akers 
 BK 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Neural correlates of weight gain with olanzapine 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 2012 
 69 
 12 
 1226 
 1237 
 22868896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 MM 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Flory 
 JD 
 
 
 Harvey 
 PD 
 
 
 Siever 
 LJ 
 
 
 Context processing in schizotypal personality disorder: evidence of specificity of impairment to the schizophrenia spectrum 
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
 2008 
 117 
 2 
 342 
 354 
 18489210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meehl 
 PE 
 
 
 Schizotaxia revisited 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 1989 
 46 
 10 
 935 
 944 
 2552952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Michelon 
 P 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 M 
 
 
 Zacks 
 JM 
 
 
 Neural correlates of incongruous visual information. An event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 2003 
 19 
 4 
 1612 
 1626 
 12948716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 RW 
 
 
 Vercammen 
 A 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 R 
 
 
 Moore 
 L 
 
 
 Langton 
 JM 
 
 
 Short 
 B 
 
 
 Weickert 
 TW 
 
 
 Disambiguating ventral striatum fMRI-related bold signal during reward prediction in schizophrenia 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 2012 
 17 
 3 
 280 
 289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 RW 
 
 
 Quail 
 S 
 
 
 Griffiths 
 KR 
 
 
 Green 
 MJ 
 
 
 Balleine 
 BW 
 
 
 Corticostriatal control of goal-directed action is impaired in schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2015 
 77 
 2 
 187 
 195 
 25062683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mucci 
 A 
 
 
 Galderisi 
 S 
 
 
 Merlotti 
 E 
 
 
 Rossi 
 A 
 
 
 Rocca 
 P 
 
 
 Bucci 
 P 
 
 
 Maj 
 M 
 
 
 The Brief Negative Symptom Scale (BNSS): Independent validation in a large sample of Italian patients with schizophrenia 
 European Psychiatry 
 2015 
 30 
 5 
 641 
 647 
 25758156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nielsen 
 MO 
 
 
 Rostrup 
 E 
 
 
 Wulff 
 S 
 
 
 Bak 
 N 
 
 
 Broberg 
 BV 
 
 
 Lublin 
 H 
 
 
 Glenthoj 
 B 
 
 
 Improvement of brain reward abnormalities by antipsychotic monotherapy in schizophrenia 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 2012 
 69 
 12 
 1195 
 1204 
 22868877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 JG 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 McKinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 Anatomic localization and quantitative analysis of gradient refocused echo-planar fMRI susceptibility artifacts 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 6 
 3 
 156 
 167 
 9344820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overall 
 JE 
 
 
 Gorham 
 DR 
 
 
 The brief psychiatric rating scale 
 Psychological Reports 
 1962 
 10 
 799 
 812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Padmala 
 S 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Reward reduces conflict by enhancing attentional control and biasing visual cortical processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 11 
 3419 
 3432 
 21452938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Dubis 
 JW 
 
 
 The mixed block/event-related design 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 62 
 2 
 1177 
 1184 
 22008373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Piskulic 
 D 
 
 
 Addington 
 J 
 
 
 Cadenhead 
 KS 
 
 
 Cannon 
 TD 
 
 
 Cornblatt 
 BA 
 
 
 Heinssen 
 R 
 
 
 McGlashan 
 TH 
 
 
 Negative symptoms in individuals at clinical high risk of psychosis 
 Psychiatry Research 
 2012 
 196 
 2–3 
 220 
 224 
 22445704 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rajkowska 
 G 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Cytoarchitectonic definition of prefrontal areas in the normal human cortex: II. Variability in locations of areas 9 and 46 and relationship to the Talairach Coordinate System 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 1995 
 5 
 4 
 323 
 337 
 7580125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reddy 
 LF 
 
 
 Horan 
 WP 
 
 
 Green 
 MF 
 
 
 Motivational Deficits and Negative Symptoms in Schizophrenia: Concepts and Assessments 
 Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences 
 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 Relationship between reward-enhancing and stereotypical effects of psychomotor stimulant drugs 
 Nature 
 1976 
 264 
 5581 
 57 
 59 
 12471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Robertson 
 BR 
 
 
 Prestia 
 D 
 
 
 Twamley 
 EW 
 
 
 Patterson 
 TL 
 
 
 Bowie 
 CR 
 
 
 Harvey 
 PD 
 
 
 Social competence versus negative symptoms as predictors of real world social functioning in schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2014 
 160 
 1–3 
 136 
 141 
 25468184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sakagami 
 M 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 M 
 
 
 Integration of cognitive and motivational information in the primate lateral prefrontal cortex 
 Annuals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2007 
 1104 
 89 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Salamone 
 JD 
 
 
 Koychev 
 I 
 
 
 Correa 
 M 
 
 
 McGuire 
 P 
 
 
 Neurobiological basis of motivational deficits in psychopathology 
 European Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2015 
 25 
 8 
 1225 
 1238 
 25435083 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Juckel 
 G 
 
 
 Koslowski 
 M 
 
 
 Kahnt 
 T 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 Dembler 
 T 
 
 
 Heinz 
 A 
 
 
 Reward system activation in schizophrenic patients switched from typical neuroleptics to olanzapine 
 Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
 2008 
 196 
 4 
 673 
 684 
 18097655 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 Schmack 
 K 
 
 
 Ballmaier 
 M 
 
 
 Rapp 
 M 
 
 
 Wrase 
 J 
 
 
 Heinz 
 A 
 
 
 Reward feedback alterations in unmedicated schizophrenia patients: relevance for delusions 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2009 
 65 
 12 
 1032 
 1039 
 19195646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Huys 
 QJ 
 
 
 Deserno 
 L 
 
 
 Rapp 
 MA 
 
 
 Beck 
 A 
 
 
 Heinze 
 HJ 
 
 
 Heinz 
 A 
 
 
 Striatal dysfunction during reversal learning in unmedicated schizophrenia patients 
 Neuroimage 
 2014 
 89 
 171 
 180 
 24291614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Servan-Schreiber 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Steingard 
 S 
 
 
 Schizophrenic deficits in the processing of context. A test of a theoretical model 
 Archives of General Psychiatry 
 1996 
 53 
 12 
 1105 
 1112 
 8956676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simon 
 JJ 
 
 
 Biller 
 A 
 
 
 Walther 
 S 
 
 
 Roesch-Ely 
 D 
 
 
 Stippich 
 C 
 
 
 Weisbrod 
 M 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 S 
 
 
 Neural correlates of reward processing in schizophrenia--relationship to apathy and depression 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2010 
 118 
 1–3 
 154 
 161 
 20005675 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Frank 
 MJ 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Kasanova 
 Z 
 
 
 Herbener 
 ES 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Deficits in positive reinforcement learning and uncertainty-driven exploration are associated with distinct aspects of negative symptoms in schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2011 
 69 
 5 
 424 
 431 
 21168124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Hong 
 LE 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Buchanan 
 RW 
 
 
 McMahon 
 RP 
 
 
 Keller 
 WR 
 
 
 Kirkpatrick 
 B 
 
 
 Factor structure of the Brief Negative Symptom Scale 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2012 
 142 
 1–3 
 96 
 98 
 23062750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Keller 
 WR 
 
 
 Buchanan 
 RW 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Fischer 
 BA 
 
 
 McMahon 
 RP 
 
 
 Kirkpatrick 
 B 
 
 
 Next-generation negative symptom assessment for clinical trials: validation of the Brief Negative Symptom Scale 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2012 
 142 
 1–3 
 88 
 92 
 23127378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strauss 
 GP 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 A review of reward processing and motivational impairment in schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 2014 
 40 Suppl 2 
 S107 
 S116 
 24375459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szatkowska 
 I 
 
 
 Szymanska 
 O 
 
 
 Marchewka 
 A 
 
 
 Soluch 
 P 
 
 
 Rymarczyk 
 K 
 
 
 Dissociable contributions of the left and right posterior medial orbitofrontal cortex in motivational control of goal-directed behavior 
 Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 
 2011 
 96 
 2 
 385 
 391 
 21741492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 1988 
 NEw York 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsuang 
 MT 
 
 
 Lyons 
 MJ 
 
 
 Faraone 
 SV 
 
 
 Heterogeneity of schizophrenia. Conceptual models and analytic strategies 
 British Journal of Psychiatry 
 1990 
 156 
 17 
 26 
 2404538 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ucok 
 A 
 
 
 Ergul 
 C 
 
 
 Persistent negative symptoms after first episode schizophrenia: A 2-year follow-up study 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2014 
 158 
 1–3 
 241 
 246 
 25107850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Velligan 
 DI 
 
 
 Roberts 
 D 
 
 
 Mintz 
 J 
 
 
 Maples 
 N 
 
 
 Li 
 X 
 
 
 Medellin 
 E 
 
 
 Brown 
 M 
 
 
 A randomized pilot study of MOtiVation and Enhancement (MOVE) Training for negative symptoms in schizophrenia 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2015 
 165 
 2–3 
 175 
 180 
 25937461 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ventura 
 J 
 
 
 Subotnik 
 KL 
 
 
 Gitlin 
 MJ 
 
 
 Gretchen-Doorly 
 D 
 
 
 Ered 
 A 
 
 
 Villa 
 KF 
 
 
 Nuechterlein 
 KH 
 
 
 Negative symptoms and functioning during the first year after a recent onset of schizophrenia and 8years later 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Walter 
 H 
 
 
 Heckers 
 S 
 
 
 Kassubek 
 J 
 
 
 Erk 
 S 
 
 
 Frasch 
 K 
 
 
 Abler 
 B 
 
 
 Further evidence for aberrant prefrontal salience coding in schizophrenia 
 Frontiers in Behavavioral Neuroscience 
 2010 
 3 
 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Schweitzer 
 JB 
 
 
 Gold 
 JM 
 
 
 Kurup 
 PK 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Salmeron 
 BJ 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 Patients with schizophrenia have a reduced neural response to both unpredictable and predictable primary reinforcers 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2009 
 34 
 6 
 1567 
 1577 
 19052540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waltz 
 JA 
 
 
 Schweitzer 
 JB 
 
 
 Ross 
 TJ 
 
 
 Kurup 
 PK 
 
 
 Salmeron 
 BJ 
 
 
 Rose 
 EJ 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 Abnormal responses to monetary outcomes in cortex, but not in the basal ganglia, in schizophrenia 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2010 
 35 
 12 
 2427 
 2439 
 20720534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Mamah 
 D 
 
 
 Harms 
 MP 
 
 
 Karnik 
 M 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Gado 
 MH 
 
 
 Csernansky 
 JG 
 
 
 Progressive deformation of deep brain nuclei and hippocampal-amygdala formation in schizophrenia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2008 
 64 
 12 
 1060 
 1068 
 18814865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Watanabe 
 M 
 
 
 Sakagami 
 M 
 
 
 Integration of cognitive and motivational context information in the primate prefrontal cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2007 
 17 Suppl 1(1) 
 101 
 109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woods 
 RP 
 
 
 Cherry 
 SR 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Rapid automated algorithm for aligning and reslicing PET images 
 Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography 
 1992 
 16 
 4 
 620 
 633 
 1629424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wotruba 
 D 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 K 
 
 
 Michels 
 L 
 
 
 Buechler 
 R 
 
 
 Simon 
 JJ 
 
 
 Theodoridou 
 A 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 S 
 
 
 Symptom dimensions are associated with reward processing in unmedicated persons at risk for psychosis 
 Frontiers in Behavavioral Neuroscience 
 2014 
 8 
 382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yung 
 AR 
 
 
 McGorry 
 PD 
 
 
 The prodromal phase of first-episode psychosis: past and current conceptualizations 
 Schizophrenia Bulletin 
 1996 
 22 
 2 
 353 
 370 
 8782291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Task Stimuli and Paradigm 
 Note.  During reward blocks, Reward-cue (REW, “ $20 ”) and Reward-Context cue (RCTX, “ XX ”) were intermixed with equal number of trials across trial-type 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Behavioral Data: Median Correct Reaction Times 
 Note.  BASE-CUE = Baseline cue trials, HC = healthy controls, REW-CUE= Reward cue, RCTX-CUE = Reward-Context cue, SCZ = Schizophrenia. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Regions Displaying Sustained Reward x Group Interaction 
 Note.  Error bars represent ± SEM 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Relationship between Sustained DLPFC Activation and Amotivation 
 Note.  DLPFC= dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, L = left, R= right, SANS = The Scales for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms ( Andreasen, 1983b ). **  p  < 0.02. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Time Courses for Regions showing Reward Cue Type x Group x Time Point Interactions During Cue Phase 
 Note.  R= Right, L= Left 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Time courses for the Right DLPFC Region Displaying a Reward x Trial type x Group Interaction During  Target  Phase 
 Note.  BASE-CUE= Baseline cue, RCTX-CUE=Reward-Context cue, REW-CUE = Reward Cue 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Relationship between Cue-Related DLPFC Activation and Negative Symptoms 
 Note.  BNSS: Brief Negative Symptom Scale, DLPFC = Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Participants Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 Variables 
 HC ( N  =27) 
 SCZ ( N  =36) 
 Group Comparison 
 
 
 
 Mean  ( SD ) 
 Mean  ( SD ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age (years) 
 35.56 (8.61) 
 38.96 (8.47) 
 F  (1, 62) = 2.43,  p  =.12 
 
 
 Gender (% male) 
 55.6 
 69.4 
 χ 2  (1) = 1.28,  p  = .25 
 
 
 Race (% Caucasian) 
 29.6% 
 41.7 
 χ 2  (1) = 3.33,  p  = .18 
 
 
 Smoking status (%Smokers) 
 37.0% 
 68.8% 
 χ 2  (1) = 3.58,  p = .06 
 
 
 Handedness (% right) 
 92.6% 
 80.6% 
 χ 2  (2) = 1.48,  p = .47 
 
 
 Highest Parental Education (years) 
 14.11 (1.73) 
 13.80 (3.62) 
 F  (1, 61) = .16,  p  = .68 
 
 
 Education (years) 
 14.51 (1.86) 
 13.13 (2.60) 
 F  (1, 62) = 5.44,  p = .02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diagnosis Subtype ( N ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schizoaffective (7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schizophrenia (29) 
 
 
 
 
 
 SAPS: Positive a 
 - 
 4.83 (4.31) 
 
 
 
 SANS: Negative b 
 - 
 8.77 (3.33) 
 
 
 
 BDI 
 2.14 (3.55) 
 8.47 (8.99) 
 t  (61) = −3.44,  p  =.001 
 
 
 BNSS, consummatory 
 - 
 3.83 (2.83) 
 
 
 
 BNSS, anticipatory 
 - 
 1.41 (1.42) 
 
 
 
 BNSS, total 
 - 
 19.13 (11.16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Antipsychotic Medications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Typical antipsychotics (first generation antipsychotics) (%) 
 - 
 11.1% 
 
 
 
 Atypical antipsychotics (second generation) (%) 
 - 
 69.4% 
 
 
 
 Both typical and atypical antipsychotics (%) 
 - 
 8.3% 
 
 
 
 
 Other Medications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Antidepressant 
 - 
 44% 
 
 
 
 Mood Stabilizer 
 - 
 16% 
 
 
 
 Anticholinergic 
 - 
 25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . HC = Healthy Controls, BDI = Beck Depression Inventory ( Beck, Steer, & Garbin, 1988 ), BNSS= The Brief Negative Symptom Scale ( Andreasen, 1983b ), SCZ = schizophrenia, SAPS= The Scales for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms ( Andreasen, 1983b ), SANS = The Scales for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms ( Andreasen, 1983b ). 
 
 
 a 
 Sum of the global scores for hallucinations and delusions of the SAPS (Andreasen, Arndt, Alliger, Miller, & Flaum, 1995) 
 
 
 b 
 Sum of the global scores for alogia, anhedonia, avolition, affective flattening and attentional impairments (Andreasen et al., 1995) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Sustained Context-dependent Activity 
 
 
 
 
 Effect 
 BA 
 Region of Activation 
 Cluster size (voxels) 
 Talairach Coordinates 
 
 Z 
 
 Activation Pattern a 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reward Condition 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 267 
 42 
 16 
 29 
 3.97 
 REWARD > BASE 
 
 
 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 81 
 −42 
 10 
 30 
 3.34 
 REWARD> BASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 44 
 41 
 19 
 27 
 2.61 
 SCZ > HC 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 25 
 14 
 10 
 −3 
 2.82 
 SCZ > HC 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Globus Pallidus 
 24 
 −22 
 −6 
 −2 
 2.99 
 HC > SCZ 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Globus Pallidus 
 15 
 23 
 −8 
 2 
 2.78 
 HC > SCZ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reward x Group 
 
 Putamen 
 24 
 22 
 10 
 3 
 2.66 
 SCZ: BASE = REWARD HC: REWARD > BASE 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . BASE= Baseline conditions; REWARD = Reward conditions, HC = healthy controls, REWARD= Reward conditions, SCZ = schizophrenia.  Z  values represent mean activation across the region. 
 
 
 a 
 Post-hoc paired  t -tests or independent  t --tests were conducted (all  p  < .05). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Results from the Cue-related Activity Analyses 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 Region of Activation 
 Cluster size (voxels) 
 Talairach Coordinates 
 
 Z 
 
 Activation Patterns a 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reward Cue Type X Time Point Interaction 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 30 
 −19 
 3 
 −1 
 3.24 
 REW-CUE > BASE-CUE +  =RCTX-CUE 
 
 
 
 Medial Globus Pallidus 
 16 
 −14 
 −8 
 0 
 3.33 
 REW-CUE > RCTX-CUE=  BASE-CUE 
 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 85 
 12 
 −3 
 14 
 3.81 
 REW-CUE>  RCTX-CUE  =  BASE-CUE 
 
 
 
 Caudate Body 
 30 
 −14 
 −10 
 19 
 3.22 
 REW-CUE >  RCTX-CUE  = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 253 
 −38 
 20 
 29 
 4.27 
 REW-CUE >  RCTX-CUE  = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 385 
 37 
 23 
 29 
 4.49 
 REW-CUE >  RCTX-CUE  = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reward Cue Type x Group x Time Point Interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HC 
 
 
 SCZ 
 
 
 
 
 Putamen 
 37 
 21 
 3 
 0 
 3.13 
 REW-CUE > RCTX-CUE  =  BASE-CUE 
 REW-CUE= BASE-CUE=RCTX-CUE 
 
 
 
 Lateral Globus Pallidus 
 22 
 −23 
 −13 
 2 
 2.82 
 REW-CUE > RCTX-CUE =  BASE-CUE 
 REW-CUE = BASE-CUE=RCTX-CUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . BASE-CUE=Baseline cue, HC= Healthy Controls, REW-CUE = Reward cue, RCTX-CUE= Reward-context cue, SCZ= Schizophrenia.  Bold  indicates deactivated regions. 
 
 
 a 
 Post-hoc paired  t -tests were conducted to examine the relationship between neural activity on reward trials and other cue-type activity on each region ( p  <0.05). 
 
 
 + 
 p -value was 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Reward x Group Interaction During Target Phase 
 
 
 
 
 Analysis 
 BA 
 Region of Activation 
 Cluster size (voxels) 
 Talairach Coordinates 
 
 Z 
 
 Activation Pattern 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 HC 
 SCZ 
 
 
 
 
 Basal Ganglia 
 
 Medial Globus Pallidus 
 25 
 −14 
 0 
 −5 
 3.31 
 RCTX-CUE =REW-CUE =BASE-CUE a 
 RCTX-CUE= REW-CUE = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 TP3 
 TP4 
 TP3 
 TP4 
 
 
 RCTX-CUE= REW- CUE = BASE-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE> REW- CUE= BASE-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE= REW-CUE = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 Putamen 
 15 
 21 
 6 
 1 
 2.64 
 RCTX-CUE=REW-CUE=BASE-CUE 
 BASE-CUE > RCTX-CUE + = REW-CUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DLPFC 
 9 
 Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 16 
 25 
 37 
 29 
 2.62 
 BASE-CUE >RCTX-CUE + =REW-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE = REW-CUE = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 51 
 −34 
 23 
 33 
 3.09 
 RCTX-CUE=REW-CUE=BASE-CUE 
 BASE-CUE> REW-CUE = RCTX-CUE 
 
 
 9 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 20 
 43 
 26 
 30 
 2.54 
 RCTX-CUE=REW-CUE=BASE-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE=REW-CUE = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 TP3 
 TP4 
 TP3 
 TP4 
 
 
 BASE-CUE>REW- CUE ++ =RCTX-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE=REW- CUE= BASE-CUE 
 RCTX-CUE=REW-CUE = BASE-CUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . BASE-CUE=Baseline Cue, REW-CUE = Reward cue, RCTX-CUE= Reward-context cue, TP = Time Point. 
 
 
 + 
 p  = .05, 
 
 
 ++ 
 p  =0.08. 
 
 
 a 
 When neural activities at the average of time point 3–4 did not differ as a function of trial-type, another paired  t -tests at each time point 3 and 4 for each group were separately conducted to identify the source of significant effects 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 No Significant Associations Between Medications and Reward Cue and Context Effects 
 
 
 
 
 
 Group 
 
 
 
 Healthy Controls ( n =27) 
 Individuals with Schizophrenia ( n =36) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BDI 
 1 
 
 
 
 Reward Cue Effects 
 −.18 (0.35) 
 .06(0.70) 
 
 
 Reward Contexts Effect 
 −.18 (0.37) 
 .19 (0.26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olanzapine Equivalent Doses 
 
 
 
 Reward Cue Effects 
 - 
 −.09 (0.58) 
 
 
 Reward Context Effects 
 - 
 −.03 (0.82) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. Numbers in parentheses represents p-value. 
 
 
 1 
 BDI= Beck Depression Inventory ( Beck, 1988 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 No significant associations between medications and neural activations 
 
 
 
 
 Effect 
 
 
 Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Activation (Talairach coordinates) 
 Olanzapine Equivalent Doses 
 BDI 1  in SCZ ( n =36) 
 BDI in HC ( n =26) 
 
 
 
 
 Sustained Reward 
 DLPFC ( x :42,  y :16,  z :29) 
 −0.08 (.63) 
 −.33 (.05) 
 .24 (.22) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sustained Reward X Group 
 Putamen ( x :22,  y :10,  z :3) 
 −0.002 (.98) 
 −.31 (.06) 
 −.14 (.46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Transient 2 Reward Cue x Group x Time point 
 Putamen (x: 21,y:3,z:0) 
 −.09 (.57) 
 −.15 (.37) 
 −.18 (.35) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lateral Globus Pallidus ( x :-23,  y ::-13,  z :2) 
 .23 (.16) 
 .13 (.42) 
 −.30 (.12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . 
 
 
 1 
 BDI= Beck Depression Inventory ( Beck, 1988 ) 
 
 
 Numbers in parentheses represent p-value. 
 
 
 2 
 Pearson correlations were conducted using neural contrasts during Reward-Cue (“ $20” ) – Reward-Context cue ( “$XX ”) within reward conditions 
 
 
 
 
