
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8100437 
 6047 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 Neurobiol. Aging 
 
 Neurobiology of aging 
 
 0197-4580 
 1558-1497 
 
 
 27143433 
 4857153 
 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.03.015 
 NIHMS771210 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 The relationships between age, associative memory performance and the neural correlates of successful associative memory encoding 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 Marianne 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Mattson 
 Julia T. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 Tracy H. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Donley 
 Brian E. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 Michael D. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75235, USA 
 2 UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA 
 
 Corresponding author: Marianne de Chastelaine, 1600 Viceroy Drive, Suite 800, Dallas, TX 75235.  mad106120@utdallas.edu 
 
 
 25 
 3 
 2016 
 
 
 19 
 3 
 2016 
 
 
 6 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 6 
 2017 
 
 42 
 163 
 176 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Using fMRI, subsequent memory effects (greater activity for later remembered than later forgotten study items) predictive of associative encoding were compared across samples of young, middle-aged and older adults (total n = 136). During scanning, participants studied visually presented word pairs. In a later test phase, they discriminated between studied pairs, ‘rearranged’ pairs (items studied on different trials) and new pairs. Subsequent memory effects were identified by contrasting activity elicited by study pairs that went on to be correctly judged intact or incorrectly judged rearranged. Effects in the hippocampus were age-invariant and positively correlated across participants with associative memory performance. Subsequent memory effects in the right IFG were greater in the older than the young group. In older participants only, both left and, in contrast to prior reports, right IFG subsequent memory effects correlated positively with memory performance. We suggest that the IFG is especially vulnerable to age-related decline in functional integrity, and that the relationship between encoding-related activity in right IFG and memory performance depends on the experimental context. 
 
 
 fMRI 
 Aging 
 Associative recognition 
 Episodic memory 
 Hippocampus 
 Over-recruitment 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Episodic memory – memory for unique events – is one of several cognitive domains in which performance declines with increasing age ( Koen & Yonelinas, 2014 ;  Old & Naveh-Benjamin, 2008 ;  Nilsson, 2003 ;  Rönnlund et al., 2005 ). A significant fraction of age-related variance in episodic memory performance is attributable to differences in the efficacy with which events are encoded into memory (see  Craik & Rose, 2012 , for review), and numerous studies have utilized functional neuroimaging in an effort to elucidate the neural underpinnings of the effects of age on episodic memory encoding. The majority of these studies have employed event-related fMRI in concert with the ‘subsequent memory procedure’ ( Paller & Wagner, 2002 ), examining age-related differences in neural activity predictive of successful or unsuccessful performance on a later memory test (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Dennis et al., 2008 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Gutchess et al., 2005 ;  Mattson et al., 2014 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ;  Morcom et al., 2003 ;  Mormino et al., 2012 ;  Park et al., 2013 ; see  Maillet & Rajah, 2014 , for review). 
 The findings from these studies are somewhat mixed, but show some consistent trends. There is converging evidence for example that ‘negative’ subsequent memory effects – where later remembered study items elicit relatively less activity than later forgotten items – are attenuated, and sometimes reversed, in older individuals (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al. 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Gutchess et al., 2005 ;  Mattson et al., 2014 ;  Miller et al. 2008 ;  Mormino et al. 2012 ;  Park et al., 2013 ). Consistent with these findings, in a recent published analysis of the present data set ( de Chastelaine et al., 2015 ) we reported that while negative subsequent memory effects were reliable in young, middle-aged and older age groups, there was a graded attenuation in the size of the effects with increasing age (young > middle-aged > older). We do not discuss these findings further here, however; instead, we focus on ‘positive’ subsequent memory effects (henceforth, just ‘subsequent memory effects’ or ‘encoding-related activity’), where study items that go on to be remembered on a later memory test elicit greater neural activity than items that are later forgotten (see  Kim, 2011  for a review of relevant research in young adults). 
 Two fairly consistent trends emerge from studies examining the effects of age on subsequent memory effects: first, despite the vulnerability of the hippocampus to age-related volume reduction (see  Raz & Rodrigue, 2006 , for review), the weight of the evidence suggests that encoding-related activity in this region does not differ with age (e.g.,  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ; but see for example  Dennis et al., 2008  for contrasting findings, and see  Maillet & Rajah, 2014 , for a review). Second, whereas the magnitude of subsequent memory effects in left lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) also appear to differ little with age, the effects in homotopic regions of the right PFC have been reported to be greater in older than in young individuals (e.g.,  Morcom et al., 2003 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ), an example of age-related, right-frontal ‘over-recruitment’ ( Grady, 2012 ). 
 Findings of right frontal over-recruitment are open to multiple interpretations ( Grady, 2012 ). According to one set of proposals, for example, the findings reflect engagement of neural regions that help to compensate for age-related decline in processing efficiency in other regions sufficient to support task performance in younger individuals (e.g.,  Cabeza et al., 2002 ;  Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008 ;  Reuter-Lorenz & Park, 2014 ). A second set of proposals suggests that, rather than facilitating task performance, over-recruitment harms it, reflecting age-related de-differentiation of cortical specialization and an attendant decline in processing efficiency (e.g.,  Li et al., 2006 ). Another, related, proposal is that right frontal over-recruitment reflects age-related decline in the transcallosal inhibitory drive from the left hemisphere that suppresses activation of, and hence interference from, homotopic task-irrelevant cortical regions (e.g.,  Logan et al., 2002 ). Finally, it has been proposed that right frontal over-recruitment, at least as it is expressed in item-related activity (that is, in the BOLD response elicited by study items relative to the inter-item baseline) is a consequence of age-related sampling bias ( Nyberg et al., 2010 ; see also  Pudas et al., 2013 ). 
 One possible way of arbitrating between these different proposals is to assess the relationship between right prefrontal activity and task performance. In studies of episodic memory encoding, this amounts to asking whether, as would be predicted by the simplest form of the ‘compensation hypothesis’ described above, memory performance in older individuals is positively correlated with the magnitude of right frontal subsequent memory effects. Three studies in which this question was addressed ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ; but see also  Bangen et al., 2012 ) reported consistent findings: in each case, a reliable correlation between right frontal subsequent memory effects and memory performance was observed, but the direction was negative. That is, right frontal encoding-related activity was greater in those individuals with the poorest memories for the study items. 
 These findings are inconsistent with the most straightforward prediction of the compensation hypothesis of age-related right frontal over-recruitment and, on the face of it, are more supportive of the proposal that over-recruitment is detrimental for memory encoding. As was discussed by, among others,  de Chastelaine et al. (2011)  and  Grady (2012 ; see also  Duverne et al., 2009 ), the findings are however compatible with other conceptualizations of age-related neural compensation. By one account (e.g., Düzel et al., 2012), it is those individuals most affected by aging, and hence with the lowest levels of performance, who engage compensatory mechanisms to the greatest extent. By an alternative account ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ), right frontal over-recruitment reflects ‘partial’ compensation – sufficient to support performance on the study task, but not to boost memory encoding. We return to this issue in the Discussion. 
 The aim of the present study was to gain further insight into the relationship between age, encoding-related neural activity, and memory performance. We employed the same associative memory procedure as in our prior study of episodic encoding ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). Associative memory is well suited to studies such as the present one because it is strongly dependent on the recollection of qualitative information (e.g.,  Mickes et al., 2010 ) and is highly sensitive to age ( Old & Naveh-Benjamin, 2008 ). In our prior study, we investigated subsequent memory effects in samples of young (N=18) and older (n=36) individuals. We found that the magnitude of the effects in several regions, including left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and hippocampus, did not differ according to age group. In the older participants, we also found that subsequent memory effects in left and right IFG demonstrated reliable but opposite relationships with memory performance, such that there was a positive correlation for the left IFG, and a negative correlation for the right IFG. We further reported that the integrity of the anterior corpus callosum, as this was indexed by fractional anisotropy (FA) estimated from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), was both strongly age-dependent (replicating numerous prior reports, e.g.,  Head et al. 2004 ;  Kochunov et al., 2012 ;  O’Sullivan et al. 2001 ;  Pfefferbaum et al. 2000 ), and positively correlated with the magnitude of subsequent memory effects in the right IFG. This latter finding is arguably inconsistent with the proposal that right frontal over-recruitment reflects age-related disruption of trans-callosal inhibition (e.g.,  Logan et al. 2002 ). 
 The present study extends this prior work in two important ways. First, we employed substantially larger samples of young and older participants than in the prior study (Ns of 36 and 64 respectively), affording greater statistical power with which to detect age-related differences in subsequent memory effects, and to examine the relationship between different facets of encoding-related activity and individual differences in subsequent memory performance. Thus, we were able to assess the generality of our prior finding that left and right frontal subsequent memory effects demonstrate opposite relationships with memory performance, and whether these or other relationships with performance differ with age. We were also able to assess the generality of a prior report that the magnitude of subsequent memory effects in the hippocampus is negatively correlated with subsequent associative memory accuracy in older individuals ( Miller et al., 2008 ), and to examine whether this finding extends to other age groups. Second, in addition to samples of young and older individuals, here we also employed a sample of middle-aged individuals (N=36). This age-range has been relatively neglected in studies examining the effects of age on the neural correlates of episodic memory (we are aware of only three prior papers describing encoding-related activity in this population:  de Chastelaine et al., 2015 ; Kwon et al., 2015;  Park et al., 2013 ). The inclusion of middle-aged individuals provides a more continuous sampling of encoding-related activity across the lifespan than can be achieved with an extreme age groups approach, and hence provides additional insight into the profile of any age-related differences. 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 Additional methodological information can be found in  de Chastelaine et al. (2015) , where a complementary analysis of the present fMRI data set is reported (see Introduction). 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Participants were 36 young (18–29 yrs; M = 22 yrs; SD = 3.0 yrs; 17 female), 36 middle-aged (43–55 yrs; M = 49 yrs; SD = 3.4 yrs; 17 female) and 64 older adults (63–76 yrs; M = 68 yrs; SD = 3.6 yrs; 35 female). The participants were recruited from the city of Dallas and surrounding communities, and comprised samples wholly independent of those participating in our previous study ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). All participants were in good health, had no history of cardiovascular, neurological or psychiatric disease, and were not taking central nervous system-active medication. The participants were right-handed, had learned English before age 5, and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Exclusion criteria based on neuropsychological test scores are described below. Informed consent was given by all participants according to the procedures approved by the UT Dallas and University of Texas Southwestern Institutional Review Boards. Participants were compensated at the rate of $30 per hour. 
 
 
 2.2 Neuropsychological testing 
 Standardized neuropsychological tests were administered in a separate experimental session. Participants were screened for dementia with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), for which a nominal cutoff score of 27/30 was adopted. Other tests included the California Verbal Learning Test-II (CVLT;  Delis et al. 2000 ), the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-IV), the Digit Span Forward and Backward test of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Revised (WAIS-R) ( Wechsler, 2001 ), the Digit/Symbol Coding test of the WAIS-R, Trail Making Tests A and B, letter and category fluency tests, the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR;  Wechsler 2001 ) and the Raven’s Progressive Matrices (short version). 
 Potential participants were excluded if they scored >1.5 standard deviations (SDs) below their age-appropriate norm on either of the long-term memory tests (CVLT or the WMS), had an estimated full-scale IQ < 100 as indexed by performance on the WTAR, or scored >1.5 SDs below the age-appropriate norm on any two of the other neuropsychological tests. A composite CVLT recall score was calculated by averaging across the 4 recall tests (immediate and delayed free and cued recall, see Results: section 3.1 Neuropsychological data). Similarly, a composite WMS score was computed by averaging scores on the WMS 1 and WMS 2. 
 
 
 2.3 Experimental materials 
 The experimental materials comprised 320 semantically unrelated, visually presented word pairs. The words were concrete nouns ranging in length from 3 to 9 letters, selected from the word association norms compiled by  Nelson et al. (2004) . They were randomly divided into 4 lists of 80 pairs. For each set of yoked participants (1 young, 1 middle-aged and 1 or 2 older participants), the 4 lists were rotated such that each list provided stimuli for all 3 of the experimental word-pair categories: intact, rearranged and new (see below), and word pairs from 3 of the lists were pseudo-randomly ordered to form the study list. The test list included all 320 critical word pairs; 160 of the pairs had been presented at study (intact pairs), 80 comprised studied items that had been re-paired between study and test (rearranged pairs), and 80 were unstudied pairs (new pairs). Critical study pairs were intermixed with 80 null trials, and critical test pairs were intermixed with 106 null trials. Two buffer pairs were placed at the start and in the middle of each of the two study blocks and the test blocks (see below). Word pairs in the study and test lists were pseudo-randomly ordered such that the same word pair category did not occur more than three times consecutively. Practice study and test lists, comprising items not employed in the experimental lists proper, were also constructed. 
 
 
 2.4 Procedure 
 Prior to entering the MR scanner participants were given instructions and practice sessions for both the study task and the memory test. Thus, encoding was intentional. The study and test phases were conducted in separate scanning sessions. During the first scanning session, study pairs were presented in two consecutive blocks separated by a short rest interval. The study task required participants to indicate with a button press which of the two objects denoted by the words was more likely to fit into the other. Study task accuracy was indexed as the proportion of study pairs attracting the response considered the most plausible by consensus of three experimenters. After completing the study task, participants were removed from the scanner for 15 mins, and then returned to complete an associative memory test. Test pairs were presented in three consecutive blocks separated by short rest intervals. One of three button press responses was required to indicate whether each test pair was intact, rearranged or new. Participants were required to respond ‘intact’ when they recognized both words and had a specific memory of the two words having been presented together at study. They were instructed to make this judgment only when they were confident that the words had been studied together. A ‘rearranged’ response was required when both words were recognized from the study phase but there was no specific memory of the words being paired together previously. A ‘new’ response was required when neither word, or only one word, was recognized. DTI and structural scans were acquired after participants had completed the test phase. Study and test instructions emphasized the need for both accuracy and speed. 
 At both study and test, words were presented for a duration of 2 s just above and below central fixation in white uppercase Helvetica 30 point font against a black background. The word pairs subtended an approximate vertical visual angle of 1.8 deg. and a maximum horizontal visual angle of 5.1 deg. They were viewed via a mirror fixed to the head coil directly above the participants’ eyes. Study and test pairs were preceded by a red fixation cross that was presented for 0.5 s and were followed by a white fixation cross for 1 s at study, and for 2 s at test. Null trials consisted of the presentation of a white fixation cross against a black background for 3.5 s or 4.5 s at study and test respectively. A 30 s rest break occurred halfway through each study and test block. Inter-block intervals lasted approximately 2 mins. Experimental control, including stimulus display, was implemented in the ‘Cogent’ software package ( http://www.vislab.ucl.ac.uk/cogent.php ). 
 
 
 2.5 MRI data acquisition 
 Functional and anatomical images were acquired with a Philips Achieva 3T MR scanner (Philips Medical System, Andover, MA USA) equipped with a 32 channel parallel imaging head coil. A T1-weighted anatomical image was acquired with a 3D magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) pulse sequence (FOV= 256×224, voxel size 1×1×1 mm, 160 slices, sagittal acquisition). DTI acquisition involved a single-shot EPI sequence (30 directions, 50 transverse slices, 2 mm thick, 1 mm gap, matrix size 112 × 110, TR 4410 ms, TE 51 ms; flip angle 90°, b 1000 s/mm 2 , 1 × b = 0). Functional scans were acquired with a T2*–weighted echo-planar image (EPI) (TR 2 s, TE 30 ms, flip angle 70°, FOV 240×240, matrix size 80×78). Each EPI volume comprised 33 × 3 mm slices (1 mm inter-slice gap) with an in-plane resolution of 3 × 3 mm. Slices were acquired in ascending order, oriented parallel to the AC–PC line and positioned for full coverage of the cerebrum and most of the cerebellum. The functional data were acquired using a sensitivity encoding (SENSE) reduction factor of 2. fMRI data were acquired during both study and test phases (311 and 351 volumes for each study and test block, respectively). The first 5 volumes of each block were discarded to allow tissue magnetization to achieve a steady state. For the GLM analyses, study sessions were concatenated to form a single time-series. 
 
 
 2.6 DTI analysis 
 Computation of the diffusion tensor was performed using DTIstudio ( Jiang et al. 2006 ). The program used non-rigid registration to correct for motion and eddy current related deformations. A first order tensor model was then fit to the DTI data on a voxel by voxel basis. The FA maps were calculated from the tensor parameters, which were used in the analysis. Voxel-wise FA values were scaled from 0 to 1, 0 representing isotropic diffusion and 1 maximum anisotropy. Before processing, images were reoriented parallel to the AC-PC line but were not spatially normalized. For each participant, regions-of-interest (ROIs) were drawn directly onto axial slices of the FA maps to cover the full extent of the anterior corpus callosum and, separately, the posterior corpus callosum. FA values were averaged across all slices in each of the ROIs to yield single values for the anterior and posterior regions of the corpus callosum for each participant. 
 
 
 2.7 MRI analyses 
 Here, we report analyses for the study phase only; the fMRI findings for the test phase will be described elsewhere. Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), run under Matlab R2008a (MathWorks) was employed for MRI data analysis. Functional images were motion and slice-time corrected, realigned, and spatially normalized using a sample-specific template. The template was created by first normalizing ( Ashburner and Friston 1999 ) the mean volume of each participant’s functional time series (separately for study and test) with reference to a standard EPI template based on the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) reference brain ( Cocosco et al. 1997 ). The normalized images were separately averaged within each age group and the resulting 3 mean images were then averaged to generate a template that was equally weighted with respect to the 3 age groups. Normalized volumes were resampled into 3 mm isotropic voxels and smoothed with an isotropic 8 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel. T1 anatomical images were normalized with a procedure analogous to that applied to the functional images. 
 For each participant, item-elicited neural activity was modeled by a delta function and convolved with 2 hemodynamic response functions (HRFs) using a GLM. These functions consisted of a canonical ( Friston et al. 1998 ) and an orthogonalized, delayed HRF ( Andrade et al. 1999 ), the latter generated by shifting the canonical HRF one TR (2 s) later in time. As the results obtained with the late HRF added little of theoretical significance to the findings obtained with the canonical function, they are not reported here. The fMRI data were analyzed in two stages. In the first stage, separate GLMs were constructed for each participant. Two events of interest were included in the design matrix: study pairs that went on to be correctly endorsed as intact (subsequent associative hits) and pairs that were later incorrectly identified as rearranged (subsequent associative misses) on the subsequent associative recognition test. Study pairs later incorrectly identified as new, those that became rearranged at test or were not responded to, buffer pairs and the two 30 s breaks interposed during the study list were also modeled, along with 6 regressors representing motion-related variance and 2 constants representing means across each scan session. The time series in each voxel were high-pass filtered to 1/128 Hz to remove low-frequency noise and scaled within session to a grand mean of 100 across voxels and scans. 
 In the second stage of the analysis, the participant-specific parameter estimates for subsequent associative hits and misses were taken forward to a 3 × 2 mixed-design analyses of variance (ANOVA) with factors of age group (young, middle-aged, older) and subsequent memory (associative hits, associative misses) using ANOVA models implemented within SPM8 (and hence employing single pooled error terms). Subsequent memory effects were operationalized as greater BOLD activity for subsequent associative hits than for subsequent associative misses. Whole brain analyses were conducted to identify subsequent memory effects that were common to the 3 age groups as well as effects that differed between groups using contrasts derived from the ANOVA models. Regions where subsequent memory effects did not differ according to age group (common effects) were identified by exclusively masking the across-group, main effect of subsequent memory (associative hit > associative miss, thresholded at p < 0.001, see below) with the two-sided age group x subsequent memory interaction contrast, liberally thresholded at p < .05 (two-sided). Regions demonstrating age-related differences in subsequent memory effects were identified by the age group x subsequent memory interaction contrast (2-sided), exclusively masked with each group’s negative subsequent memory effect (associative misses > associative hits; thresholded at p < .05 one-sided) to restrict the findings to group-wise differences in positive effects (as noted in the Introduction, findings for negative subsequent memory effects have previously been reported,  de Chastelaine et al., 2015 ). Following our prior practice ( de Chastelaine at al., 2011 ;  Duverne et al., 2009 ) parameter estimates for pre-experimentally selected regions of interest (ROI) (specifically, left and right IFG and hippocampus) were extracted from the unmasked across-participant main effect of subsequent memory. Whole brain subsequent memory and subsequent memory x age group interaction effects exceeding a height threshold of p < 0.001 and comprising clusters of 21 or more contiguous voxels were considered reliable. The cluster extent threshold was determined by a Monte Carlo simulation implemented in AlphaSim ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni ) to give a corrected cluster-wise significance level of p < 0.05. 
 Turning to the ROI analyses, we first determined if we could replicate our prior findings in older participants concerning the relationships between left and right frontal subsequent memory effects, anterior callosal FA and associative memory performance ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). For each participant, mean parameter estimates were extracted across all voxels within a 5 mm radius of the peak of the left IFG subsequent memory effect identified in the whole brain analysis described above, and from the homotopic ROI in the right hemisphere. For the older participants only, we conducted two partial correlation analyses identical to the ones employed in our previous analyses ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). The first investigated the relationship between the magnitude of right IFG subsequent memory effects and memory performance, controlling for the magnitude of left IFG subsequent memory effects. The second analysis investigated the correlation between the size of right IFG subsequent memory and anterior callosal FA, again controlling for left IFG effects. 
 Next, using the data from all 3 age groups, we assessed the effects of age on subsequent memory effects in the left and right IFG, as well as the relationship between these variables and associative memory performance. Parameter estimates from left and right IFG ROIs were subjected to a 3 (group) x 2 (hemisphere) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA. We also examined the relationships between age group, IFG subsequent memory effects and memory performance with multiple regression analyses. The first regression model included memory performance as the dependent variable, and age group, left IFG subsequent memory effects and the age group x left IFG effect interaction term as predictor variables. The second model was identical except subsequent memory effects in the left IFG were replaced as a predictor variable with those in the right IFG. For the reasons outlined in the Results section (3.4.2 ROI analyses – IFG subsequent memory effects), these two regression analyses were followed up by a third analysis that employed the mean of the left and right IFG effects as the fMRI predictor variable. 
 We also used an ROI approach to investigate whether the magnitude of hippocampal subsequent memory effects, and any relationship between these effects and memory performance, varied across age groups. Mean parameter estimates were extracted across all voxels within a 3 mm radius of the peak of the hippocampal subsequent memory effect identified in the unmasked subsequent memory contrast and subjected to a 3 (group) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA. In addition, we employed multiple regression to examine whether hippocampal effects were related to memory performance, and whether any such relationship differed according to age. The regression model included memory performance as the dependent variable, along with age group, the left hippocampal subsequent memory effect, and the age group x hippocampal effect interaction term as predictor variables. 
 Finally, for the older participants only, we conducted between-experiment analyses by combining the data from the current experiment with those from our previous study ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). This allowed us to directly compare the two sets of findings. The IFG data for the previous experiment were those reported previously (see  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). Parameter estimates were also extracted from voxels in the left hippocampal region that demonstrated a significant subsequent memory effect in that study. This region was identified by the whole brain, across-group main effect of subsequent memory (MNI co-ordinates −27, −9, −15; see  Figure 2B  and Table 4 of  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). We first contrasted the magnitudes of the subsequent memory effects in left IFG and right IFG and, separately, the left hippocampus according to experiment. For the IFG data, we used a 2 (experiment) x 2 (hemisphere) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA and, for the hippocampal data, a 2 (experiment) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA. We also performed 3 regression analyses, one for each ROI (left IFG, right IFG and left hippocampus), in which memory performance was the dependent variable, and the variables of experiment, age, the subsequent memory effect in the ROI in question, and the subsequent memory effect by experiment interaction term, were the predictor variables. 
 For the purposes of visualizing the fMRI findings, Caret software ( Van Essen et al., 2001 ) was used to map fMRI effects of interest on to inflated fiducial brains derived from the PALS-B12 atlas ( Van Essen 2002 ,  2005 ) in SPM5 space. Results were also visualized using sections from the across-group averaged T1 structural image. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 See  de Chastelaine et al. (2015)  for additional description and discussion of the neuropsychological and behavioral findings. 
 
 3.1 Neuropsychological data 
 Table 1  summarizes demographic and neuropsychological data for the three age groups. To briefly summarize, the 3 age groups showed equivalent performance on tests that are typically preserved with age, while composite recall of word lists was significantly lower in the older, but not in the middle-aged group, compared to the younger participants. Older participants also demonstrated poorer performance on tests of speeded cognition relative to both the younger and middle-aged groups. Performance of both older and middle-aged participants was lower than that for younger participants on a test of fluid intelligence (Raven’s Matrices), while performance on a test of crystallized intelligence (WTAR) was age-invariant. 
 
 
 3.2 Behavior 
 
 3.2.1 Study phase 
 Accuracy on the study task was high and did not differ significantly between age groups: means (standard deviations (SDs)) of 0.81 (0.09), 0.82 (0.07) and 0.80 (0.09) for the young, middle-aged and older groups, respectively. Reaction times (RTs) to study items also did not differ significantly between the groups: mean RT (SDs) of 1913 (290) ms, 1805 (310) ms and 1849 (243) ms for young, middle-aged and older groups, respectively. 
 In parallel to the later fMRI analyses, study RTs for word pairs presented in the same pairing at test (intact pairs) were segregated according to subsequent memory (associative hits versus associative misses). A 3 (group) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA revealed a main effect of subsequent memory (F1, 133 = 38.25, p < 0.001), reflecting faster study RTs for associative hits than for associative misses (collapsed across age-group, 1835 (279) ms and 1883 (285) ms respectively). There was no effect of age, and no group by subsequent memory interaction. 
 
 
 3.2.2 Test phase 
 Table 2  summarizes performance on the associative recognition test. Associative recognition accuracy (hereafter referred to as ‘pR’) was indexed as the difference between the proportion of intact test pairs correctly endorsed as intact (associative hits) and the proportion of rearranged test pairs incorrectly endorsed as intact (associative false alarms). A one-way ANOVA of these data indicated a graded decline in pR with age (F2, 135 = 12.80, p < 0.001), with means (SDs) of 0.48 (0.19), 0.39 (0.14) and 0.31 (0.15) for the young, middle-aged and older groups, respectively. Pair-wise t-tests revealed that young participants were more accurate than both middle-aged (t64 = 2.25, p < 0.05) and older participants (t59 = 4.50, p < 0.001), and that middle-aged participants were more accurate than the older participants (t76 = 2.60, p < 0.025). 
 
 
 
 3.3 DTI data 
 Mean FA values from the ROIs in anterior and posterior portions of the corpus callosum (see  Table 3 ) were subjected to a 3 (group) x 2 (region) ANOVA. This revealed a main effect of group (F1,133 = 9.56, p < 0.001), a main effect of region (F1,133 = 623.22, p < 0.001) and a group by region interaction (F2,133 = 21.83, p < 0.001). The interaction largely reflected the typical finding of greater age-related decline for anterior, relative to posterior, callosal FA (see Introduction: section 1). Follow-up t-tests indicated that anterior callosal FA was higher in the young group compared to both the middle-aged (t70 = 5.05, p < 0.001) and older (t78 = 7.47, p < 0.001) groups (between which FA did not differ), while posterior callosal FA did not differ between the young and either the middle-aged or older groups (both ps > 0.1), although (inexplicably) it was reliably higher in the older than the middle-aged group (t94 = 2.73, p < .01). 
 
 
 3.4 fMRI data 
 
 3.4.1 Whole brain analyses 
 Subsequent memory effects common to the three age groups were identified at the whole-brain level by the across-group main effect of subsequent memory (associative hits > associative misses) exclusively masked with the group x subsequent memory interaction thresholded at p < .05 two-sided (see Materials and Methods: section 2.7 MRI analyses). As is summarized in  Table 4  and depicted in  Figure 1 , the outcome of this contrast revealed age-invariant subsequent memory effects in a left-lateralized cortical network that included the ventral IFG and hippocampus. 
 We were unable to identify any clusters demonstrating a group by subsequent memory interaction (when this was exclusively masked with each group’s negative subsequent memory effect; cf.  de Chastelaine et al., 2015 ) at our pre-experimentally determined whole-brain threshold of p < 0.001. 
 
 
 3.4.2 ROI analyses – IFG subsequent memory effects 
 Mean parameter estimates from the ventral left IFG and homotopic right hemisphere ROI are depicted for each group in  Figure 2  (these estimates were extracted from the peaks of the main effect of subsequent memory described above, but without the application of the exclusive mask, see Materials and Methods: section 2.7 MRI analyses. In no case did the removal of the mask change the loci of the peak co-ordinates detailed in  Table 4 ). For the older participants only, we conducted two correlational analyses that mirrored those employed in our previous analyses ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). The first, investigating the relationship between the magnitude of right IFG subsequent memory effects and pR (controlling for the magnitude of left IFG subsequent memory effects), failed to demonstrate a significant correlation between the two variables (p > 0.1). The second correlational analysis, investigating the relationship between the size of right IFG subsequent memory effects and anterior callosal FA, also failed to demonstrate a significant relationship (p > 0.8). 
 The ANOVA conducted on the IFG data from all 3 age groups, with levels of group (3), hemisphere (2) and subsequent memory (2), revealed a main effect of hemisphere (F1,132 = 136.63, p < 0.001), a subsequent memory by hemisphere interaction (F1,132 = 49.94, p < 0.001), and an age group by subsequent memory by hemisphere interaction (F2,132 = 5.84, p < 0.005). Follow-up paired samples t-tests indicated that while each age group showed robust subsequent memory effects in the left IFG (as expected, given the whole brain results reported above), subsequent memory effects in the right IFG were evident in the older group only (t63 = 2.29, p = 0.025). Moreover, the magnitude of the right IFG subsequent memory effects in the older group was significantly greater than that in the young group (t67 = 2.22, p < 0.05), and showed a non-significant trend in the same direction relative to the middle-aged group (t70 = 1.89, p < 0.07). The effects for the young and the middle age groups did not significantly differ (p > .8). These findings suggest that IFG subsequent memory effects were less asymmetric in the older group than in the two younger groups. To directly test for group differences in the asymmetry of IFG effects, we conducted a between-groups one-way ANOVA on the difference scores between the left and right IFG subsequent memory effects (i.e., left IFG minus right IFG). The ANOVA revealed a main effect of group (F2,135 = 5.84, p < 0.005), which is unsurprising given that this effect is synonymous with the three-way interaction effect reported above. More importantly, follow-up pairwise tests (independent t-tests) indicated greater asymmetry in the young group relative to the older group (t67 = 3.12, p < 0.005), a trend for greater asymmetry in the young compared to the middle-aged group (t63 = 1.96, p < 0.06), and no significant difference in asymmetry between the middle-aged and older groups (p > 0.1). 
 Repeating the foregoing analyses using ANCOVAs to control for any effects of memory performance resulted in the identical pattern of findings. Thus, the reported age effects are not a consequence of a confound between age group and level of subsequent memory performance (for discussion of the implications of such a confound see  Rugg and Morcom, 2005 ;  Rugg, in press ). 
 Regression analyses were conducted to assess whether the magnitude of subsequent memory effects in either the left or right IFG were predictive of pR, and whether any such relationship differed with age. As is evident from  Table 5 , in both models age group was, unsurprisingly, a reliable predictor of pR 1 . In the regression model for the left IFG, the interaction term was significant (see  Table 5 ), indicating that the regression slopes for the relationship between pR and left IFG subsequent memory effects differed reliably between age groups. Correlation analyses were conducted to assess the relationship between left IFG subsequent memory effects and pR separately for each group. These analyses revealed a positive relationship between pR and left IFG subsequent memory effects for the older participants (r = 0.269, p < 0.05), but no significant correlations between these two variables for the middle-aged or young participants (both ps > 0.1; the low correlations in these two age groups were not a consequence of restricted variance in the left IFG subsequent memory effects. SDs of these effects were 0.78, 0.52 and 0.65 in the young, middle-aged and older groups respectively. Corresponding SDs for the right IFG effects were 0.58, 0.56 and 0.53). By contrast, the regression model for the right IFG failed to identify either the magnitude of the subsequent memory effect, or its interaction with age group, as a reliable predictor of pR. In light of our  a priori  interest in the relationship between the magnitude of right IFG subsequent memory effects and memory performance in older individuals (see Introduction: section 1), we calculated the correlation between these variables in the older group only. The correlation was .275 (p < .05) after controlling for age. 
 The analyses of the relationships between subsequent memory performance and left and right IFG subsequent memory effects suggests that, in striking contrast to our prior findings ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ), both effects in older participants were positively correlated with performance. Accordingly, in a third regression analysis (conducted for the older participants only), we employed the mean of the two IFG subsequent memory effects as a predictor variable, along with the continuous variable of age. Age again accounted for a significant proportion of the variance in memory performance. Importantly, so too did the averaged left and right IFG subsequent memory effects (partial r = .328, p < 0.01). The partial plot of this relationship is illustrated in  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 3.4.3 ROI analyses – hippocampus 
 Unsurprisingly, given the findings for the whole brain analyses described previously, the ANOVA of left hippocampal activity revealed a reliable main effect of subsequent memory, in the absence of an interaction between this factor and age group. Importantly, the same results were obtained when the analysis was repeated with an ANCOVA that controlled for individual differences in pR (age group x subsequent memory interaction, p > 0.1). Thus, there was no evidence that the relationship between subsequent memory performance and hippocampal subsequent memory effects reported below was sufficiently strong to have led to a spurious null effect of age group on these effects. 
 Turning to the regression model assessing the relationship between left hippocampal subsequent memory effects and associative memory performance ( Table 6 ), both age group and left hippocampal subsequent memory effects, but not the age group by subsequent memory effect interaction term, were reliable predictors of pR (left hippocampal effect: partial r = 0.212). After dropping the interaction term from the model, the across-group partial correlation (controlling for age group) between the left hippocampal effect and pR was 0.223 (p < 0.01; see  Figure 4  for the partial plot of this relationship). 
 
 
 3.4.4 Between-experiment analyses (older participants) 
 Independent t-tests indicated that pR did not differ between the two experiments (p > 0.4). A 2 (experiment) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA conducted on study RTs revealed a main effect of subsequent memory (F1, 98 = 6.69, p < .025), indicating that RTs were longer for subsequent associative misses than for subsequent associative hits, a main effect of experiment (F1, 98 = 8.01, p < .01), indicating that RTs were longer for the present relative to the previous experiment, and a trend for the interaction between these factors’ RTs (p < 0.07). Paired samples t-tests conducted for each experiment separately revealed that, as was the case for the entire sample, RTs for subsequent associative misses were longer than those for subsequent associative hits in the present experiment (t64 = 3.42, p < 0.005). The RTs did not however differ significantly in our prior study (p > 0.5). 
 A 2 (experiment) x 2 (hemisphere) x 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA of the data from the left and right IFG revealed, as would be expected given the outcomes of the independent analyses of the data from the two studies, a main effect of subsequent memory (F1, 98 = 25.82, p < .001) and a hemisphere by subsequent memory interaction (F1, 98 = 21.58, p < 0.001). There were, however, no significant interactions involving both the factors of experiment and subsequent memory (ps > 0.1). A 2 (experiment) by 2 (subsequent memory) ANOVA of the left hippocampal data also revealed (again unsurprisingly) a main effect of subsequent memory (F1, 98 = 21.32, p < 0.001), which, like the effects for the IFG, did not significantly interact with experiment (p > 0.06). 
 The regression analyses employed to assess the relationships between pR and the subsequent memory effects in left IFG, right IFG and left hippocampus each accounted for significant proportions of the variance in pR (left IFG: F4, 99 = 3.53, p < .01, R 2  = 0.093; right IFG: F4, 99 = 4.66, p < .005, R 2  = 0.129; left hippocampus: F4, 99 = 4.12, p < .005, R 2  = 0.112). In each case, age was a significant predictor of pR. For the models employing as predictors subsequent memory effects in the left IFG and the left hippocampus, the experiment by subsequent memory effect interaction terms were not significant and, in both cases, the subsequent memory effects were positively correlated with pR across participants (left IFG: r = 0.220, p < 0.05; left hippocampus: r = 0.240, p < 0.025). After dropping the interaction term from each of the models, the partial correlation (controlling for age and experiment) between pR and hippocampal subsequent memory effects was 0.260 (p < 0.01; see  Figure 5 ), but the partial correlation between pR and left IFG effects was no longer significant. For the model with right IFG subsequent memory effects as a predictor variable, the experiment by subsequent memory effect interaction term was significant (p < 0.005). Partial correlations (controlling for age) for each experiment separately revealed a significant negative relationship between pR and right IFG effects in the prior experiment (r = − 0.342, p < 0.05), consistent with what was previously reported using a somewhat different regression model and, of course, the significant positive relationship between pR and right IFG effects already described for the current experiment (see Results: section 3.4.2 ROI analyses – IFG subsequent memory effects). The partial plots of each of these relationships are illustrated in  Figure 6 . 
 
 
 
 
 3. Discussion 
 The present findings significantly extend those of our prior study of the effects of age on the neural correlates of associative encoding ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ). Several of the findings reported in that study were replicated here. These include age-invariance in the magnitude of subsequent memory effects in left IFG, posterior cortical regions and the hippocampus and, in older participants, a positive correlation between the magnitude of left IFG subsequent memory effects and later associative recognition performance. A new finding to emerge from the present study was an age-invariant correlation between the magnitude of hippocampal subsequent memory effects and subsequent memory performance. A striking disparity between our present and prior findings was evident in respect of right IFG subsequent memory effects in older individuals. Whereas we previously reported a negative correlation between these effects and later memory performance, the correlation in the present experiment was positive. Below, we discuss the relevance of these and related findings to the understanding of the effects of age on the neural correlates of episodic memory encoding, and to individual differences in memory performance. 
 
 3.1 Behavioral data 
 The demographic and neuropsychological test profiles of the present young and older samples were highly comparable to those of our prior study, as was associative recognition performance. Therefore there is little reason to suppose that any of the disparities in the respective fMRI findings reflect differences in the characteristics of the young and older samples employed in the two studies. 
 Whereas the present study largely followed the experimental procedures employed previously, it differed from our prior experiment in one potentially important way. While in both of the experiments participants performed the study task in the MRI scanner, in our prior experiment the subsequent associative recognition test was undertaken outside of the scanner on a laptop computer and was unpaced. In the present study, by contrast, participants re-entered the scanner and performed a paced version of the memory test while further fMRI data were acquired. Thus, the two experiments differed in respect of both the amount of overlap between the study and test contexts, and the time constraints imposed on the test judgments. Given that subsequent memory effects can qualitatively differ depending on the nature of the later memory test ( Otten, 2007 ;  Park et al., 2008 ;  Rugg et al., 2008 ;  Wong et al., 2013 ), it might not be surprising if some of the fMRI findings diverged between our present and prior studies. 
 We return to this issue later, but note here that the procedural differences between the test phases of the two studies seem likely to account for why study RTs differed according to subsequent memory performance in the present study (when they were some 50 ms faster for study pairs correctly endorsed as intact), but did not do so previously. We conjecture that the different test conditions in the two studies resulted in participants processing what were ostensibly the same retrieval cues in partially different ways (that is, they adopted different ‘retrieval orientations’ ( Rugg, 2004 ;  Rugg & Wilding, 2000 ), such that successful retrieval depended upon overlap between different combinations of the features of the retrieval cues and stored memory representations in the two studies. For example, the high perceptual overlap between the study and test pairs in the present experiment might have led participants to base their memory judgments on retrieved perceptual information to a greater extent than in the prior experiment, when study-test overlap at the perceptual level was lower. 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI findings 
 The present findings converge with the majority of prior studies to suggest that, in sharp contrast to what is typically reported for ‘negative’ subsequent memory effects, positive effects differ little in their magnitudes across much of the healthy human lifespan ( Maillet & Rajah, 2014 ). This is the case even for regions such as the hippocampus and IFG, where age-related reductions in volume and cortical thickness are consistently reported ( Raz & Rodrigue, 2006 ). As noted in Footnote 2, such reductions were also evident in the present participants. The right IFG is an exception to this general conclusion. Consistent with some prior reports (e.g.,  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Morcom et al., 2003 ), subsequent memory effects in this region were greater in older than in young participants, causing an age-related attenuation of the lateralization of the effects. In contrast to our prior study of associative memory encoding ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ), however, there was no evidence in the present older sample of a correlation across participants between the strength of the lateralization of the IFG subsequent memory effects (as indexed by left – right difference scores) and subsequent memory performance. 
 Unlike in the case of our older participants, the magnitude and lateralization of frontal subsequent memory effects in the middle-aged sample did not significantly differ from those of the young participants. The similarity of the frontal subsequent memory effects between these two age groups is consistent with the findings of two previous studies in which encoding-related activity in PFC was compared between young and middle-aged individuals (Kwon et al., 2015;  Park et al., 2013 ). The present findings suggest that, at least in relatively high-functioning individuals such as those comprising the present participant samples, right frontal over-recruitment of subsequent memory effects might not be evident until fairly late in the adult lifespan. A caveat to this conclusion arises from the finding that the right frontal subsequent memory effects in our middle-aged group did not significantly differ from the effects in either the young  or  the older participants. This raises the possibility that the magnitude of these effects varies continuously with age. 
 It is worth noting that, regardless of whether right frontal over-recruitment of subsequent memory effects varies continuously or discontinuously over the lifespan, it does not follow that it is a consequence of aging. An alternative possibility, for which there is indirect empirical support ( Nyberg et al., 2010 ), is that the influence of age on the magnitude of right frontal subsequent memory effects reflects the differential sampling biases inherent in the recruitment of healthy participants at different points of the lifespan (see  Rugg, in press , for further discussion of this issue). Arbitrating between these different accounts is not possible in the absence of relevant longitudinal data. 
 Although there was no evidence in the present older group of a relationship between over-recruitment of right frontal subsequent memory effects (as indexed by inter-hemispheric asymmetry of left and right frontal effects) and later memory performance, this is not to say the magnitude of the effects was independent of performance. Rather, asymmetry of the older participants’ effects failed to predict later memory performance because both left and right IFG effects were positively correlated with performance. The finding for the left IFG is reminiscent of the results reported for this region in our prior study, and converges with the previous finding to suggest that encoding-related activity in the left IFG of older individuals is a determinant of associative memory performance. Presumably, this reflects the benefit to associative encoding that comes with relatively high engagement during the study task of the semantic control processes held to be supported by this region ( Badre and Wagner, 2007 ;  Wong et al., 2013 ). By itself, however, this account does not explain why left IFG subsequent memory effects were correlated with later memory performance in older participants only. One possibility is that it is only in older individuals that the functional capacity of the left IFG is so limited that it acts as a mediator of encoding efficacy. By this account, processes supporting effective encoding are more sensitive to the amount of IFG engagement in older than in young or middle-aged individuals because of the high level of neural resources required to overcome limitations in processing efficiency caused by age-related synaptic or neuronal loss (cf.  Grady, 2012 ;  Motes et al., 2011 ;  Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008 ). There seems little reason to suppose that a similar account would not extend to the analogous findings reported here for the right IFG, to which we now turn. 
 As already noted, the present findings for the right IFG differed qualitatively from our previous results 3 , sufficiently so that there was a statistically significant cross-over interaction in the relationship between memory performance and the magnitude of right IFG subsequent memory effects in the two experiments ( Figure 6 ). Also unlike in our prior study, while FA of the anterior corpus callosum demonstrated the expected pattern of age-related decline (see Introduction: section 1), it did not predict the magnitude of right IFG subsequent memory effects in our older participants. Thus, both the structural and behavioral correlates of these effects differed between the two studies. As we alluded to previously, we conjecture that these disparate findings reflect the different circumstances under which memory was tested in the two experiments and, consequently, differences in the nature of the retrieved information that supported the associative recognition judgments in each case. We explained our prior findings ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ; see also  Duverne et al., 2009 ) by proposing a ‘partial compensation’ account of right frontal subsequent memory effects. According to this account, the effects reflect recruitment of right frontal cortical regions in individuals in whom the functional integrity of the left IFG is insufficient to support the demands of the study task. The account further proposed that whereas right frontal recruitment benefits on-line processing of the study items, it makes little or no contribution to encoding, which remains dependent on the processing supported by left IFG. Hence, we argued, the negative relationship between the magnitude of right frontal subsequent memory effects and memory performance that we reported came about because the effects serve as a proxy for the functional integrity of left frontal cortex. 
 The present finding of a positive relationship in older individuals between right frontal subsequent memory effects and performance can, perhaps, be accommodated by a simple (albeit,  ad hoc ) modification to the partial compensation account outlined above. According to this modified account, recruitment of the right IFG continues to reflect a compensatory response to the failure of the left IFG to fully meet the demands of the study task. Rather than contributing solely to study processing, however, recruitment of the right IFG in the present experiment also contributed to the formation of a memory representation that was potentially accessible on the later memory test. As was discussed earlier, this may have arisen because the high level of contextual and perceptual overlap between the study and test tasks encouraged a retrieval strategy that weighted perceptual features, or other features of the study items preferentially processed by right IFG, more heavily than was the case in our previous study. Obviously, additional research will be needed to examine the validity of this and alternate accounts. Irrespective of the precise reasons for the disparity between the present and previous findings ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ; see also  Duverne et al., 2009 ;  Miller et al., 2008 ), it seems clear that the functional significance of right frontal subsequent memory effects in older adults depends upon poorly understood but seemingly subtle variations in experimental context. Importantly, the present findings are inconsistent with the notion that these effects invariably reflect processing that confers no mnemonic benefit. 
 A reviewer suggested that our proposal that recruitment of the right IFG in older adults in support of memory encoding is driven by degradation of the functional integrity of the left IFG leads to a testable prediction. Specifically, the relationship between right IFG subsequent memory effects and memory performance should be stronger in participants with relatively small rather than relatively large left IFG effects (on the assumption that the size of subsequent memory effects in the left IFG is a reflection of the functional integrity of the region). To examine this prediction, we dichotomized our older group by a median split based on the size of left IFG subsequent memory effects, and then computed the correlations between memory performance and right IFG effects. Consistent with the reviewer’s prediction, the correlation in the sub-group with the smaller left IFG effects was sizeable and significant (r = .513, p < .005), while the correlation in the sub-group with the larger effects was negligible (r = −.087). These correlations differed significantly (p < .025). 
 In agreement with our prior findings ( de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ; see also  Miller et al., 2008 , and  Maillet & Rajah, 2014 , for review), we identified robust, age-invariant subsequent memory effects in the left hippocampus. The present effects were age-invariant not only in their magnitudes, but also with respect to the across-participants relationship that they demonstrated with subsequent memory performance. We conducted an across-experiment regression analysis (using subsequent memory data from the left anterior hippocampal peak reported by  de Chastelaine et al., 2011 ; MNI coordinates −27, −9, 15) to examine whether we might have missed a similar age-invariant relationship in our prior study. As is illustrated in  Figure 7 , the analysis revealed a reliable relationship across participants between left hippocampal effects and memory performance in the combined young and older samples (r = .259, p = .001, after controlling for age group and experiment, with no hint of any interaction effects involving these variables, ps > 0.4). Therefore it seems that our failure to identify this relationship previously was a Type II error. 
 The finding that the relationship between encoding-related activity in the hippocampus and later memory performance is age-invariant stands in contrast to the findings for the left and right IFG subsequent memory effects, where relationships with performance were evident in older individuals only. Thus it would appear that, unlike in these frontal regions, encoding-related activity in the hippocampus predicts later memory performance to largely the same extent regardless of the amount of any age-related structural decline. The functional significance of this relationship is unclear. On the one hand, it might be a direct reflection of individual differences in hippocampal function, perhaps reflecting the capacity of the structure to bind disparate information about a study event into a durable memory representation ( Eichenbaum et al., 2007 ). Thus, hippocampal subsequent memory effects might act as a marker for age-invariant individual differences in the efficiency with which the hippocampus can capture the products of on-line processing of a study event. Alternately, the relationship between hippocampal subsequent memory effects and memory performance might be indirect. For example, the relationship might reflect individual differences not in the functional capacity of the hippocampus, but in the amount or the quality of the information about a study event that it receives. There is evidence, for instance, that both subsequent memory performance and encoding-related activity in the hippocampus are modulated by the amount of attentional resources that are directed towards a study event or a sub-set of its features (Aly & Turk-Browne, 2015;  Uncapher & Rugg, 2009 ). Therefore the present findings might be a reflection of individual differences in processing resources or attentional strategies deployed by participants in performing the study task. 
 Our finding of a positive relationship in older individuals between the magnitude of hippocampal subsequent memory effects and later memory performance stands in contrast to the findings of  Miller et al. (2008) . In a study of face-name encoding, these authors reported the opposite relationship, such that older adults who performed relatively poorly on the later memory test demonstrated greater encoding-related activity in the hippocampus than higher-performing individuals. The finding was interpreted as evidence for compensatory hippocampal ‘hyper-activation’ in the face of decline in the functional integrity of other brain regions (see also  Mormino et al., 2012 ). There are a number of possible explanations for the divergence between the present findings and those of  Miller at al. (2008) , including the different sample sizes employed in the respective studies (Ns of 100 and 17 older participants), and the composition of the samples (mean age was some 5 years older in the sample of  Miller et al., 2008  than in our studies, and the age range was markedly broader). The present results are however consistent with those from a large longitudinal study ( Pudas et al., 2013 ). These authors reported that the magnitude of encoding-related hippocampal activity in older individuals (assessed in a blocked rather than an event-related design) correlated positively across participants with their memory performance, and was higher in individuals in whom episodic memory performance had remained stable over the preceding 15–20 years than in individuals who demonstrated a decline in performance over the same period (see  Persson et al., 2012 , and  Pudas et al., 2014 , for related findings from the same study). The present cross-sectional data provide little insight into the extent to which the age-related differences evident in associative recognition performance reflect effects of aging (within-participant decline over time) rather than age-correlated factors such as birth cohort effects ( Rönnlund and Nilsson, 2009 ;  Baxendale, 2010 ), and hence cannot be compared directly with the findings of  Pudas et al. (2013) . The data converge with those findings however to suggest that encoding-related activity in the hippocampus of healthy adults is more strongly predictive of memory performance than it is of chronological age. 
 We conclude by noting an important caveat to the interpretation of the present findings (and those of most prior studies where age-related differences in brain activity were examined with fMRI). Our conclusion that age has little impact on the magnitude of encoding-related activity in regions such as the left IFG and hippocampus rests on the assumption that the transfer function mediating between neural activity and the fMRI BOLD signal is age-invariant. There is evidence however that cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR) – an important non-neural determinant of BOLD signal magnitude – both varies across individuals of the same age, and declines monotonically with increasing age ( Lu et al., 2011 ). This decline appears to be sufficient to lead to an underestimation of the size of at least some types of fMRI effects in older relative to young individuals when the effects are uncorrected for individual differences in CVR (e.g.,  Liu et al., 2013 ;  Tsvetanov et al. 2015 ). Thus it is possible that the magnitude and regional extent of age-related ‘over-recruitment’ in encoding-related activity were underestimated in the present study. Importantly, it is unlikely that this caveat extends to our principal findings, which pertain to the relationships between individual, rather than group-wise, differences in the size of fMRI encoding effects and subsequent memory performance. Indeed, on the assumption that individual variation in CVR in our participants was largely uncorrelated with their memory performance, correcting for the variation would, if anything, lead to a strengthening of these relationships. That said, it will be important in future studies to incorporate methods (e.g., Ravi et al., 2015) that permit the influence of individual differences in CVR on the fMRI BOLD signal to be estimated and the signal corrected accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIH 1R01AG039103). 
 We gratefully acknowledge Hannah Stanton and Kay Moolenijzer for their contributions to participant recruitment and neuropsychological data collection, and Kristen Kennedy for her guidance in the analyses of structural data. We also thank the staff of the UTSW Advanced Imaging Center for their assistance with fMRI data collection. 
 
 
 
 1 
 Age and pR were significantly correlated across the older participants, r = − 0.260, p < 0.05. Accordingly, correlation and regression analyses conducted on this age group alone either controlled for the effects of age (correlation), or included it as a predictor variable (regression). 
 
 
 2 
 Although not reported in detail here, semi-automated analysis ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/ ) of the T1-weighted structural images revealed that thickness and volume of the left and right IFG were significantly lower in the middle-aged and older samples than in the young participants, while hippocampal volume was reduced in the older group relative to either of the other two groups, which did not significantly differ on this measure. Controlling for the effects of these different structural measures did not however alter the outcomes of any of the ANOVA or regression analyses described in this section. 
 
 
 3 
 A reviewer noted that right frontal subsequent memory effects might have lower reliability than left frontal effects, and that this could have contributed to the differential relationship with performance observed for the right frontal effects in the present and prior experiments. To examine this possibility, we re-ran the subsequent memory analyses in the present older group treating odd- and even-numbered remembered and forgotten trials as separate conditions, allowing us to assess the internal reliability of subsequent memory effects. This analysis yielded 4 IFG subsequent memory effects for each hemisphere: (1) hit (odd) – miss (odd); (2) hit (odd) – miss (even); (3) hit (even) – miss (odd); (4) hit (even) – miss (even). The mean across-participant correlations between the magnitudes of these effects were .40 and .35 for the left IFG and right IFG respectively (ranges were .61 to .072 on the left and .73 to −.002 on the right). Thus, there was minimal, if any, evidence for a difference in the internal reliability of IFG effects between the two hemispheres. It remains to be established whether this conclusion extends to measures of test-retest reliability. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aly 
 M 
 
 
 Turk-Browne 
 NB 
 
 
 Attention Stabilizes Representations in the Human Hippocampus 
 Cereb Cortex 
 in press 
 10.1093/cercor/bhv041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrade 
 A 
 
 
 Paradis 
 AL 
 
 
 Rouquette 
 S 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Ambiguous results in functional neuroimaging data analysis due to covariate correlation 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 10 
 483 
 6 
 10493904 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Nonlinear spatial normalization using basis functions 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1999 
 7 
 254 
 66 
 10408769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Badre 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 2883 
 901 
 17675110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bangen 
 KJ 
 
 
 Kaup 
 AR 
 
 
 Mirzakhanian 
 H 
 
 
 Wierenga 
 CE 
 
 
 Jeste 
 DV 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Compensatory brain activity during encoding among older adults with better recognition memory for face-name pairs: an integrative functional, structural, and perfusion imaging study 
 J Int Neuropsychol So 
 2012 
 18 
 402 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baxendale 
 S 
 
 
 The Flynn effect and memory function 
 J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
 2010 
 32 
 699 
 703 
 20119877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Hemispheric asymmetry reduction in older adults: the HAROLD model 
 Psychol Aging 
 2002 
 17 
 85 
 100 
 11931290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cocosco 
 CA 
 
 
 Kollokian 
 V 
 
 
 Kwan 
 RKS 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Brainweb: online interface to a 3D MRI simulated brain database 
 Neuroimage 
 1997 
 5 
 425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craik 
 FI 
 
 
 Rose 
 NS 
 
 
 Memory encoding and aging: a neurocognitive perspective 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2012 
 36 
 1729 
 39 
 22155274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 Minton 
 B 
 
 
 Muftuler 
 LT 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 The effects of age, memory performance, and callosal integrity on the neural correlates of successful associative encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 2166 
 76 
 21282317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Mattson 
 JT 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 Donley 
 BE 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Sensitivity of negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects to age and associative memory performance 
 Brain Res 
 2015 
 1612 
 16 
 29 
 25264353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delis 
 DC 
 
 
 Kramer 
 JH 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 E 
 
 
 Ober 
 BA 
 
 
 California Verbal Learning Test 
 2 
 San Antonio, TX 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 2000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Hayes 
 SM 
 
 
 Prince 
 SE 
 
 
 Madden 
 DJ 
 
 
 Huettel 
 SA 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Effects of aging on the neural correlates of successful item and source memory encoding 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 2008 
 34 
 791 
 808 
 18605869 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duverne 
 S 
 
 
 Motamedinia 
 S 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 The relationship between aging, performance, and the neural correlates of successful memory encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 733 
 44 
 18653664 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Düzel 
 E 
 
 
 Schütze 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Heinze 
 HJ 
 
 
 Functional phenotyping of successful aging in long-term memory: Preserved performance in the absence of neural compensation 
 Hippocampus 
 2011 
 21 
 803 
 14 
 20665594 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AR 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory 
 Annu Rev Neurosc 
 2007 
 30 
 123 
 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 P 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Holmes 
 A 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Event-related fMRI: characterizing differential responses 
 Neuroimage 
 1998 
 7 
 30 
 40 
 9500830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 C 
 
 
 The cognitive neuroscience of ageing 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2012 
 13 
 491 
 505 
 22714020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gutchess 
 A 
 
 
 Welsh 
 RC 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Bangert 
 A 
 
 
 Minear 
 M 
 
 
 Liu 
 L 
 
 
 Park 
 D 
 
 
 Aging and the neural correlates of successful picture encoding: frontal activations compensate for decreased medial-temporal activity 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 2005 
 17 
 84 
 96 
 15701241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Head 
 D 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Shimony 
 JS 
 
 
 Williams 
 LE 
 
 
 Akbudak 
 E 
 
 
 Conturo 
 TE 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 M 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Differential vulnerability of anterior white matter in nondemented aging with minimal acceleration in dementia of the Alzheimer type: evidence from diffusion tensor imaging 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2004 
 14 
 410 
 23 
 15028645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiang 
 H 
 
 
 van Zijl 
 PC 
 
 
 Kim 
 J 
 
 
 Pearlson 
 GD 
 
 
 Mori 
 S 
 
 
 DtiStudio: resource program for diffusion tensor computation and fiber bundle tracking 
 Comput Methods Programs Biomed 
 2006 
 81 
 106 
 16 
 16413083 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 H 
 
 
 Neural activity that predicts subsequent memory and forgetting: a meta-analysis of 74 fMRI studies 
 Neuroimage 
 2011 
 54 
 2446 
 61 
 20869446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 Williamson 
 DE 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 J 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Cornell 
 J 
 
 
 Blangero 
 J 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fractional anisotropy of water diffusion in cerebral white matter across the lifespan 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2012 
 33 
 9 
 20 
 20122755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koen 
 JD 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 The effects of healthy aging, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease on recollection and familiarity: a meta-analytic review 
 Neuropsychol Rev 
 2014 
 24 
 332 
 54 
 25119304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kwon 
 D 
 
 
 Maillet 
 D 
 
 
 Pasvanis 
 S 
 
 
 Ankudowich 
 E 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Rajah 
 MN 
 
 
 Context Memory Decline in Middle Aged Adults is Related to Changes in Prefrontal Cortex Function 
 Cereb Cortex 
 in press; pii: bhv068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 SC 
 
 
 Brehmer 
 Y 
 
 
 Shing 
 YL 
 
 
 Werkle-Bergner 
 M 
 
 
 Lindenberger 
 U 
 
 
 Neuromodulation of associative and organizational plasticity across the life span: empirical evidence and neurocomputational modeling 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2006 
 30 
 775 
 90 
 16930705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 P 
 
 
 Hebrank 
 AC 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 Section 
 J 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Lu 
 H 
 
 
 Age-related differences in memory-encoding fMRI responses after accounting for decline in vascular reactivity 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 78 
 415 
 25 
 23624491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Logan 
 JM 
 
 
 Sanders 
 AL 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Morris 
 JC 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Under-recruitment and nonselective recruitment: dissociable neural mechanisms associated with aging 
 Neuron 
 2002 
 33 
 827 
 40 
 11879658 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lu 
 H 
 
 
 Xu 
 F 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 Cheng 
 Y 
 
 
 Flicker 
 B 
 
 
 Hebrank 
 AC 
 
 
 Uh 
 J 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Alterations in cerebral metabolic rate and blood supply across the adult lifespan 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2011 
 21 
 1426 
 34 
 21051551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maillet 
 D 
 
 
 Rajah 
 MN 
 
 
 Age-related differences in brain activity in the subsequent memory paradigm: A meta-analysis 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2014 
 45 
 246 
 57 
 24973756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mattson 
 JT 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Effects of age on negative subsequent memory effects associated with the encoding of item and item–context information 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2014 
 24 
 3322 
 33 
 23904464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mickes 
 L 
 
 
 Johnson 
 EM 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Continuous recollection versus unitized familiarity in associative recognition 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 2010 
 36 
 843 
 63 
 20565205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 SL 
 
 
 Celone 
 K 
 
 
 DePeau 
 K 
 
 
 Diamond 
 E 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Rentz 
 D 
 
 
 Pihlajamäki 
 M 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Age-related memory impairment associated with loss of parietal deactivation but preserved hippocampal activation 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2008 
 105 
 2181 
 6 
 18238903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morcom 
 AM 
 
 
 Good 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Age effects on the neural correlates of successful memory encoding 
 Brain 
 2003 
 126 
 213 
 29 
 12477708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mormino 
 EC 
 
 
 Brandel 
 MG 
 
 
 Madison 
 CM 
 
 
 Marks 
 S 
 
 
 Baker 
 SL 
 
 
 Jagust 
 WJ 
 
 
 Aβ deposition in aging is associated with increases in brain activation during successful memory encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 1813 
 23 
 21945849 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Motes 
 MA 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Rypma 
 B 
 
 
 Age-dependent relationships between prefrontal cortex activation and processing efficiency 
 Cogn Neurosci 
 2011 
 2 
 1 
 10 
 22792129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 DL 
 
 
 McEvoy 
 CL 
 
 
 Schreiber 
 TA 
 
 
 The University of South Florida free association, rhyme, and word fragment norms 
 Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 
 2004 
 36 
 402 
 7 
 15641430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Memory function in normal aging 
 Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 
 2003 
 107 
 7 
 13 
 12603244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Salami 
 A 
 
 
 Andersson 
 M 
 
 
 Eriksson 
 J 
 
 
 Kalpouzos 
 G 
 
 
 Kauppi 
 K 
 
 
 Lind 
 J 
 
 
 Pudas 
 S 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Longitudinal evidence for diminished frontal cortex function in aging 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 2010 
 107 
 22682 
 6 
 21156826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Old 
 SR 
 
 
 Naveh-Benjamin 
 M 
 
 
 Differential effects of age on item and associative measures of memory: a meta-analysis 
 Psychol Aging 
 2008 
 23 
 104 
 18 
 18361660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Sullivan 
 MRCP 
 
 
 Jones 
 DK 
 
 
 Summers 
 PE 
 
 
 Morris 
 RG 
 
 
 Williams 
 SCR 
 
 
 Markus 
 HS 
 
 
 Evidence for cortical “disconnection” as a mechanism of age-related cognitive decline 
 Neurology 
 2001 
 57 
 632 
 8 
 11524471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Fragments of a larger whole: retrieval cues constrain observed neural correlates of memory encoding 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2007 
 17 
 2030 
 8 
 17088375 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Observing the transformation of experience into memory 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2002 
 6 
 93 
 102 
 15866193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Effects of study task on the neural correlates of source encoding 
 Learn Mem 
 2008 
 15 
 417 
 25 
 18511693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 KM 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Hebrank 
 A 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 An fMRI study of episodic encoding across the lifespan: changes in subsequent memory effects are evident by middle-age 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2013 
 51 
 448 
 56 
 23219676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Pudas 
 S 
 
 
 Lind 
 J 
 
 
 Kauppi 
 K 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Longitudinal structure–function correlates in elderly reveal MTL dysfunction with cognitive decline 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2012 
 22 
 2297 
 304 
 22065863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 Hedehus 
 M 
 
 
 Lim 
 KO 
 
 
 Adalsteinsson 
 E 
 
 
 Moseley 
 M 
 
 
 Age-related decline in brain white matter anisotropy measured with spatially corrected echo-planar diffusion tensor imaging 
 Magn Reson Med 
 2000 
 44 
 259 
 68 
 10918325 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pudas 
 S 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Josefsson 
 M 
 
 
 de Luna 
 X 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Brain characteristics of individuals resisting age-related cognitive decline over two decades 
 J Neurosci 
 2013 
 33 
 8668 
 77 
 23678111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pudas 
 S 
 
 
 Persson 
 J 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Midlife memory ability accounts for brain activity differences in healthy aging 
 Neurobiol Aging 
 2014 
 35 
 2495 
 503 
 24973117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ravi 
 H 
 
 
 Thomas 
 BP 
 
 
 Peng 
 SL 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Lu 
 H 
 
 
 On the optimization of imaging protocol for the mapping of cerebrovascular reactivity 
 J Magn Reson Imaging 
 in press 
 10.1002/jmri.25028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raz 
 N 
 
 
 Rodrigue 
 KM 
 
 
 Differential aging of the brain: patterns, cognitive correlates and modifiers 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2006 
 30 
 730 
 48 
 16919333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 Cappell 
 KA 
 
 
 Neurocognitive aging and the compensation hypothesis 
 Curr Dir Psychol Sci 
 2008 
 17 
 177 
 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 How does it STAC up? Revisiting the scaffolding theory of aging and cognition 
 Neuropsychol Rev 
 2014 
 24 
 355 
 70 
 25143069 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rönnlund 
 M 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Bäckman 
 L 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Stability, growth, and decline in adult life span development of declarative memory: cross-sectional and longitudinal data from a population-based study 
 Psychol Aging 
 2005 
 20 
 3 
 18 
 15769210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rönnlund 
 M 
 
 
 Nilsson 
 LG 
 
 
 Flynn effects on sub-factors of episodic and semantic memory: Parallel gains over time and the same set of determining factors 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 2174 
 80 
 19056409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 Park 
 H 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Encoding-retrieval overlap in human episodic memory: a functional neuroimaging perspective 
 Prog Brain Res 
 2008 
 169 
 339 
 52 
 18394485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Morcom 
 AM 
 
 
 The relationship between brain activity, cognitive performance, and aging 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Cognitive neuroscience of aging: Linking cognitive and cerebral aging 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 2005 
 132 
 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Interpreting age-related differences in memory-related neural activity 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 Park 
 DC 
 
 
 Cognitive Neuroscience of Aging: Linking cognitive and cerebral aging 
 New York 
 Oxford University Press 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Retrieval processing in human memory: electrophysiological and fMRI evidence 
 
 
 Gazzaniga 
 MS 
 
 
 The Cognitive Neurosciences III 
 Cambridge (MA) 
 MIT Press 
 2004 
 727 
 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Wilding 
 EL 
 
 
 Retrieval processing and episodic memory 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 2000 
 4 
 108 
 15 
 10689345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 EV 
 
 
 Pfefferbaum 
 A 
 
 
 Diffusion tensor imaging and aging 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2006 
 30 
 749 
 61 
 16887187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsvetanov 
 KA 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Davis 
 SW 
 
 
 Shafto 
 MA 
 
 
 Taylor 
 JR 
 
 
 Williams 
 N 
 
 
 Cam-Can 
 
 
 Rowe 
 JB 
 
 
 The effect of ageing on fMRI: Correction for the confounding effects of vascular reactivity evaluated by joint fMRI and MEG in 335 adults 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2015 
 36 
 2248 
 69 
 25727740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Rugg 
 M 
 
 
 Selecting for memory? The influence of selective attention on the mnemonic binding of contextual information 
 J Neurosci 
 2009 
 29 
 8270 
 9 
 19553466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Drury 
 HA 
 
 
 Dickson 
 J 
 
 
 Harwell 
 J 
 
 
 Hanlon 
 D 
 
 
 Anderson 
 CH 
 
 
 An integrated software suite for surface-based analyses of cerebral cortex 
 J Am Med Inform Assoc 
 2001 
 8 
 443 
 59 
 11522765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Windows on the brain: the emerging role of atlases and databases in neuroscience 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 2002 
 12 
 574 
 9 
 12367638 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 A population-average, landmark-and surface-based (PALS) atlas of human cerebral cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 28 
 635 
 62 
 16172003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 Wechsler Test of Adult Reading 
 San Antonio, TX 
 The Psychological Corporation 
 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wong 
 JX 
 
 
 de Chastelaine 
 M 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Comparison of the neural correlates of encoding item-item and item-context associations 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 2013 
 7 
 436 
 23970858 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Clusters demonstrating across-group subsequent memory effects. Effects are displayed on coronal sections of the across-groups mean T1-weighted structural image and the left lateral surface of a standardized brain (PALS-B12) atlas using Caret 5. The blue circles indicate the regions (left hippocampus, left and right IFG) from which parameter estimates were extracted for the ROI analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Mean parameter estimates (arbitrary units) for the three age groups for subsequent associative hits and misses extracted from left and homotopic right IFG ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Partial plot showing the relationship across older participants between IFG subsequent memory effects collapsed across hemisphere and pR, controlling for age. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Partial plot showing the relationship across participants between subsequent memory effects in the left hippocampus and pR after controlling for age group. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Partial plot showing the relationship across older participants between subsequent memory effects in the left hippocampus and pR after controlling for age and experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Partial plots (controlling for age) showing the relationships between pR and right IFG subsequent memory effects across older participants from (A) the prior experiment; (B) the current experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Partial plot showing the relationship across young and older participants from the prior and current experiments between subsequent memory effects in the left hippocampus and pR after controlling for experiment and age group. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Demographic and neuropsychological data (mean, SD, and range) for young, middle-aged, and older adults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young adults 
 Middle-aged adults 
 Older adults 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 Mean 
 SD 
 Range 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 
 22.2 
 3.0 
 18–29 
 49.4 
 3.4 
 43–55 
 68.4 
 3.6 
 63–76 
 
 
 
 Years of Education 
 a 
 † 
 
 15.5 
 2.4 
 11–22 
 16.3 
 2.6 
 10–22 
 17.1 
 2.3 
 12–22 
 
 
 
 Mini Mental State Exam 
 
 29.6 
 0.6 
 28–30 
 29.3 
 0.8 
 28–30 
 29.3 
 0.8 
 27–30 
 
 
 CVLT 1 
 Composite Recall a † 
 13.3 
 1.9 
 9.3–16 
 12.4 
 2.0 
 9–16 
 12.0 
 2.5 
 5.5–16 
 
 
 CVLT 1 
 Recognition a ‡ , b * 
 15.6 
 0.6 
 14–16 
 15.2 
 0.9 
 13–16 
 14.8 
 1.3 
 12–16 
 
 
 CVLT 1 
 False Positives a † , b * 
 0.9 
 1.0 
 0–4 
 1.9 
 2.2 
 0–8 
 1.9 
 2.2 
 0–10 
 
 
 WMS 2 
 Composite Score 
 29.0 
 6.6 
 15.5–41 
 27.1 
 6.2 
 14–44.5 
 27.5 
 5.3 
 18.5–39.5 
 
 
 
 Forward/Backward Digit Span 
 
 18.0 
 3.9 
 11–26 
 18.2 
 3.5 
 13–26 
 18.3 
 4.4 
 12–27 
 
 
 
 Digit Symbol Substitution 
 a 
 ‡ 
 , b 
 † 
 , c 
 † 
 
 61.4 
 10.1 
 39–83 
 55.2 
 7.8 
 41–70 
 49.7 
 8.5 
 31–74 
 
 
 
 Trail A 
 a 
 ‡ 
 , c 
 ‡ 
 
 20.9 
 7.3 
 11–47 
 24.1 
 6.7 
 14–39 
 32.5 
 11.4 
 15–88 
 
 
 
 Trail B 
 a 
 ‡ 
 , c 
 ‡ 
 
 46.7 
 17.3 
 23–108 
 51.7 
 16.9 
 27–95 
 74.8 
 46.7 
 31–360 
 
 
 
 Letter Fluency 
 
 43.6 
 11.8 
 23–65 
 47.5 
 12.0 
 28–69 
 45.3 
 12.6 
 21–81 
 
 
 
 Category Fluency 
 
 24.8 
 5.9 
 16–42 
 24.0 
 5.9 
 13–36 
 22.3 
 5.5 
 12–40 
 
 
 WTAR 3 
 Raw Score 
 112.3 
 5.0 
 102–119 
 111.1 
 5.1 
 101–118 
 112.5 
 5.5 
 101–119 
 
 
 
 Raven’s Prog. Matrices 
 4  a 
 ‡ 
 , b 
 ** 
 
 11.2 
 1.0 
 8–12 
 10.4 
 1.5 
 7–12 
 9.7 
 2.0 
 3–12 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 California Verbal Learning Test. 
 
 
 2 
 Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-IV). 
 
 
 3 
 Wechsler Test of Adult Reading Full Scale Intellectual Quotient. 
 
 
 4 
 Short version of Raven’s Progressive Matrices. 
 
 
 Note: Statistically significant difference between a) young and older adults, b) young and middle-aged adults, c) middle-aged and older adults. 
 
 
 * 
 p < 0.05, 
 
 
 ** 
 p < 0.01, 
 
 
 † 
 p < 0.005, 
 
 
 ‡ 
 p < 0.001, 2-tailed t-tests. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Mean proportions (±SD) of intact, rearranged, and new test pairs given intact, rearranged, and new responses in each age group. Correct responses are highlighted in bold. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young 
 Middle-aged 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intact responses 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 
 0.63 (0.17) 
 
 
 0.63 (0.14) 
 
 
 0.56 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 0.15 (0.11) 
 0.24 (0.12) 
 0.25 (0.13) 
 
 
 New pairs 
 0.03 (0.06) 
 0.06 (0.07) 
 0.07 (0.07) 
 
 
 
 Rearranged responses 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 0.26 (0.12) 
 0.27 (0.11) 
 0.29 (0.13) 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 
 0.64 (0.16) 
 
 
 0.55 (0.15) 
 
 
 0.49 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 New pairs 
 0.29 (0.15) 
 0.30 (0.16) 
 0.30 (0.16) 
 
 
 
 New responses 
 
 
 
 Intact pairs 
 0.11 (0.09) 
 0.10 (0.09) 
 0.14 (0.09) 
 
 
 Rearranged pairs 
 0.20 (0.11) 
 0.21 (0.13) 
 0.26 (0.12) 
 
 
 New pairs 
 
 0.68 (0.17) 
 
 
 0.64 (0.19) 
 
 
 0.63 (0.18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Mean FA values (SDs) from the anterior and posterior corpus callosum ROIs according to age group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Young 
 Middle-aged 
 Older 
 
 
 
 
 Anterior corpus callosum 
 0.73 (0.03) 
 0.70 (0.03) 
 0.69 (0.03) 
 
 
 Posterior corpus callosum 
 0.79 (0.03) 
 0.78 (0.03) 
 0.80 (0.04) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Peak voxels of the across-group main effect of subsequent memory, exclusively masked by the 2-sided group by subsequent memory contrast. 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates
 
 Peak  Z 
 No. of above-threshold voxels 
 Region 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 −48 
 32 
 −11 
 6.44 
 477 
 Left IFG 
 
 
 −12 
 26 
 58 
 5.03 
 227 
 Left superior medial frontal cortex 
 
 
 −30 
 17 
 55 
 4.05 
 79 
 Left superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −30 
 31 
 −23 
 5.34 
 194 
 Left fusiform gyrus 
 
 
 −33 
 −19 
 −14 
 4.11 
 sub-peak 
 Left hippocampus 
 
 
 −60 
 −52 
 −17 
 4.61 
 97 
 Left inferior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −48 
 −70 
 22 
 4.46 
 240 
 Left angular gyrus 
 
 
 30 
 −13 
 1 
 3.73 
 26 
 Right putamen 
 
 
 33 
 −16 
 25 
 3.82 
 30 
 White matter 
 
 
 27 
 −31 
 −29 
 4.44 
 31 
 Right cerebellum 
 
 
 27 
 −34 
 61 
 3.55 
 26 
 Right post-central gyrus 
 
 
 21 
 −73 
 −35 
 4.79 
 124 
 Right cerebellum 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Results of the across-group regression models investigating to what extent age group, IFG subsequent memory effects (left or right) and their interaction with age, predict subsequent associative memory performance. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 
 b 
 
 SE  b 
 β 
 P  value 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age group 
 
 −.107 
 .019 
 −.523 
 .000 
 
 
 
 LIFG subsequent memory effect 
 
 .004 
 .020 
 .015 
 .849 
 
 
 
 LIFG subsequent memory effect x Age group 
 
 .056 
 .022 
 .231 
 .013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age group 
 
 −.084 
 .016 
 −.414 
 .000 
 
 
 
 RIFG subsequent memory effect 
 
 .007 
 .025 
 .024 
 .772 
 
 
 
 RIFG subsequent memory effect x Age group 
 
 .041 
 .029 
 .112 
 .166 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Results of the across-group regression model investigating to what extent age group, left hippocampal subsequent memory effects, and the interaction between these variables, predict subsequent associative memory performance. 
 
 
 
 
 Model 
 
 b 
 
 SE  b 
 β 
 P  value 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age group 
 
 −.075 
 .018 
 −.370 
 .000 
 
 
 
 Left hippo subsequent memory effect 
 
 .090 
 .036 
 .219 
 .014 
 
 
 
 Left hippo subsequent memory effect x Age group 
 
 −.014 
 .042 
 −.033 
 .732 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age-invariant hippocampal subsequent memory effects predicted memory performance 
 
 
 Right IFG subsequent memory effects were evident only in older adults 
 
 
 IFG subsequent memory effects predicted subsequent memory only in older adults 
 
 
 
 
