
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9814574 
 31973 
 Dev Sci 
 Dev Sci 
 
 Developmental science 
 
 1363-755X 
 1467-7687 
 
 
 27147257 
 4945471 
 10.1111/desc.12422 
 NIHMS782375 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Comprehending text versus reading words in young readers with varying reading ability: Distinct patterns of functional connectivity from common processing hubs 
 
 
 
 
 Aboud 
 Katherine S. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Bailey 
 Stephen K. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Petrill 
 Stephen A. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Cutting 
 Laurie E. 
 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 1 Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA 
 2 Department of Psychology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA 
 
 * Send correspondence to: Laurie E. Cutting, Education and Brain Sciences Research Lab, Peabody College of Education and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Pl., PMB 328, Nashville, TN 37203, USA. ( Laurie.Cutting@Vanderbilt.Edu ) 
 
 
 2 
 5 
 2016 
 
 
 04 
 5 
 2016 
 
 
 7 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 7 
 2017 
 
 19 
 4 
 632 
 656 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Skilled reading depends on recognizing words efficiently in isolation ( word-level processing; WL ) and extracting meaning from text ( discourse-level processing; DL ); deficiencies in either result in poor reading. FMRI has revealed consistent overlapping networks in word and passage reading, as well as unique regions for DL processing, however less is known about how WL and DL processes interact. Here we examined functional connectivity from seed regions derived from where BOLD signal overlapped during word and passage reading in 38 adolescents ranging in reading ability, hypothesizing that even though certain regions support word- and higher-level language, connectivity patterns from overlapping regions would be task modulated. Results indeed revealed that the left-lateralized semantic and working memory (WM) seed regions showed task-dependent functional connectivity patterns: during DL processes, semantic and WM nodes all correlated with the left angular gyrus, a region implicated in semantic memory/coherence building. In contrast, during WL, these nodes coordinated with a traditional WL area (left occipitotemporal region). Additionally, these WL and DL findings were modulated by decoding and comprehension abilities, respectively, with poorer abilities correlating with decreased connectivity. Findings indicate that key regions may uniquely contribute to multiple levels of reading; we speculate that these connectivity patterns may be especially salient for reading outcomes and intervention response. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Skilled reading comprehension (RC) requires the integration of word-level (WL) and discourse-level (DL) processing of a text. Early adolescence (~10–14 years old) is a period of reading development marked by a transition in the classroom from a focus on WL reading (“learning to read”) to cohesive integration of WL and DL processes (“reading to learn”). Readers with RC deficits have been found to show correlated but separable difficulties in both word and text reading processes, including vocabulary skills ( Cain & Oakhill, 2006 ; Kate  Nation, Snowling, & Clarke, 2007 ;  Spencer, Quinn, & Wagner, 2014 ), integration of semantic information within and across sentences ( Oakhill et al., 2003 ;  Oakhill & Cain, 2012 ), and working memory and other executive functions (WM;  Locascio, Mahone, Eason, & Cutting, 2010 .;  Nation, Adams, Bowyer-Crane, & Snowling, 1999 ;  Stothard, 1992 ). These findings suggest that RC deficits may involve unique and interactive deficits in WL and DL processes, particularly semantic processing and WM. Nevertheless, despite the estimated prevalence rate of approximately 30% of adolescent readers struggling with RC ( U.S. Department of Education:  National Assessment of Educational Progress , 2013 ), the neurobiological underpinnings of WL and DL functions, and how they are appropriately integrated during reading, is poorly understood. Surprisingly, no neuroimaging studies to date have examined the interaction between WL and DL processes in adolescents. The current study aimed to address this significant gap in the literature by using a naturalistic reading paradigm in order to investigate the relationship between these tiers of reading in adolescent readers who ranged in reading ability. 
 Surveying the literature for individual WL and DL studies reveals consistent neural networks identified across both levels of reading. The literature has clearly established that WL reading recruits a widespread network of left-lateralized language regions ( Price, 2012 ). These include activation of the left occipitotemporal area (OT; for full abbreviations list see  Table 1 ), particularly the putative visual word form area (pVWFA), which is thought to support orthographic processing, including rapid visual word recognition ( McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2003 ;  Schlaggar & McCandliss, 2007 ). Additionally, WL processing recruits phonological support regions, including subregions of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; BA 44 in particular), with additional associations with the supramarginal gyrus (SMG;  Richlan, 2012 ;C. J.  Price, 2012 ;  Vandermosten, Boets, Wouters, & Ghesquière, 2012 ). Finally, the middle temporal gyrus (MTG) and temporal pole (TP), and other subcomponents of the IFG (BA 45 and 47 especially) are thought to support WL semantic functions (i.e. the connection of word stimuli to meaning;  Price, 2012 ). In the context of these findings, WL neuroimaging work appears to map reasonably well onto behavioral models of reading, which suggest that skilled reading requires adequate formation and integration of the orthographic, phonological, and semantic representations of words ( Perfetti, 2007 ). In addition to these language-specific functions, behavioral and neuroimaging studies have also suggested that the integration of word representations is supported by top-down or executive processes such as WM ( Christopher et al., 2012 )—cognitive abilities which are largely associated with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC;  Coelho, Lê, Mozeiko, Krueger, & Grafman, 2012 ;  Fedorenko, 2014 ). Consequently, the dlPFC could also play an important role in WL processes ( Kovelman et al., 2012 ). 
 Previous literature has revealed that DL processing involves a complex integration of multiple skill sets spanning different cognitive domains, including those required for WL reading. In addition to the WL processing requirements mentioned above ( Kendeou, van den Broek, Helder, & Karlsson, 2014 ;  Perfetti, 2007 ), in order to comprehend a text meaning must be integrated across multi-word units through combinatorial semantic and syntactic unification (i.e. DL processes;  Friederici, 2011 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Humphries, Binder, Medler, & Liebenthal, 2007 ). This act of building meaning is supported by domain-general executive functions, including WM, inferencing, planning/organization, and social cognition, which work to appropriately maintain, organize, and contextualize the incoming information ( Cutting, Materek, Cole, Levine, & Mahone, 2009 ;  Ferstl, Neumann, Bogler, & von Cramon, 2008 ;  Kendeou et al., 2014 ;  Sesma, Mahone, Levine, Eason, & Cutting, 2009 ). Through these convergent functions, meaning is integrated into an evolving internal representation of the text known as the “situation model” ( Dijk & Kintsch, 1983 ;  Whitney et al., 2009 ). Because reading connected texts requires integration of WL processes, not surprisingly, neuroimaging studies find large areas of overlap between word and passage reading, including left IFG, TP, and MTG ( Friederici, 2011 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Price, 2012 ); the dlPFC has also been implicated ( Christopher et al., 2012 ;  Coelho, Lê, Mozeiko, Krueger, & Grafman, 2012 ;  Fedorenko, 2014 ). Discourse-specific areas include domain-general nodes within the default mode network (DMN) including the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), bilateral angular gyri (AG), posterior midline regions, and in some cases, the hippocampus and bilateral anterior superior temporal sulcus ( Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008 ). This dispersed network is implicated in numerous cognitive tasks, but in the context of discourse processing, appears to support inferential and contextualization functions, including social cognition ( Ferstl et al., 2008 ;  Mar, 2011 ). 
 Central to the current study, regions of overlap between WL and DL processing are implicitly interpreted in discourse processing studies as primarily supporting “lower-level” WL processes, (i.e. they are subtracted out using WL baseline tasks). However, studies examining these left-lateralized language and WM areas suggest that these regions are potentially multi-functional, with flexible network properties depending on task demand, or, perhaps due to smaller functionally specific subregions. Indeed, subregions of the IFG form a complex functional gradient potentially supporting a broader role of the IFG in the unification of information ( Hagoort, 2005 ): BA 44 and BA 45 are both implicated in syntactic unification; BA 44 additionally is related to phonological functions; and BA 45 (along with BA 47) is also thought to support semantic processes ( Cappa, 2012 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Hagoort, 2005 ;  Price, 2012 ;  Pugh et al., 2001 ). More generally, IFG, MTG, and TP have been associated with multiple functions including WL reading ( Cappa, 2012 ;  Jefferies, 2013 ;  Pugh et al., 2001 ;  Tsapkini et al., 2011 ), combinatorial semantics ( Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Humphries et al., 2007 ), syntax (IFG, MTG, TP;  Cappa, 2012 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Hagoort, 2005 ), semantic storage (MTG;  Jefferies, 2013 ;  Price, 2012 ), and executive semantic functions ( Whitney, Kirk, O’Sullivan, Lambon Ralph, & Jefferies, 2011 ). 
 Whether these regions are truly multifunctional, or reflect smaller, functionally-specific subregions is an open question. For example, the canonical Broca’s area has been divided into multiple subdivisions based on connectivity, cytoarchitecture, and transmitter receptor distribution ( Amunts & Zilles, 2012 ), some of which map onto proposed, distinct functions ( Friederici, 2011 ). Consequently, areas which appear to exhibit flexible network properties could be comprised of different neuronal subpopulations. To determine whether hub regions exhibit flexible connections due to true multifunctionality or proximal, heterogeneous subdivisions, the dynamic network and functional characteristics of these regions requires close interrogation in the context of reading and reading deficits. From this context, heretofore when we refer to the term multifunctionality, we acknowledge that it may reflect either “true” multifunctionality or further subregions that are proximal but perhaps heterogeneous in function. 
 In addition to language regions common to WL and DL processing, neuroimaging and behavioral studies suggest that the dlPFC-based top-down, executive control and WM functions may play critical, independent and integrative roles in WL and DL cognition ( Christopher et al., 2012 ;  Coelho et al., 2012 ;  Fedorenko, 2014 ;  Locascio, Mahone, Eason, & Cutting, 2010 ;  Newman, Malaia, Seo, & Cheng, 2013 ;  Petten, Weckerly, Mclsaac, & Kutas, 1997 ). A traditional cognitive model of reading, the simple view of reading ( Hoover & Gough, 1990 ), hypothesizes that skilled RC ability requires appropriate integration of WL and oral DL (listening or language comprehension) processes. An expanded version of this model suggests that this integration is potentially facilitated by executive functions ( Cutting et al., 2015 ). Practically, this integration seems to involve semantic processing, particularly connecting orthographic representations to meaning, and integrating this meaning across units of text. Behavioral studies of RC deficits have suggested that struggling readers could have deficits in this integration process, rather than the component skills of word reading and oral language ( Locascio, Mahone, Eason, & Cutting, 2010 .;  Sesma, Mahone, Levine, Eason, & Cutting, 2009 ). In this context, the dlPFC may play a role in top-down maintenance of WL and DL integration, specifically by managing semantic-orthographic representations and combinatorial semantic processing. 
 Thus, previous literature on word and discourse processes indicates that semantic (including orthographic-semantic networks) and executive overlap regions described above may be multi-functional in the context of reading at multiple levels. Due to the dynamic activity of these areas, some studies have suggested that these overlapping language and executive regions are cognitive “hubs” (TP,  Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007 ; IFG,  Bitan et al., 2005 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ; MTG,  Visser, Jefferies, Embleton, & Lambon Ralph, 2012 ); i.e. they exhibit flexible network activity by communicating with a greater number of disparate networks ,and “support and/or integrate multiple types of information” ( Power, Schlaggar, Lessov-Schlaggar, & Petersen, 2013 ). Importantly, a recent study by  Power et al. (2013)  suggests that damage to hub regions has a significant impact on clinical outcomes across different cognitive domains. Consequently, examination of multifunctional regions has potentially significant implications both within and beyond the context of reading ( Cole et al., 2013 ). By examining network properties of multifunctional passage and word overlap regions, we expected not only to identify patterns predictive of reading ability, but also sought to better identify potentially flexible network characteristics of hub areas within the traditionally identified language network. 
 
 
 Current Study 
 In the current study, we used an expository text reading paradigm to examine reading networks in adolescents with a range of word reading and RC abilities. In addition to the inclusion of both WL and DL processing tasks in our paradigm, we also purposely utilized expository text for our DL task. Expository text is distinct from narrative text because it conveys information on subject matter without reliance on narrative structure or characters. Key for this study, it is a genre that is increasingly relied upon during the fourth grade transition from “learning to read” to “reading to learn” and has been shown to have distinct and increased cognitive burden from narrative texts, including increased demand on processes involved in vocabulary, semantic coherence, WM, and other executive functions ( Berman & Nir-sagiv, 2007 ;  Eason, Goldberg, Young, Geist, & Cutting, 2012 ). Additionally, expository comprehension has been found to be more difficult for young readers, due to less global coherence markers and decreased subject background knowledge ( Baretta, Tomitch, MacNair, Lim, & Waldie, 2009 ;  Berman & Nir-sagiv, 2007 ). Because expository texts places increased demand on skill sets that correlate with poor RC ability, and due to its central pragmatic importance, this genre provides an ideal environment in which to examine the neural underpinnings of adolescent RC ability, and how WL and DL processes integrate. Since young readers with RC deficits struggle with overlapping but separable difficulties in both word and passage reading, we were particularly interested in the activity patterns of regions recruited for both of these tasks. 
 Through this paradigmatic approach, we aimed to address the following questions: 1.) What are the neural correlates of expository text comprehension, particularly in relation to WL processing regions in adolescents? and 2.) Are regions that support both word and passage reading differentiated by task-specific network connectivity patterns? For each question, we additionally sought to address how these findings might be modulated with WL and RC ability. From previous literature, we hypothesized that, as examined through GLM mean activation analyses, adolescent word and passage reading would each recruit a shared, left-lateralized processing network, including those that support orthographic (OT area), semantic functions (IFG, MTG, and TP), and potentially WM (left dlPFC). We also expected constrained recruitment of regions within the DMN specifically for DL processing. However, given the evidence that 1.) Multi-functional regions show unique predictions of a myriad of clinical outcomes, 2.) Specific language and WM regions are reported to be multi-functional across different reading demands, and 3.) Struggling readers behaviorally demonstrate multi-tier semantic and WM/executive deficits, we additionally hypothesized that semantic/WM regions activated for both passage- and word-reading were likely to underlay critical network differences (as examined through functional connectivity analyses). Importantly, we further expected that hypothesized mean activation and connectivity findings would be modulated by reading skill thus revealing novel information about reading development. Given the behavioral, theoretical, and neural implications of executive functions in RC ability, we particularly anticipated that dlPFC activation and connectivity to the language network would be associated with RC ability. 
 
 
 Methods 
 Out of an original cohort of 131 subjects who were scanned as part of a larger ongoing project of reading comprehension, we selected individuals for participation in the current study who had greater than 85 standard score IQ, and between 85–115 standard scores on basic reading tests (n = 98; see Behavioral Testing section for rationale and mean values). From these 98 subjects, subjects were excluded based on the following exclusion parameters: motion (n = 29 excluded for average motion outliers > 10%), in-scanner task performance (n = 12 excluded for poor in-scanner task performance, see below), and inadequate head coverage (n = 19). The final analysis included 38 adolescents, aged 9–14 years old (mean age = 12.1 +/− 1.5; 24 female). 
 All participants were native English speakers with normal hearing and vision, and no history of major psychiatric illness or traumatic brain injury/epilepsy. All subjects had no history of a developmental disability or contraindication to MRI. Each participant gave written consent at the beginning of the study, with procedures carried out in accordance with Vanderbilt University’s Institutional Review Board. Participants received $150 for behavioral and neuroimaging testing. 
 
 Behavioral Testing 
 Participants who met pre-screening eligibility requirements completed a comprehensive test battery (measures relevant to the current study reported in  Table 2 ). All participants had typical IQ (standard score > 85 on Full Scale, Performance, and Verbal IQ of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence; mean IQ = 107.6 +/− 8.1;  Wechsler, 2011 ). Additionally, to ensure that participants had at least the entry level word recognition/decoding ability to complete the paradigm, participants had to have a standard score of 85–115 on the basic reading composite score and subtests of the Woodcock Mastery Test-Revised ( Woodcock, 1998 ). Subtests of the basic reading composite score included Letter-Word Identification and Word Attack, which measure word recognition and decoding ability, respectively. As one primary question in this paper is how the full range of RC ability influences neural networks of reading, RC ability, as measured by the Gates  MacGinitie (MacGinitie, 2000 ), was allowed to vary (mean percentile = 61.7 +/− 23.6; see  Table 2  for demographic information). One subject did not complete the Gates MacGinitie, and subject’s score was replaced with the group mean for all related analyses. For the Supplemental Analysis, Sentence Span ( Swanson, Cochran, & Ewers, 1989 ) was used to assess working memory capacity. 
 
 
 fMRI Tasks 
 
 Passages condition (see  Figure 1a ) 
 Eight expository passages were constructed in-lab and equated across measures of word concreteness, syntactic simplicity, referential cohesion, causal cohesion, and narrativity (i.e., the degree to which the text uses everyday oral conversation and tells a story with familiar characters, events, places, and things) using Coh-Metrix 2.0 ( McNamara et al., 2005 ). Passages were additionally matched on descriptive factors, including: number of words, average sentence length, and Flesch-Kincaid grade-level (range from 4.0–4.9), ultimately matching across 23 discourse measures. To ensure equivalence of all measures across passages, measures for each of the 8 passages were individually compared to the mean of the remaining 7 passages. Passages were considered equivalent when measures were within a 90% confidence interval of the mean of the remaining passages. Four of these passages were used for the Passages condition and four were used for the Words condition (see below), which included words from the passages in randomized order. 
 All passages were 150 words in length. Each sentence was no longer than 13 words. The passages were all expository and included the following topics: Hang Gliding, Wrasses, Velvet Worms, and Hydroponics. Each passage consisted of two paragraphs, the first of which served to introduce the topic while the second elaborated on a particular detail of the subject matter. 
 
 
 Words Condition (see  Figure 1b ) 
 The words condition consisted of scrambled words presented in “phrases”, which were exactly matched in length, word type, and presentation time to the phrases in the passages (see  Figure 1b ). 
 
 
 Symbolic Baseline (see  Figure 1c ) 
 The baseline condition included three non-alphanumeric symbols (two symbol types) displayed horizontally on a slide (see  Figure 1c ), and was matched in presentation time to the word and passage phrases. 
 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Single word presentations in sentential context have been reported to create an uncomfortable, artificial reading experience ( Rayner, 1986 ). In the current study, passages were consequently divided into syntactic phrases (verb, noun, and propositional), ranging from 1–6 words in length. Each phrase was presented on a separate trial. We allowed 550 ms for each content word and 275 ms for each function word. For timing purposes, we presented no more than three content words per slide. The interval between phrase stimuli was randomized to allow for event-related analyses (not included in this study; jitter ranging from 550 ms-4000 ms). The baseline condition was presented between paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 of both the Passages and Words conditions. The purpose of this design was to allow participants’ activation to return to baseline after reading each block (paragraph). A typical presentation sequence was: 1) Passage condition, Paragraph 1; 2) Baseline condition; 3) Passage condition, Paragraph 2; 4) Baseline condition; 5) Words condition; 6) Baseline condition. In half of the runs per subject, the Words condition was presented first. Two lists were used, which randomly alternated whether the first run of the scanning session was Words or Passages. The mean time for the Passages block was 78.54 s (SD = 22.94); Words mean = 82.45 s (SD = 3.29); and Baseline mean = 47.69 s (SD = 1.48). 
 To monitor whether participants attended to all stimuli, 8% of the stimuli within each task block were randomly repeated on two consecutive screens. Participants pressed a button with their right thumb when they detected a phrase repetition or a symbol configuration repetition. Only subjects who responded to greater than 75% repetitions correctly per block and had less than 95% sporadic buttons pushes (button pushes during non-repeated stimuli), were included in the analysis. 
 
 
 fMRI Data Acquisition, Preprocessing and First-Level Analyses 
 Imaging was performed on a Philips Achieva 3T MR scanner with an 8-channel head coil. Functional images were acquired using a gradient echo planar imaging sequence with 40 (3mm thick) slices with no gap and consisted of 4 runs, each 7 minutes (190 dynamics per run). Additional imaging parameters for functional images included TE=30 msec (for optimal BOLD contrast at 3T), FOV 240 × 240 × 120 mm, slice thickness=3 mm with 0 mm gaps, 75 degree flip angle, TR=2200 msec, and a matrix size 80×80 (interpolated), yielding 3mm 3  isotropic voxels. 
 All functional data were analyzed using MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick MA) and SPM8 ( Frackowiak, Friston, Frith, Dolan, & Mazziotta, 1997 ). The functional data for each participant were slice-timing corrected, aligned to the mean functional image, normalized to MNI space and spatially smoothed with an 8 mm FWHM Gaussian filter. All subject masks underwent dual-rater quality assessment checks. Due to differences in subject masks, the cerebellum was not included in our analysis. In our first-level analysis, standard regression models were created using an estimated HRF for each condition; the size motion parameters (x, y, z translational; x, y, z rotational) and outlying volumes as determined by ART (Whitfield-Gabrieli;  http://www.nitrc.org/projects/artifact_detect/ ) were included in the design matrix as regressors of no interest. Subjects with greater than 10% average motion outliers and greater than 20% motion outliers in any individual run were not included in the final analysis. For the standard GLM analyses three sets of contrasts for each participant were created: Words vs. Symbols, Passages vs. Symbols, and Passages vs. Words. 
 
 
 Group-Level Imaging Analysis 
 SPM8 and MATLAB (Mathworks, Nattick MA) were used to create whole brain activation maps. Individual contrast maps were brought up to a group level, one-sample t-test to analyze Passages and Words. The conjunction of  Passages > Symbols  and  Words > Symbols  was performed using SPM’s minimum t-value conjunction algorithm. AFNI’s 3dClustSim algorithm was used to determine the probability of false positive clusters (and appropriate correction for multiple comparisons) through iterative Monte Carlo simulations (n = 10,000). All group-level analyses were subjected to an uncorrected statistical threshold of p < 0.005 and a cluster size of 118 voxels, which was determined by 3dClustSim to be equivalent to p-corrected < .05 (2-sided). 
 
 
 Connectivity Analysis 
 Connectivity analysis was performed using the CONN toolbox ( Whitfield-Gabrieli & Nieto-Castanon, 2012 ). The toolbox uses the CompCor method ( Behzadi, Restom, Liau, & Liu, 2007 ) to estimate confounding signals. White matter and CSF signal (derived from T1 images; characterized by 5 dimensions), movement artifacts, six movement parameters (as determined by ART), and the first temporal derivative of the movement parameters were regressed out of the signal. To remove correlations driven by general, task-related co-activations, task effects and their first temporal derivative were also removed from the signal ( Whitfield-Gabrieli & Nieto-Castanon, 2012 ). Analysis was run across the whole duration of the concatenated blocks per task. High-pass filtration with a cut-off value of .008 Hz was applied to remove slow oscillations driven by physiological noise. One subject was excluded from connectivity analysis due to excessive motion specifically during the T1 scan. 
 For subject-level analysis, the corrected voxel time-series was extracted for each pre-defined ROI (defined below), then averaged to produce one time series per ROI. Whole-brain bivariate correlation maps were then generated for each ROI and converted to Fischer’s z scores. For group-level analyses, ANCOVA models were run to identify whole-brain task-related difference with and without additional covariates of interest. For all connectivity results, only positive correlations were investigated. 
 
 
 Seed regions 
 For the connectivity analyses, we were specifically interested in isolating semantic, orthographic, and executive function regions that were active in both  Words > Symbols  and  Passages > Symbols  ( Table 5 ). Specifically, we were interested in overlap nodes previously identified as part of the primary frontal-temporal semantic network, namely the left IFG (BA 44, 45, and 47), left MTG (BA 21), and left TP (BA 38), which have been found to support word and text-level semantic processes ( Friederici, 2011 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Jefferies, 2013 ;  Price, 2012 ;  Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009 ). Additionally, we examined the pVWFA and dlPFC overlap areas, since their associated functions of orthographic-semantic and WM processes, respectively, have been implicated in unique word and text-level functions ( Christopher et al., 2012 ;  Rimrodt et al., 2009 ). To isolate these specific overlap regions, the Words > Symbols and Passages > Symbols conjunction (described above) was masked by Brodmann Area (BA) using the WFU PickAtlas Talairach Daemon atlas regions (WFU Pickatlas, version 2.5.2;  Maldjian et al., 2003 ,  Lancaster et al., 2000 ;  Lancaster et al., 1997 ), with dilation = 3. Seeds were closely evaluated to ensure there were no overlapping voxels. As the pVWFA does not have an associated BA, the Passage and Word conjunction map was masked with a spherical ROI (radius = 10) centered at [-43, −55, −17], which was implicated as the central pVWFA point in a meta-analysis (converted to MNI;  Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2009 ). Consequently, the following seeds from the Passage/Word conjunction map were run in a whole-brain connectivity analysis: IFG (comprised of BA 44, 45, and 47), MTG (BA 21), TP (BA 38), dlPFC (BA 46 and 9), and pVWFA (ROI centered at −43, −55, −17 with a radius of 10). With BA masking, the resulting dlPFC seed localized to the frontal border of BA 46/9 at the inferior frontal sulcus. In order to examine a more constrained, centralized dlPFC seed, we masked the Passage/Word conjunction map with a dlPFC map defined in the Neurosynth cortical dlPFC meta-analysis ( Yarkoni et al., 2011 ). This seed overlapped with our original BA 46/9 seed. For all subsequent analyses of the BA 46/9 seed, we performed supplemental analysis on this secondary seed to examine the regional specificity of results. 
 For each seed, hierarchical contrasts were run for  Words > Symbols  and  Passages > Words . For comparison purposes,  Passages > Symbols ,  Passages alone  (without baseline), and  Words alone  were additionally run to assess whether patterns were only due to relative differences to the baseline tasks. 
 
 
 
 GLM Results 
 
 Words > Symbols ( Table 3 ;  Figure 2 ) 
 Compared to Symbols, Word reading elicited greater activation in language areas and language homologues including left fusiform gyrus (including pVWFA), bilateral/left dominant IFG (BA 47, 44, 45) extending bilaterally into dlPFC (BA 46/9), bilateral MTG, left STG extending to left ventral SMG, and bilateral temporal poles. Additional activations included motor regions (SMA and left precentral), bilateral hippocampus, left putamen, bilateral anterior insula, and bilateral occipital regions extending into ITG and MTG. 
 
 
 Passages > Symbols ( Table 3 ;  Figure 2 ) 
 Compared to Symbols, Passage reading exhibited greater activation in traditional perisylvian language areas and their right hemisphere homologues. These included pVWFA, bilateral/left dominant IFG (BA 47, 44, 45), bilateral MTG, and bilateral TP. Left and right IFG additionally extended upwards into the dlPFC (BA 46/9). Regions associated with the DMN were also seen, including bilateral/left dmPFC/SFG extending to SMA, bilateral AG, PCU, bilateral STS, and bilateral hippocampus. Additional activations were seen in left putamen, bilateral dorsal insula/rolandic operculum, bilateral occipital regions extending into ITG and MTG, and bilateral precentral gyrus. 
 
 
 Passages > Word Reading ( Table 3 ;  Figure 3 ) 
 In a direct contrast of Passages vs. Words, Passages showed greater activation in heteromodal regions, including bilateral/left dominant TP extending to left MTG, bilateral anterior superior temporal sulcus (STS), bilateral AG, and dorsal PCU. Except for dorsal PCU, all of these activations were also greater in Passage-Baseline. 
 
 
 Word > Symbols Modulated by Word Reading Ability ( Table 4 ;  Figure 4 ) 
 In Word reading greater than Symbols, both Word Attack (WA) and Letter Word ID (LWID) show positive correlation with activation of the left MTG. Each measurement also predicted activation in unique regions:
 Word > Symbols Modulated by Word Attack (WA)  ( Table 4 ;  Figure 4a ) : WA percentile showed unique positive correlations with activation in the left anterior STS, extending into left TP. Word > Symbols Modulated by Letter Word Identification (LWID)  ( Table 4 ;  Figure 4a ) : LWID percentile showed unique positive correlations with activation in the left OT area (including pVWFA), left IFG, and left superior parietal lobule. 
 
 
 Passages > Symbols Modulated by Gates Percentile ( Table 4 ;  Figure 5 ) 
 In Passages greater than Symbols, Gates percentile was positively correlated with activation in left IFG (BA 47, 45, and 44) extending into left insula, left dlPFC (BA 46 and BA 9), bilateral TP extending into right ventral IFG and ventral insula, and pVWFA. Additional results included positive correlation between Gates and activation in regions associated with the DMN, including dmPFC, bilateral AG, dorsal PCU, PCC, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), left hippocampus extending to the amygdala, and bilateral anterior STS. Additional correlations were seen in bilateral postcentral, right caudate, left thalamus, right SPL, and bilateral lingual gyrus. 
 
 
 
 Connectivity Results 
 
 Seed-to-Whole-Brain Connectivity of Overlap Regions (positive correlations only) 
 We ran whole-brain analysis on the 3 language seeds (L IFG, L MTG, and L TP), pVWFA, and dlPFC GLM conjunction areas (activations seen in both Passages > Symbols and Words > Symbols). All results are reported at  p  < .05 as determined by 3dClustSim (p-uncorr < .005, k = 118). To identify shared correlations across seeds, seed-to-whole-brain analyses were run separately for each seed region, and additional Boolean overlap maps were generated across seed correlation maps to identify areas of convergent correlations. Results that fall within the language and WM network are in bold. Seed region characteristics are reported in  Table 5 . 
 
 Words > Symbols ( Table 6 ) 
 3 Language Seeds (L IFG, L MTG, L TP ;  Figure 6 ):  In Words compared to Symbols, all language seeds correlated with left OT area extending into pVWFA . Regions also correlated with bilateral middle occipital areas (IFG and MTG), right IFG (IFG and TP), left frontal operculum/RO (IFG and TP), primary motor and somatosensory cortices (IFG, TP, and MTG), and right ITG (TP). Supplemental analysis indicated that IFG correlations with the left pVWFA were driven by BA 44 and BA 47 ( Supplemental Table 1 ;  Supplemental Figure 1 ). 
 pVWFA  ( Figure 7 ):  The pVWFA was more strongly correlated with left MTG in Words than Symbols , as well as with bilateral occipital regions, left insula, bilateral precentral gyrus, right postcentral, and right middle frontal gyri. 
 dlPFC  ( Figure 8 ):  In Words compared to Symbols, dlPFC correlated with left MTG , along with right dlPFC (BA 9/46), left MFG (BA 9, 6), bilateral middle occipital regions, and left RO in Words compared to Symbols. The more constrained dlPFC seed did not replicate BA 46/9 word-level findings, instead showing connectivity to bilateral precentral, bilateral RO, right orbitofrontal, and right dlPFC. 
 
 
 Passages > Words ( Table 7 ) 
 3 Language Seeds (L IFG, L MTG, L TP; 
 Figure 6 ):  All language seeds correlated with left AG more strongly in Passages compared to Words. Additionally, during Passages, language seeds showed correlation with other language areas including left ventral MTG (MTG and TP) and left TP/anterior MTG (IFG) , along with bilateral caudate (IFG and TP), SFG (IFG, TP, MTG; different subdivisions), occipital regions (IFG, TP, and MTG), bilateral thalamus (IFG), PCC/PCU (IFG and TP), and ACC (TP). Supplemental analysis indicated that IFG correlations with the left AG were driven by BA 45 and BA 47 ( Supplemental Table 1 ;  Supplemental Figure 1 ). 
 pVWFA  ( Figure 7 ):  In Passages greater than Words, the pVWFA correlated with left AG, bilateral TP, left SMG , left thalamus, left middle cingulate, right MTG, left/bilateral fusiform, and left dlPFC/MFG. 
 dlPFC  ( Figure 8 ):  In Passages greater than Words, the left dlPFC correlated more strongly with left AG (which overlapped with the AG seen in the 3 language seeds and pVWFA connectivity results), extending into more dorsal AG  and regions of the left lateralized DMN, specifically showing greater connectivity to left-lateralized PCC, SFG, and temporal pole. Additionally, dlPFC correlated with right ventral fusiform/parahippocampal regions. With the exception of left PCC, findings were replicated with the constrained dlPFC seed, which additionally showed connectivity to dorsal PCU. 
 Of note,  the 3 language seeds, pVWFA, and left dlPFC all showed convergent correlation with the left AG in Passages compared to Words . 
 
 
 
 Seed-to-Whole-Brain Connectivity Analysis of Overlap Regions with Reading Metrics 
 To assess how out-of-scanner behavioral reading measures (WA, LWID, and RC) predicted correlations among the regions of interest, we ran whole-brain connectivity from each the original seeds (3 language seeds, VWFA, and left dlPFC). 
 Our whole-brain connectivity results were masked by the five original seeds, as well as the seed extracted from the whole-brain connectivity analysis (L AG). This approach allowed us to constrain our findings to specific areas of interest, without excluding any potential diverse correlations with functional subregions in our areas of interest. 
 
 Words > Symbols ( Table 8 ;  Figure 9 ) 
 WA: 
 In Words compared to Symbols, phonological decoding was positively correlated with increased connectivity between the left VWFA seed and left MTG . No other seed regions showed significant correlations predicted by WA percentile within the defined mask. 
 LWID:  Word recognition did not predict correlations from any of the seed regions. 
 
 
 Passages > Words ( Table 8 ;  Figure 10 ) 
 Gates: 
 In Passages compared to Words, reading comprehension ability was positively correlated with connectivity between the left dlPFC and left ventral AG . No other seed regions showed significant correlations predicted by Gates percentile within the defined mask, including the more constrained, supplemental dlPFC seed. 
 
 
 
 Supplemental Physio-physiological Results 
 To assess how increased activation in dlPFC predicted whole-brain left AG results during Passage reading, the time series for the convergent left AG (from all 5 seeds) was extracted and entered into a first-level, whole-brain connectivity analysis in which each voxel-level time series was predicted by the interaction of the left AG and left dlPFC time series. Second-level t-test was run to compare the interaction term for Passages versus Symbols. 
 
 Passages > Symbols, dlPFC activation x left AG whole-brain connectivity 
 One unit increase in dlPFC activation predicted increased correlation between the left AG and the left VWFA , as well as the left parahippocampal gyrus. Findings were replicated in Passages alone. Preliminary analysis indicates that dlPFC prediction of left AG to the left OT area is positively correlated with WM span (see  Supplemental Table 2  and  Supplemental Figure 2 ). Findings were replicated for the constrained dlPFC seed. 
 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The goal of this study was to identify the neural networks that support adolescent discourse processing, and how these networks may be modulated by level of reading skill. We had two main questions: 1.) What are the neural correlates of expository passage reading, and, more centrally, how are these networks related to WL processing in adolescents? 2.) Do brain areas that are active for both word and passage reading, particularly language and WM processing regions, show separable, task-specific connectivity patterns? With each question, we also sought to understand how behavioral indices of WL reading and RC ability modulated findings. 
 
 Question 1: Neural correlates of expository text comprehension in adolescent readers 
 Consistent with previous work, our GLM results showed that during both word and passage reading adolescents recruited left-lateralized language areas traditionally associated with reading (see  Figure 2 ). These include regions thought to support rapid visual word recognition (left OT areas and pVWFA) and areas associated with semantic processing (left IFG, MTG, and TP). This overlap network also included the dlPFC, a critical region in WM processes for both WL and DL processes. Additionally, there were areas uniquely associated with DL processing. As compared to WL processing, adolescent readers activated portions of the DMN, which has previously been seen in other DL analyses and is thought to support integration of world knowledge (see  Figure 3 ;  Ferstl et al., 2008 ;  Mar, 2011 ). 
 One plausible hypothesis for the function of overlap regions between word and passage reading could be that they perform common functions (e.g., primarily underpin processes important for WL reading, since passage reading includes word processing). However, the overlapping activations across both tasks could obscure complex, task-specific processes. Previous fMRI studies suggest that these regions seen in both word and passage reading are “multi-functional” within and outside of the language domain, either through as-of-yet undefined functional subdivisions ( Friederici, 2011 ) or functionally flexible neuronal populations ( Hagoort, 2005 ). For instance, areas in left IFG have been found to support multiple cognitive processes: BA 45 is associated with both semantic and syntactic unification ( Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ;  Hagoort, 2005 ;  Price, 2012 ), and BA 44 has been found to support phonological, syntactic, and speech-motor mapping functions ( Fadiga et al., 2006 ;  Friederici, 2011 ;  Amunts, 2012 ). TP is implicated in semantic memory and domain-general meaning associations across stimulus modalities ( Tsapkini et al., 2011 ), and the pVWFA has been proposed to be involved in general visual processes which include but are not limited to a role in word identification ( Vogel, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2014 ). While MTG is primarily studied in the context of language, within this domain it is associated with word and text-level processes, including syntax ( Hagoort, 2014 ), semantic storage ( Price, 2012 ), and semantic control ( Jefferies, 2013 ;  Whitney, Kirk, O’Sullivan, Lambon Ralph, & Jefferies, 2011 ). In this context, the literature therefore encourages an exploration of these regions in the context of their flexible “information processing characteristics” ( Vogel et al., 2014 ) rather than restrictive cognitive properties. 
 This movement towards identifying regions based on information processing characteristics has been more successfully accomplished in domain-general areas, such as our final overlap region of interest, the left dlPFC. The dlPFC has been found to support a range of higher-level functions, including working memory (WM) and top-down executive control ( Ptak, 2012 ), which is necessarily adaptive to support changing external goals ( Smallwood, Brown, Baird, & Schooler, 2012 ). While the specific role of the dlPFC in RC is unclear, neuroimaging work and behavioral studies on WM suggest that the dlPFC may play a role in both WL and DL reading processes, including support of word-to-text integration ( Petten, Weckerly, Mclsaac, & Kutas, 1997 ;  Stafura & Perfetti, 2014 ) and discourse construction/coherence ( Coelho et al., 2012 ). 
 Interestingly, our covariate findings support the hypothesis that passage and word overlap regions have divergent, task-specific activation patterns (see  Figures 4  and  5 ). RC ability  only  correlated with increased activation in critical areas during passage reading (not WL reading), and language/WM regions predicted by RC ability all fell within the passage and word overlap regions (see  Figure 4 ). Consequently, stronger readers appear to elicit greater activation in language and executive overlap regions only during passage reading, despite the necessity of these regions in both word and passage reading. Conversely, word recognition ability correlated with WL phonological and semantic processing regions, including the left OT area, left MTG, and left IFG (see  Figure 5 ). Interestingly, the left OT area and left MTG regions were also implicated in word reading ability in our connectivity findings (see Q2). These findings parallel behavioral studies on reading, which have found that RC ability correlates with a wider number of cognitive tasks than basic reading tasks do, including WM, inference, vocabulary, and sentence-level semantic processes ( Oakhill et al., 2003 ;  Sesma et al., 2009 ). Greater activation of portions of the DMN parallels behavioral findings that stronger readers have greater inferential processing ability ( Ferstl et al., 2008 ;  Locascio et al., 2010 ;  Sesma et al., 2009 ). 
 The differential activation of these regions provide preliminary support of complex, task-specific activation patterns within overlap areas. In our next analyses, we sought to describe  how  these regions flexibly perform diverse functions within different levels of reading through connectivity analyses. 
 
 
 Question 2: Differential functional connectivity networks during word- and discourse processing 
 To examine networks that might underlie multi-tier RC deficits, we isolated regions whose mean activation overlapped during word and passage reading, and which have been implicated in WL and DL reading processes: (a) the pVWFA, a region previously found to critically contribute to reading through support of both orthographic and orthographic-semantic linking (b) IFG, MTG, and TP, all implicated in the frontal-temporal semantic network (henceforth referred to as  language overlap regions ; ( Binder et al., 2009 ), and (c) the dlPFC, as prior studies suggest that WM, which is supported by the dlPFC, may play a role in both WL and DL functions. Our findings indicate that key language and WM regions that show shared activation in word and passage reading have different network correlations for these respective tasks. Importantly, this differentiation was predicted by reading ability. 
 
 Word Reading 
 
 WL correlations with language overlap regions and pVWFA 
 WL connectivity was characterized by coordination between semantic and orthographic processing regions. All three language overlap regions showed convergent correlations with a key region in visual word recognition, the left occipitotemporal area (extending to the pVWFA; see  Figure 6 ). Similarly, the pVWFA seed showed coordination with the left MTG (overlapping with the left MTG seed), a region consistently implicated in word-level semantic storage and vocabulary processes (see  Figure 7 ). Importantly, this pVWFA-to-MTG coupling was associated with WL reading ability (see  Figure 10 ). This is consistent with previous studies which show that reading ability is positively associated with connectivity between pVWFA and regions in the language network during resting state ( Koyama et al., 2011 ), and that typically developed readers show greater bottom-up communication from the fusiform gyrus to left MTG as compared to children with reading deficits during single word reading ( Liu et al., 2010 ). Our findings suggest that WL processing and WL reading ability are characterized both by activation of semantic and orthographic regions, as well as greater coupling between semantic and orthographic processing networks. These findings are consistent with behavioral models of reading. According to the Lexical Quality Hypothesis, adequate word recognition requires building appropriate semantic, orthographic, and phonological representations of the words, and for these representations to appropriately converge into a unified understanding of the word ( Perfetti, 2007 ). This convergence of semantic and orthographic processing streams is additionally supported by previous structural findings. Both the pVWFA seed and the pVWFA result region (from the language overlap results) map onto structural connectivity subdivisions of this region that have previously been suggested to support orthographic-semantic linking ( Fan, Anderson, Davis, & Cutting, 2014 ). Specifically,  Fan et al. (2014)  found that anterior portions of the OT area are more structurally connected to semantic processing regions than posterior portions. Thus, neural correlates of word reading ability appear to map on to behavioral specifications of strong WL processing. 
 We were additionally interested in performing preliminary analysis to examine whether these results might be driven by functionally distinct subdivisions. The left IFG has historically been examined in the context of multifunctionality ( Hagoort, 2005 ) versus subdivisions ( Friederici, 2011 ). Interestingly, functional connectivity results from structural divisions of the IFG seed (left BA 44, 45, and 47) showed that both BA 44 and BA 47 correlated with distinct portions of the left pVWFA and general OT areas (see  Supplemental Figure 1 ). In word reading, BA 44 is traditionally associated with phonological processing pathways, while BA 47 has greater associations with semantic pathways ( Price, 2012 ;  Friederici, 2011 ). BA 45 did not correlate with the left OT, but did show distinct correlations with primary sensory regions. While this analysis is still limited to large areas of tissue that are known to contain additional functional subdivisions ( Amunts & Zilles, 2012 ), these findings demonstrate that WL connectivity findings from the L IFG seed are driven by distributed IFG subregions. Future analysis should examine the specific network properties of these subdivisions in the context of Passage and Word reading. 
 
 
 WL correlations with dlPFC 
 The dlPFC seed also showed correlations with an extended network that largely overlapped with the pVWFA network findings. These included correlations with primary sensorimotor regions, frontal regions (bilateral IFG/dlPFC), and the left MTG during WL processing (see  Figure 9 ). Interestingly, the shared left MTG correlation from dlPFC and pVWFA networks also overlapped with our left MTG seed regions. Though the dlPFC correlation network was not predicted by WL reading ability, these coupled networks support previous assertions that the dLPFC and WM functions in general may play an important “top down” role in the maintenance of lexical information ( Christopher et al., 2012 ). This includes the coordination of visual, orthographic, semantic and potential semantic embodiment information ( Pulvermüller, 2013 ), though further study is needed to ascertain the specific directional relationships between these networks. 
 
 
 Word processing summary 
 Overall, connectivity findings for WL processing were highly consistent with the central role of the pVWFA in word recognition, and suggest that stronger basic readers not only have greater activation of word recognition areas (as found in our GLM results), but also have greater communication between these areas and other semantic and orthographic processing regions. Additionally, this semantic-orthographic pipeline appears to interact closely with the dlPFC. 
 
 
 Discourse Processing Networks 
 In contrast to the WL findings, we found that DL processing showed a strikingly different pattern of connectivity results for the language overlap regions, pVWFA, and most particularly the dlPFC. Notably, DL processing was characterized by independent, convergent positive correlations between all seed regions and the left AG (see  Figures 6 – 8 ). The left AG is a heteromodal region that is implicated in a wide range of cognitive functions, including spatial cognition, the DMN, math processing, and semantics ( Seghier, 2013 ). Within the context of language, the left AG has been extensively studied and consistently found to support global semantic/conceptual integration processes, including the integration of local semantic information into larger meaningful textual representations ( Price, Bonner, Peelle, & Grossman, 2015 ;  Seghier, 2013 ). Furthermore, a study by  Hampson et al. (2006)  found that correlations between Broca’s area and the left AG was predicted by reading ability in adults reading single sentences. As DL processing requires the coordinated effort to combinatorically integrate word-pair-, sentence-, and discourse-level units of meaning, in addition to maintaining previous units of information in WM, it is theoretically consistent that DL processing involves tighter coupling between the whole overlap network and the left AG. 
 
 
 DL correlations of language overlap regions and pVWFA 
 In addition to coupling with the left AG, DL processing was marked by greater coupling within the traditional left-hemisphere language network, including the language overlap regions and the pVWFA. Specifically, the left IFG, TP, and posterior MTG were correlated with each other in DL processing (see  Table 7 ). These three regions are thought to form an executive semantic control network ( Whitney et al., 2011 ), which processes local combinatorial semantic information and semantic inferences, as opposed to the more global processes of the left AG. Consequently, compared to the orthographic-semantic network found in WL processing, our results characterize DL processing with local-global semantic network interactions. This is consistent with neural models of language processing ( Friederici, 2011 ), in which sub-sentence information is necessarily passed to (and informed by;  Stafura & Perfetti, 2014 ) higher-level processing centers (left AG) in order to be integrated into a cohesive internal model ( Whitney et al., 2009 ). 
 Supplemental examination of IFG subdivisions in DL processing showed that both BA 45 and BA 47 correlated with left AG in Passages compared to Words (see  Supplemental Figure 1 ). BA 45 and 47 are part of the heteromodal granular layers of the frontal cortex ( Hagoort, 2005 ), and are identified as part of semantic processing structural and functional pathways ( Friederici, 2011 ). Interestingly, in conjunction with the WL analysis, these findings suggest that BA 47 alone exhibits flexible correlation patterns specifically with WL and DL “hub” regions, potentially reflecting its heterogeneous role in semantics (word- and discourse-level) and syntax ( Price, 2012 ). This BA 47-specific connectivity pattern is also consistent with a study by  Xiang et al. (2010)  which showed that during resting state, ventral IFG (pars orbitalis) uniquely correlated with left AG and left OT areas compared to the rest of the IFG. These findings again demonstrate that DL results are driven by distributed, rather than focal, subdivisions within the left IFG. 
 Interestingly, compared to WL reading, the pVWFA was also found to be tightly coupled with both local (left TP and left MTG) and global (left AG) semantic processing nodes, as well as with the left SMG, a region associated with phonological processing ( Price, 2012 ; see  Figure 7 ). In the context of the Lexical Quality Hypothesis, this could suggest that DL processing requires more rigorous coordination between the phonological-orthographic-semantic nodes, as represented by pVWFA, left SMG, and local/global semantic regions (left MTG, left TP, left AG), respectively. However, these network connections were not found to be mediated by basic reading ability or RC ability, and further study is needed to tease apart the specific functional roles of this network. 
 
 
 DL correlations of dlPFC 
 Our results show that the dlPFC seed was not only correlated with the left AG in DL comprehension, but also that this correlation was positively associated with RC ability (see  Figures 8  and  10 ). These findings therefore suggest that adolescent RC ability is marked by greater activation of and coordination between higher-order regions responsible for conceptual coherence functions (left AG; A. R.  Price, Bonner, Peelle, & Grossman, 2015 ;  Seghier, 2013 ) and top-down information maintenance/organization functions (left dlPFC;  Ptak, 2012 ). 
 The dlPFC and its associated cognitive functions are hypothesized to support the integration, prediction, and organization of different types of incoming text information ( Christopher et al., 2012 ;  Fedorenko, 2014 ). Consequently, the WM and executive control behaviors associated with the dlPFC are of particular interest in the context of RC deficits. Executive functions related to dlPFC are independently associated with success in word reading and RC ( Cain & Oakhill, 2006 ;  Locascio et al., 2010 ;  Oakhill & Cain, 2012 ). Additionally, readers with lower WM ability have shown decreased efficiency in local-global contextual dependence ( Petten et al., 1997 ). 
 These findings have led to behavioral models of reading in which executive functions not only independently supports fluency and maintenance of conceptual information for WL and DL processing, respectively, but also supports the appropriate integration of WL and DL information ( Cutting et. al, 2015 ). Within this framework, we would expect the dlPFC to mediate the relationship between WL and DL networks, and thus facilitate phonological, semantic, combinatorial semantic, and conceptual integration. While the methods used in this paper do not allow for causal interpretations, our supplemental analysis does suggest a role of the dlPFC in WL and DL integration (see  Supplemental Figure 2 ). Specifically, examination of the interaction of dlPFC activation and left AG whole-brain connectivity (in Passage vs. Baseline) showed that one unit increase of dlPFC activation positively predicted coupling between the left AG and the left pVWFA—the two primary convergent nodes for DL and WL processing, respectively. Further, the relationship between left AG and OT areas is positively predicted by WM capacity. This suggests that the WM capabilities of dlPFC potentially facilitate greater communication between WL and DL networks. Future studies should explicitly examine WM and other executive function measurements and their predictions of network interactions, as well as apply causal modelling to examine directional relationships between the dlPFC, AG, and the language network. 
 In addition to the left AG, the left dlPFC was also found to coordinate with the left-lateralized DMN. These DMN nodes overlapped with our findings from the regions whose activation was predicted by RC ability. Previous studies have suggested that the dlPFC acts to guide DMN-related internal thought processes ( Smallwood et al., 2012 ), and interruption of dlPFC through transcranial direct current stimulation has been found to disrupt the unification of DMN connectivity in resting state ( Keeser et al., 2011 ;  Peña-Gómez et al., 2012 ). In the context of expository text comprehension, the executive control capacity of the dlPFC may support the inferential processes of the DMN ( Singer, 1997 ). 
 
 
 Discourse Processing Connectivity: Summary 
 Overall, our findings indicate that the language and WM overlap regions take on additional roles in the context of higher-level comprehension demands which support the integration of information into a cohesive, internal model. Such findings are consistent with what is known about distinctions between WL and DL processing: beyond WL processing, RC requires combinatorial semantic and syntactic processes that allow for phrase-level meaning construction ( Friederici, 2011 ;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ). These units then must be integrated into a cohesive global understanding of the text ( Kendeou et al., 2014 ). In this vein, the left IFG, MTG, and in some cases the left TP, have each been shown to be involved in both semantic and syntactic unification processes. These processes include both prediction of upcoming information (forward processing), and integration of previous information (backward processing;  Hagoort & Indefrey, 2014 ). Given the previous associations of the dlPFC in information maintenance and coherence, and the present findings that the dlPFC correlation with left AG is associated with RC ability, it is possible that the dlPFC plays an important role in these integrative processes. However, additional analysis is needed in order to make assertions of causal roles within these networks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 Our findings indicate that word and passage reading recruit activation in overlapping regions, but these areas form task-specific networks within and beyond the language network. Specifically, our functional connectivity analyses indicate that overlap areas in the language network exhibit multi-functional, task-specific correlations, and that these correlations are predicted by WL reading and RC ability. Word reading is characterized by connections between lexico-semantic regions and orthographic processing regions, and these orthographic-semantic connections are predicted by word decoding ability. Passage reading not only involves these WL processing networks, but additional communication between the same overlap areas and the global integration processes in the left AG to support DL processes. RC ability is predictive of coupling between higher-order information maintenance and meaning coherence regions. Consequently, stronger comprehenders appear to not only have greater activation of language/WM overlap regions and broader executive regions, but to also have greater communication between regions associate with executive functions. 
 These findings point to flexible network processes within reading “hub” regions. The interaction between these networks and RC ability encourage additional exploration of overlap regions in naturalistic reading environments. More generally, our findings highlight the fact that shared regional activity is not necessarily indicative of shared functions, even within the same cognitive domain. While it has long been known that brain regions perform multiple cognitive functions, our results suggest that connectivity may be critical for truly dissecting differences, even within similar tasks where one is presumed to be controlling for some aspect of the other. 
 The current study has a few limitations as well as areas that should be more extensively examined in future studies. First, as there is some evidence that OT regions respond to visual properties, it is possible that Words vs. Symbols pVWFA connectivity results were confounded by lower-level visual processes driven by visual discrepancies between the two stimuli types. However, the fact that all reported WL connectivity findings are replicated in Words alone, and are also consistent with functional and structural associations from other literature, suggests that the effect of visual characteristic differences on the current results is likely minimal. Secondly, regions of interest in the current study were limited to large brain areas; to further the current exploration of multifunctionality in reading, future studies should examine network patterns from smaller subdivisions of overlap regions. The current study also encourages further investigation of network properties in young readers, including the use of interventional paradigms to examine how RC interventions mediate connectivity patterns in struggling reader populations. The directional roles of these nodes can also be explored with causal modeling of connectivity data. Additional work should examine how these network connections are influenced by text genre, as expository text specifically places increased demand on WM capacity and semantic processing, and decreased demand on social cognition. Through these examinations, neuroimaging techniques can be used to set the groundwork for neurobiologically-informed RC interventions. Such knowledge not only has the potential to improve clinical and educational approaches to developmental reading processes, but also to contribute to our general understanding of basic language processes. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supplemental Figure 1 
 
 
 
 Supplemental Figure 2 
 
 
 
 Supplemental Table 1 
 
 
 
 Supplemental Table 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by the following funding sources: RO1 HD044073, P30 HD015052, 5RO1 HD067254, U54 HD083211, R24 HD075460, and CTSA RR024975 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Architecture and organizational principles of Broca’s region 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2012 
 16 
 8 
 418 
 426 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.06.005 
 
 22763211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baretta 
 L 
 
 
 Tomitch 
 LMB 
 
 
 MacNair 
 N 
 
 
 Lim 
 VK 
 
 
 Waldie 
 KE 
 
 
 Inference making while reading narrative and expository texts: An ERP study 
 Psychology & Neuroscience 
 2009 
 2 
 2 
 137 
 145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behzadi 
 Y 
 
 
 Restom 
 K 
 
 
 Liau 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 A component based noise correction method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 37 
 1 
 90 
 101 
 17560126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berman 
 RA 
 
 
 Nir-sagiv 
 B 
 
 
 Comparing Narrative and Expository Text Construction Across Adolescence: A Developmental Paradox 
 2007 
 Retrieved from  http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01638530709336894#tabModule 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.?: 1991) 
 2009 
 19 
 12 
 2767 
 2796 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bitan 
 T 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Choy 
 J 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Gitelman 
 DR 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 M-M 
 
 
 Shifts of effective connectivity within a language network during rhyming and spelling 
 The Journal of Neuroscience?: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 2005 
 25 
 22 
 5397 
 5403 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0864-05.2005 
 
 15930389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2008 
 1124 
 1 
 38 
 18400922 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cain 
 K 
 
 
 Oakhill 
 J 
 
 
 Profiles of children with specific reading comprehension difficulties 
 The British Journal of Educational Psychology 
 2006 
 76 
 Pt 4 
 683 
 696 
 17094880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cappa 
 SF 
 
 
 Imaging semantics and syntax 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 61 
 2 
 427 
 431 
 22019859 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christopher 
 ME 
 
 
 Miyake 
 A 
 
 
 Keenan 
 JM 
 
 
 Pennington 
 B 
 
 
 DeFries 
 JC 
 
 
 Wadsworth 
 SJ 
 
 
 Olson 
 RK 
 
 
 Predicting word reading and comprehension with executive function and speed measures across development: a latent variable analysis 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 
 2012 
 141 
 3 
 470 
 488 
 22352396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coelho 
 C 
 
 
 Lê 
 K 
 
 
 Mozeiko 
 J 
 
 
 Krueger 
 F 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Discourse production following injury to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 14 
 3564 
 3572 
 22982512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Multi-task connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive task control 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2013 
 16 
 9 
 1348 
 1355 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3470 
 
 23892552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Bailey 
 SK 
 
 
 Barquero 
 LA 
 
 
 Aboud 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 Connor 
 CM 
 
 
 McCardle 
 P 
 
 
 Neurobiological bases of word recognition and reading comprehension 
 Advances in Reading Intervention: Research to Practice to Research 
 2015 
 Brookes Publishing Co 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Materek 
 A 
 
 
 Cole 
 CAS 
 
 
 Levine 
 TM 
 
 
 Mahone 
 EM 
 
 
 Effects of fluency, oral language, and executive function on reading comprehension performance 
 Annals of Dyslexia 
 2009 
 59 
 1 
 34 
 54 
 19396550 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dijk 
 TA 
 
 
 Van 
 
 
 Kintsch 
 W 
 
 
 Strategies of Discourse Comprehension 
 1983 
 New York 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eason 
 SH 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 LF 
 
 
 Young 
 KM 
 
 
 Geist 
 MC 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Reader-text interactions: How differential text and question types influence cognitive skills needed for reading comprehension 
 Journal of Educational Psychology 
 2012 
 104 
 3 
 515 
 528 
 26566295 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fadiga 
 L 
 
 
 Craighero 
 L 
 
 
 Destro 
 MF 
 
 
 Finos 
 L 
 
 
 Cotillon-Williams 
 N 
 
 
 Smith 
 AT 
 
 
 Castiello 
 U 
 
 
 Language in shadow 
 Social Neuroscience 
 2006 
 1 
 2 
 77 
 89 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17470910600976430 
 
 18633777 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fan 
 Q 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AW 
 
 
 Davis 
 N 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Structural connectivity patterns associated with the putative visual word form area and children’s reading ability 
 Brain Research 
 2014 
 1586 
 118 
 129 
 25152466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fedorenko 
 E 
 
 
 The role of domain-general cognitive control in language comprehension 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 2014 
 5 
 335 
 24803909 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferstl 
 EC 
 
 
 Neumann 
 J 
 
 
 Bogler 
 C 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 The extended language network: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on text comprehension 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2008 
 29 
 5 
 581 
 593 
 17557297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Human Brain Function 
 1997 
 Academic Press 
 USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 The brain basis of language processing: from structure to function 
 Physiological Reviews 
 2011 
 91 
 4 
 1357 
 1392 
 22013214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 On Broca, brain, and binding: a new framework 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2005 
 9 
 9 
 416 
 423 
 16054419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Indefrey 
 P 
 
 
 The neurobiology of language beyond single words 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2014 
 37 
 347 
 362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hampson 
 M 
 
 
 Tokoglu 
 F 
 
 
 Sun 
 Z 
 
 
 Schafer 
 RJ 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Connectivity-behavior analysis reveals that functional connectivity between left BA39 and Broca’s area varies with reading ability 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 31 
 2 
 513 
 519 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.040 
 
 16497520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoover 
 WA 
 
 
 Gough 
 PB 
 
 
 The simple view of reading 
 Reading and Writing 
 1990 
 2 
 2 
 127 
 160 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00401799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension: an fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2007 
 36 
 3 
 924 
 932 
 17500009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 The neural basis of semantic cognition: converging evidence from neuropsychology, neuroimaging and TMS 
 Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior 
 2013 
 49 
 3 
 611 
 625 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keeser 
 D 
 
 
 Meindl 
 T 
 
 
 Bor 
 J 
 
 
 Palm 
 U 
 
 
 Pogarell 
 O 
 
 
 Mulert 
 C 
 
 
 Padberg 
 F 
 
 
 Prefrontal Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Changes Connectivity of Resting-State Networks during fMRI 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 43 
 15284 
 15293 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0542-11.2011 
 
 22031874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kendeou 
 P 
 
 
 van den Broek 
 P 
 
 
 Helder 
 A 
 
 
 Karlsson 
 J 
 
 
 A Cognitive View of Reading Comprehension: Implications for Reading Difficulties 
 Learning Disabilities Research & Practice 
 2014 
 29 
 1 
 10 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kovelman 
 I 
 
 
 Norton 
 ES 
 
 
 Christodoulou 
 JA 
 
 
 Gaab 
 N 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 DA 
 
 
 Triantafyllou 
 C 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Brain basis of phonological awareness for spoken language in children and its disruption in dyslexia 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.?: 1991) 
 2012 
 22 
 4 
 754 
 764 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koyama 
 MS 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Zuo 
 X-N 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Jutagir 
 DR 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Resting-state functional connectivity indexes reading competence in children and adults 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 23 
 8617 
 8624 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4865-10.2011 
 
 21653865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Summerln 
 JL 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 he Talairach Daemon, a database server for Talairach Atlas Labels 
 NeuroImage 
 1997 
 5 
 S633 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Parsons 
 LM 
 
 
 Liotti 
 M 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 PV 
 
 
 Nickerson 
 D 
 
 
 Mikiten 
 SA 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Automated Talairach atlas labels for functional brain mapping 
 Hum. Brain Mapp 
 2000 
 10 
 120 
 131 
 10912591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 L 
 
 
 Vira 
 A 
 
 
 Friedman 
 E 
 
 
 Minas 
 J 
 
 
 Bolger 
 D 
 
 
 Bitan 
 T 
 
 
 Booth 
 J 
 
 
 Children with reading disability show brain differences in effective connectivity for visual, but not auditory word comprehension 
 PloS One 
 2010 
 5 
 10 
 e13492 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0013492 
 
 21049093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Locascio 
 G 
 
 
 Mahone 
 EM 
 
 
 Eason 
 SH 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Executive dysfunction among children with reading comprehension deficits 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 2010 
 43 
 5 
 441 
 454 
 20375294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacGinitie 
 WH 
 
 
 MacGinitie 
 RK 
 
 
 Maria 
 K 
 
 
 Dreyer 
 LG 
 
 
 Gates-MacGinitie Reading Tests 
 2000 
 4th 
 Itasca, IL 
 Riverside 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fmri data sets 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 1233 
 1239 
 (WFU Pickatlas, version 2.5.2) 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mar 
 RA 
 
 
 The Neural Bases of Social Cognition and Story Comprehension 
 2011 
 Retrieved March 10, 2014, from  http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-145406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 The visual word form area: expertise for reading in the fusiform gyrus 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2003 
 7 
 7 
 293 
 299 
 12860187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McNamara 
 DS 
 
 
 Louwerse 
 MM 
 
 
 Cai 
 Z 
 
 
 Graesser 
 A 
 
 
 Coh-Metrix version 1.4 
 2005 
 1 
 1 
 Retrieved 2012, from  http//:cohmetrix.memphis.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nation 
 K 
 
 
 Adams 
 JW 
 
 
 Bowyer-Crane 
 Ca 
 
 
 Snowling 
 MJ 
 
 
 Working memory deficits in poor comprehenders reflect underlying language impairments 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 1999 
 73 
 2 
 139 
 158 
 10328862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nation 
 K 
 
 
 Snowling 
 MJ 
 
 
 Clarke 
 P 
 
 
 Dissecting the relationship between language skills and learning to read: Semantic and phonological contributions to new vocabulary learning in children with poor reading comprehension† 
 International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 
 2007 
 9 
 2 
 131 
 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 SD 
 
 
 Malaia 
 E 
 
 
 Seo 
 R 
 
 
 Cheng 
 H 
 
 
 The effect of individual differences in working memory capacity on sentence comprehension: an FMRI study 
 Brain Topography 
 2013 
 26 
 3 
 458 
 467 
 23124385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oakhill 
 JV 
 
 
 Cain 
 K 
 
 
 Bryant 
 PE 
 
 
 The dissociation of word reading and text comprehension: Evidence from component skills 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 2003 
 18 
 4 
 443 
 468 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oakhill 
 JV 
 
 
 Cain 
 K 
 
 
 The Precursors of Reading Ability in Young Readers: Evidence From a Four-Year Longitudinal Study 
 Scientific Studies of Reading 
 2012 
 16 
 2 
 91 
 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain 
 Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 12 
 976 
 987 
 18026167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peña-Gómez 
 C 
 
 
 Sala-Lonch 
 R 
 
 
 Junqué 
 C 
 
 
 Clemente 
 IC 
 
 
 Vidal 
 D 
 
 
 Bargalló 
 N 
 
 
 Bartrés-Faz 
 D 
 
 
 Modulation of large-scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by resting-state functional MRI 
 Brain Stimulation 
 2012 
 5 
 3 
 252 
 263 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2011.08.006 
 
 21962981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 C 
 
 
 Reading Ability: Lexical Quality to Comprehension 
 Scientific Studies of Reading 
 2007 
 11 
 4 
 357 
 383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petten 
 C Van 
 
 
 Weckerly 
 J 
 
 
 Mclsaac 
 HK 
 
 
 Kutas 
 M 
 
 
 WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY DISSOCIATES LEXICAL AND SENTENTIAL CONTEXT EFFECTS 
 1997 
 8 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Lessov-Schlaggar 
 CN 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Evidence for hubs in human functional brain networks 
 Neuron 
 2013 
 79 
 4 
 798 
 813 
 23972601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 AR 
 
 
 Bonner 
 MF 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Converging evidence for the neuroanatomic basis of combinatorial semantics in the angular gyrus 
 The Journal of Neuroscience?: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 2015 
 35 
 7 
 3276 
 3284 
 25698762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 62 
 2 
 816 
 847 
 22584224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ptak 
 R 
 
 
 The frontoparietal attention network of the human brain: action, saliency, and a priority map of the environment 
 The Neuroscientist?: A Review Journal Bringing Neurobiology, Neurology and Psychiatry 
 2012 
 18 
 5 
 502 
 515 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/1073858411409051 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Jenner 
 AR 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 JR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Neurobiological studies of reading and reading disability 
 Journal of Communication Disorders 
 2001 
 34 
 6 
 479 
 492 
 11725860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pulvermüller 
 F 
 
 
 Semantic embodiment, disembodiment or misembodiment? In search of meaning in modules and neuron circuits 
 Brain and Language 
 2013 
 127 
 1 
 86 
 103 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2013.05.015 
 
 23932167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rayner 
 K 
 
 
 Eye movements and the perceptual span in beginning and skilled readers 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 1986 
 41 
 211 
 236 
 3701249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Developmental dyslexia: dysfunction of a left hemisphere reading network 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2012 
 6 
 120 
 22557962 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Functional abnormalities in the dyslexic brain: a quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009 
 30 
 10 
 3299 
 3308 
 19288465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rimrodt 
 SL 
 
 
 Clements-Stephens 
 AM 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Courtney 
 SM 
 
 
 Gaur 
 P 
 
 
 Pekar 
 JJ 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 Functional MRI of sentence comprehension in children with dyslexia: beyond word recognition 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.?: 1991) 
 2009 
 19 
 2 
 402 
 413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Development of neural systems for reading 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2007 
 30 
 475 
 503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 The angular gyrus: multiple functions and multiple subdivisions 
 The Neuroscientist?: A Review Journal Bringing Neurobiology, Neurology and Psychiatry 
 2013 
 19 
 1 
 43 
 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sesma 
 HW 
 
 
 Mahone 
 EM 
 
 
 Levine 
 T 
 
 
 Eason 
 SH 
 
 
 Cutting 
 LE 
 
 
 The Contribution of Executive Skills to Reading Comprehension 
 Child Neuropsychology 
 2009 
 15 
 3 
 232 
 246 
 18629674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 M 
 
 
 Harkness 
 D 
 
 
 Steward 
 ST 
 
 
 Constructing inferences in expository text comprehension 
 Discourse Processes 
 1997 
 24 
 2–3 
 199 
 228 
 doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01638539709545013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smallwood 
 J 
 
 
 Brown 
 K 
 
 
 Baird 
 B 
 
 
 Schooler 
 JW 
 
 
 Cooperation between the default mode network and the frontal-parietal network in the production of an internal train of thought 
 Brain Research 
 2012 
 1428 
 60 
 70 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2011.03.072 
 
 21466793 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spencer 
 M 
 
 
 Quinn 
 JM 
 
 
 Wagner 
 RK 
 
 
 Specific Reading Comprehension Disability: Major Problem, Myth, or Misnomer? 
 Learning Disabilities Research & Practice?: A Publication of the Division for Learning Disabilities, Council for Exceptional Children 
 2014 
 29 
 1 
 3 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stafura 
 JZ 
 
 
 Perfetti 
 CA 
 
 
 Word-to-text integration: Message level and lexical level influences in ERPs 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2014 
 64C 
 41 
 53 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.09.012 
 
 25234645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stothard 
 SE 
 
 
 Reading comprehension difficulties in children The role of language comprehension and working memory skills 
 1992 
 245 
 256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swanson 
 HL 
 
 
 Cochran 
 KF 
 
 
 Ewers 
 Ca 
 
 
 Working memory in skilled and less skilled readers 
 Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 
 1989 
 17 
 2 
 145 
 156 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00913790 
 
 2745896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tsapkini 
 K 
 
 
 Frangakis 
 CE 
 
 
 Hillis 
 AE 
 
 
 The function of the left anterior temporal pole: evidence from acute stroke and infarct volume 
 Brain?: A Journal of Neurology 
 2011 
 134 
 Pt 10 
 3094 
 3105 
 21685458 
 
 
 
 
 U. S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics 
 National Assessment of Educational Progress 
 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandermosten 
 M 
 
 
 Boets 
 B 
 
 
 Wouters 
 J 
 
 
 Ghesquiere 
 P 
 
 
 A qualitative and quantitative review of diffusion tensor imaging studies in reading and dyslexia 
 Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
 2012 
 36 
 6 
 1532 
 1552 
 22516793 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visser 
 M 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Embleton 
 KV 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Both the middle temporal gyrus and the ventral anterior temporal area are crucial for multimodal semantic processing: distortion-corrected fMRI evidence for a double gradient of information convergence in the temporal lobes 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2012 
 24 
 8 
 1766 
 1778 
 22621260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vogel 
 AC 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 The VWFA: it's not just for words anymore 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2014 
 8 
 88 
 24688462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wechsler 
 D 
 
 
 Wechsler Abbreivated Scale of Intelligence- Second Addition 
 2011 
 San Antonio, TX 
 NCS Pearson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Nieto-Castanon 
 A 
 
 
 Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks 
 Brain Connectivity 
 2012 
 2 
 3 
 125 
 141 
 22642651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitney 
 C 
 
 
 Huber 
 W 
 
 
 Klann 
 J 
 
 
 Weis 
 S 
 
 
 Krach 
 S 
 
 
 Kircher 
 T 
 
 
 Neural correlates of narrative shifts during auditory story comprehension 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 47 
 1 
 360 
 366 
 19376237 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitney 
 C 
 
 
 Kirk 
 M 
 
 
 O’Sullivan 
 J 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 The neural organization of semantic control: TMS evidence for a distributed network in left inferior frontal and posterior middle temporal gyrus 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.?: 1991) 
 2011 
 21 
 5 
 1066 
 1075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woodcock 
 RW 
 
 
 Woodcock reading mastery tests – Revised/Normative update 
 1998 
 Circle Pines, MN 
 American Guidance Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xiang 
 H-D 
 
 
 Fonteijn 
 HM 
 
 
 Norris 
 DG 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Topographical Functional Connectivity Pattern in the Perisylvian Language Networks 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 3 
 549 
 560 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp119 
 
 19546155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 R 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 D 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 NeuroSynth: a new platform for large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data 
 Front. Neuroinform 
 2011 
 Conference Abstract: 4th INCF Congress of Neuroinformatics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Sample stimuli from each of the three conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 A Boolean rendering of Passages > Symbols and Words > Symbols show that both Passagae reading and Word reading activate a dispersed, overlapping language and WM network. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc < .005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Expository text comprehension, as compared to WL reading, uniquely recruits regions in the DMN, including bilateral AG, PCC, and bilateral anterior STS. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k = 118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 (a) During Word reading only, word reading ability, as measured by Word Attack (green) and Letter Word Identification (red) measures, predicts activation in language regions, including the orthographic processing regions in the left OT area. Both measurements of word reading predicted activation in the left MTG (yellow). (b) Plot of LWID Percentile score by Words percet signal change in the left OT area. Low and high word reading ability (as determined by median split of LWID percentile) represented in dark blue and light blue, respectively. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p.unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 (a) During Passage versus Baseline, RC ability predicts activation in both language and EF regions, including areas that support WM and the DMN. (b) Selected plots of Gates percentile by Passage percent signal change in L MTG, L IFG, and L AG (circled in yellow on (a)). Low and high RC ability (as determined by median split of Gates percentile) represented in dark blue and light blue, respectively. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Left-lateralized language regions of mean overlap activity in Passage and Word reading show differential connectivity patterns in WL (Words > Symbols; orange arrow) and DL (Passages > Words; red arrow) processes. Specifically, the three seeds show convergent correlation with the left OT area during WL reading, and additively shows correlation with the left AG during Passage reading. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Left pVWFA of mean overlap activity in Passage and Word reading shows differential connectivity patterns in WL (Words > Symbols; orange arrow) and DL (Passages > Words; red arrow) processes. During WL processes, pVWFA correlates with the left MTG and primary sensory regions. The pVWFA then additively shows correlation with the left AG, SMG, and language network/language homologues during Passage reading. Results displayed at p-corrected < .05 (p-unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Left d1PFC of mean overlap activity in Passage and Word reading shows differential connectivity patterns in WL (Words > Baseline; orange arrow) and DL (Passages > Words; red arrow) processes. During WL processes, dlPFC correlates with the same left MTG area seen in the pVWFA seed connectivity analysis. The d1PFC then additively shows correlation with the left AG and left DMN during Passage reading. Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 9 
 
 Word reading ability positively predicts correlations between left pVWFA and left MTG in WL processing. Low and high word reading ability (as determined by median split of WA percentile) represented in dark blue and light blue, respectively). Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k=118). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 10 
 
 RC ability positively predicts correlations between the left d1PFC and the left AG in DL processing. Low and high RC ability (as determined by median split of Gates percentile) represented in dark blue and light blue, respectively). Results displayed at p-corrected <.05 (p-unc <.005, k=118) 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Abbreviations of neural regions 
 
 
 
 
 Abbreviation 
 Region 
 
 
 
 
 AG 
 angular gyrus 
 
 
 ACC 
 anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 dlPFC 
 dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 dmPFC 
 dorsomedial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 IFG 
 inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 IPL 
 inferior parietal lobule 
 
 
 IPS 
 intraparietal sulcus 
 
 
 ITG 
 inferior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 MFG 
 middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 MTG 
 middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 OT 
 occipitotemporal area 
 
 
 PCC 
 posterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 PCU 
 precuneus 
 
 
 pVWFA 
 putative visual word form area 
 
 
 SFG 
 superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 SMA 
 supplementary motor area 
 
 
 SMG 
 supramarginal gyrus 
 
 
 SPL 
 superior parietal lobule 
 
 
 STS 
 superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 TP 
 temporal pole 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Demographic data for n = 38 subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Measure 
 Mean (SD) 
 Range 
 
 
 
 
 Age 
 12.1 (1.5) 
 9–14 
 
 
 WA %ile 
 47.0 (17.8) 
 18–90 
 
 
 LWID %ile 
 56.2 (18.8) 
 20–92 
 
 
 Gates %ile 
 61.7 (23.6) 
 14–98 
 
 
 WASI ss 
 107.6 (8.1) 
 89–123 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 GLM analyses for Words > Symbols, Passages > Symbols, and Passages > Words. Cluster size (k) in mm^3. BA, Brodmann Area. All T-values are significant at p = 0.05. For large clusters, brackets indicate sub-cluster peaks in BA or functional regions distinct from primary peak, extracted using a decreased peak search space of 4 mm within the main cluster. Clusters are identified by general cognitive domains based on the majority of sub-peak locations within the cluster. 
 
 
 
 
 GLM Contrast 
 Anatomical Region 
 MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 Max T 
 BA 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Words > 
 
 Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 Language and WM 
 L Middle Occipital 
 −24 
 −100 
 −4 
 26997 
 17.99 
 18 
 
 
 
   R Middle Occipital 
 22 
 −100 
 −6 
 [ ] 
 15.63 
 18 
 
 
 
   L Inferior Occipital 
 −38 
 −86 
 −12 
 [ ] 
 10.05 
 19 
 
 
 
   L Fusiform 
 −40 
 −44 
 −26 
 [ ] 
 9.71 
 37 
 
 
 
   L pVWFA 
 −46 
 −48 
 −12 
 [ ] 
 9.41 
 37 
 
 
 
   R Cuneus 
 2 
 −86 
 26 
 [ ] 
 8.18 
 17 
 
 
 
   L IFG 
 −46 
 30 
 −4 
 [ ] 
 8.08 
 45, 47, 44 
 
 
 
   L MTG/STG 
 −52 
 −42 
 4 
 [ ] 
 7.83 
 22 
 
 
 
   L Hippocampus 
 −24 
 −30 
 −4 
 [ ] 
 7.77 
 35 
 
 
 
   L Cuneus 
 −2 
 −92 
 22 
 [ ] 
 7.31 
 17 
 
 
 
   L MTG 
 −50 
 −34 
 0 
 [ ] 
 6.86 
 21 
 
 
 
   L Precentral Gyrus 
 −52 
 −2 
 50 
 [ ] 
 6.3 
 6 
 
 
 
   L anterior MTG: TP 
 −58 
 −12 
 −14 
 [ ] 
 6.28 
 21/38 
 
 
 
   L ventral IFG 
 −52 
 20 
 2 
 [ ] 
 6.12 
 47 
 
 
 
   L dorsal IFG: dlPFC 
 −46 
 12 
 24 
 [ ] 
 5.69 
 45, 46, 9 
 
 
 
   L TP 
 −44 
 20 
 −18 
 [ ] 
 5 
 38 
 
 
 
   R Fusiform Gyrus 
 38 
 −50 
 −22 
 [ ] 
 4.59 
 37 
 
 
 
 R ventral IFG: TP 
 54 
 40 
 −10 
 1302 
 5.39 
 47 
 
 
 
 R IFG 
 40 
 24 
 22 
 156 
 3.64 
 45 
 
 
 Memory and Motor 
 R Hippocampus: Thalamus 
 24 
 −28 
 −4 
 1186 
 7.27 
 35 
 
 
 
 L SMA 
 −2 
 2 
 68 
 142 
 4.46 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passages > 
 
 Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 Language, Memory, and Executive 
 L IFG 
 −48 
 30 
 2 
 29810 
 11.61 
 45, 47 
 
 
 
   L ventral IFG 
 −48 
 28 
 −10 
 [ ] 
 11.28 
 47 
 
 
 
   L Middle Occipital 
 −22 
 −102 
 −4 
 [ ] 
 11.03 
 18, 17 
 
 
 
   L MTG 
 −58 
 −34 
 −2 
 [ ] 
 10.48 
 21 
 
 
 
   R Calcarine 
 12 
 −90 
 4 
 [ ] 
 10.39 
 17 
 
 
 
   L Fusiform: Hipp. 
 −42 
 −46 
 −26 
 [ ] 
 9.49 
 37 
 
 
 
   L pVWFA 
 −50 
 −46 
 −10 
 [ ] 
 9.33 
 37 
 
 
 
   L IFG 
 −46 
 16 
 22 
 [ ] 
 9.24 
 44, 45 
 
 
 
   L STG: AG 
 −64 
 −42 
 2 
 [ ] 
 9.06 
 22, 39 
 
 
 
   L Precentral 
 −48 
 4 
 48 
 [ ] 
 8.48 
 6 
 
 
 
   L dorsal IFG: dlPFC 
 −38 
 8 
 28 
 [ ] 
 7.96 
 45, 9 
 
 
 
   L TP 
 −50 
 10 
 −28 
 [ ] 
 7.24 
 38, 21 
 
 
 
   L MFG/SFG 
 −10 
 50 
 48 
 [ ] 
 6.78 
 8, 9 
 
 
 
 R STG/MTG 
 46 
 −34 
 0 
 2605 
 6.52 
 21 
 
 
 
   R ITG 
 66 
 −44 
 −16 
 [ ] 
 5.8 
 21, 20 
 
 
 
   R TP 
 48 
 18 
 −30 
 [ ] 
 5.33 
 38 
 
 
 
 R IFG 
 60 
 30 
 12 
 2732 
 8.19 
 46, 45 
 
 
 
   R Precentral Gyrus 
 62 
 −8 
 42 
 [ ] 
 6.19 
 6 
 
 
 
   R MFG 
 56 
 22 
 38 
 [ ] 
 4.83 
 9 
 
 
 
   R MFG 
 42 
 38 
 −16 
 [ ] 
 4.8 
 11 
 
 
 
   R Insula 
 48 
 −14 
 18 
 [ ] 
 4.73 
 43 
 
 
 
   R ventral IFG 
 54 
 32 
 −12 
 [ ] 
 4.06 
 47 
 
 
 
 R AG: MTG 
 54 
 −70 
 30 
 515 
 5.42 
 39 
 
 
 
 R Parahipp/Hipp 
 26 
 −26 
 −8 
 165 
 7.22 
 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passages > 
 
 Words 
 
 
 
 
 DMN 
 L AG 
 −44 
 −60 
 30 
 1286 
 4.92 
 39 
 
 
 
 L MTG/anterior STS 
 −50 
 −24 
 −10 
 1045 
 5.4 
 21, 20 
 
 
 
 R MTG: AG 
 52 
 −76 
 16 
 884 
 5.14 
 39, 19 
 
 
 
   R Superior Occipital 
 40 
 −86 
 26 
 [ ] 
 4.45 
 19 
 
 
 
 L/R PCU 
 0 
 −56 
 34 
 380 
 4.29 
 7, 31 
 
 
 
 R MTG/anterior STS 
 54 
 −2 
 −26 
 251 
 4.49 
 21, 20 
 
 
 
 L SFG 
 −20 
 26 
 52 
 180 
 3.41 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 GLM covariate for word recognition (LWID) and decoding (WA) ability (in Words > Symbols) and RC ability (Gates percentile; Passages > Symbols). Cluster size (k) in mm^3. BA, Brodmann Area. All T-values are significant at p = 0.05. For large clusters, brackets indicate sub-cluster peaks in BA or functional regions distinct from primary peak, extracted using a decreased peak search space of 4 mm within the main cluster. Clusters are identified by general cognitive domains based on the majority of sub-peak locations within the cluster. 
 
 
 
 
 Covariate 
 Anatomical Region 
 MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 Max T 
 BA 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Words > Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 
 LWID 
 
 
 
 Language 
 L Fusiform/OT area 
 −44 
 −46 
 −12 
 140 
 3.89 
 37 
 
 
 
 L MTG/STG 
 −46 
 −50 
 4 
 452 
 4.4 
 21, 22 
 
 
 
 L IFG 
 −52 
 22 
 20 
 173 
 3.35 
 45, 44 
 
 
 
 L IPL/SPL 
 −28 
 −50 
 46 
 175 
 3.79 
 40 
 
 
 
 WA 
 
 
 
 Language 
 L anterior MTG/STG 
 −54 
 −16 
 −8 
 255 
 4.83 
 21, 22, 38 
 
 
 
 L posterior MTG/STG 
 −44 
 −52 
 8 
 156 
 3.69 
 21, 22, 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passages > Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates McGinitie 
 
 
 
 Language and WM 
 L IFG: dlPFC 
 −56 
 22 
 14 
 2308 
 6.36 
 45, 47, 44, 9 
 
 
 
 R TP: ventral IFG 
 30 
 22 
 −26 
 2050 
 5.31 
 47, 38 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 −44 
 6 
 −42 
 [ ] 
 4.98 
 38 
 
 
 
 L anterior MTG 
 −56 
 −18 
 −20 
 810 
 4.39 
 21 
 
 
 
 L fusiform 
 −58 
 −50 
 −12 
 [ ] 
 4.15 
 37 
 
 
 DMN 
 L SFG 
 −10 
 40 
 50 
 3875 
 6.08 
 8 
 
 
 
 L SFG 
 −8 
 26 
 54 
 [ ] 
 5.07 
 6 
 
 
 
 L PCU 
 −6 
 −52 
 40 
 561 
 5.32 
 7 
 
 
 
 L PCC 
 −8 
 −54 
 24 
 [ ] 
 3.06 
 31 
 
 
 
 L AG 
 −46 
 −64 
 32 
 1538 
 4.96 
 39 
 
 
 
 R AG 
 54 
 −66 
 38 
 119 
 3.34 
 39 
 
 
 
 L Hippocampus 
 −20 
 −6 
 −18 
 865 
 6.48 
 34 
 
 
 Motor and Visual 
 R Lingual /Cuneus 
 2 
 −86 
 0 
 471 
 4.55 
 18, 17 
 
 
 
 R Postcentral 
 38 
 −30 
 48 
 394 
 4.06 
 40, 3, 2 
 
 
 
 L Thalamus 
 −6 
 −14 
 8 
 185 
 4.03 
 NA 
 
 
 
 R Caudate 
 14 
 10 
 14 
 164 
 3.85 
 NA 
 
 
 
 R SPL 
 18 
 −68 
 64 
 192 
 3.77 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Center of mass (CM) and peak coordinates for five connectivity seeds. Seeds were pulled from the Passages > Symbols and Words > Symbols GLM conjunction analysis in language and executive areas. 
 
 
 
 
 Anatomical Region 
 CM MNI Coordinates 
 Peak MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 BA 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L dlPFC 
 −52 
 18 
 28 
 −44 
 16 
 26 
 116 
 46, 9 
 
 
 L IFG 
 −48 
 25 
 5 
 −46 
 28 
 2 
 1841 
 47, 45, 44 
 
 
 L TP 
 −48 
 15 
 −21 
 −54 
 18 
 −8 
 210 
 38 
 
 
 L MTG 
 −58 
 −25 
 −8 
 −58 
 −34 
 −2 
 1195 
 21 
 
 
 L pVWFA 
 −43 
 −55 
 −18 
 −44 
 −48 
 −14 
 489 
 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Seed-to-whole-brain connectivity analyses for Words > Symbols. Overlap center of mass coordinates are reported in final rows. Cluster size (k) in mm^3. BA, Brodmann Area. All T-values are significant at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Seed region 
 Whole-Brain Correlation Regions 
 MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 Max T 
 BA 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Words > 
 
 Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 L IFG 
 R IFG 
 50 
 20 
 30 
 1456 
 5.86 
 44, 45, 46, 9, 8 
 
 
 
 R/L Middle Occipital: L OT area 
 42 
 −84 
 −4 
 4106 
 5.46 
 18, 37 
 
 
 
 L Insula 
 −34 
 10 
 20 
 366 
 5.11 
 13, 44 
 
 
 
 R Postcentral 
 12 
 −44 
 70 
 420 
 4.45 
 3, 7 
 
 
 
 R Orbitofrontal/IFG 
 42 
 40 
 −12 
 284 
 4.44 
 11, 47 
 
 
 
 L Postcentral 
 −60 
 −6 
 40 
 238 
 4.31 
 6, 9 
 
 
 
 L Postcentral 
 −56 
 −6 
 16 
 140 
 3.97 
 43, 4 
 
 
 L TP 
 L Insula/RO 
 −36 
 8 
 20 
 180 
 5.24 
 13, 44 
 
 
 
 R OT area 
 52 
 −50 
 −24 
 259 
 4.43 
 37 
 
 
 
 L OT area 
 −42 
 −72 
 −10 
 276 
 4.30 
 37 
 
 
 
 R Precentral 
 14 
 −32 
 72 
 208 
 4.10 
 3 
 
 
 
 R IFG 
 46 
 18 
 14 
 224 
 3.79 
 44 
 
 
 L MTG 
 L Postcentral 
 −64 
 −6 
 20 
 471 
 5.13 
 4, 43, 44 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital 
 44 
 −84 
 −10 
 775 
 5.12 
 18, 19 
 
 
 
 L Middle Occipital: L OT area 
 −34 
 −86 
 −4 
 620 
 4.68 
 18, 19 
 
 
 
 L Paracentral Lobule 
 −14 
 −30 
 70 
 173 
 4.39 
 4 
 
 
 
 R Paracentral Lobule 
 14 
 −38 
 64 
 434 
 4.20 
 4 
 
 
 pVWFA 
 L MTG 
 −46 
 −40 
 2 
 566 
 4.82 
 21, 22 
 
 
 
 L Middle Occipital 
 −26 
 −84 
 6 
 457 
 4.36 
 18 
 
 
 
 L MFG 
 −46 
 4 
 52 
 294 
 4.33 
 6 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital 
 30 
 −96 
 2 
 187 
 4.05 
 18 
 
 
 
 L Insula 
 −36 
 10 
 20 
 126 
 4.03 
 13, 44 
 
 
 
 R Postcentral 
 20 
 −24 
 52 
 221 
 3.89 
 4 
 
 
 L dlPFC 
 L MTG 
 −48 
 −38 
 4 
 138 
 4.52 
 21 
 
 
 
 L Middle Occipital 
 −20 
 −106 
 −2 
 150 
 4.23 
 18 
 
 
 
 R Middle Occipital 
 14 
 −102 
 16 
 531 
 4.17 
 18 
 
 
 
 L MFG 
 −58 
 12 
 34 
 154 
 4.12 
 9, 6 
 
 
 
 R MFG/Precentral 
 46 
 8 
 30 
 461 
 3.97 
 9, 46 
 
 
 
 L Rolandic Operculum 
 −44 
 −6 
 16 
 250 
 3.89 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overlap 
 
 Regions 
 
 
 
 
 pVWFA 
 
 −41 
 −55 
 −16 
 190 
 − 
 37 
 
 
 L MTG 
 
 −49 
 −40 
 3 
 121 
 − 
 21, 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 7 
 
 Seed-to-whole-brain connectivity analyses for Passages > Words. Overlap center of mass coordinates are reported in final row. Cluster size (k) in mm^3. BA, Brodmann Area. All T-values are significant at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Seed Region 
 Whole-Brain Correlation Regions 
 MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 Max T 
 BA 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passages > Words 
 
 
 
 
 
 L IFG 
 
 L AG 
 −44 
 −62 
 24 
 1065 
 6.00 
 39 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 −54 
 0 
 −38 
 312 
 4.55 
 38, 21, 20 
 
 
 
 L Thalamus 
 −10 
 −4 
 12 
 169 
 4.39 
 NA 
 
 
 
 L SFG 
 −12 
 40 
 52 
 139 
 4.35 
 8 
 
 
 
 R PCC: Cuneus 
 24 
 −66 
 8 
 499 
 4.17 
 30, 31, 18 
 
 
 
 R Thalamus 
 8 
 −6 
 −2 
 255 
 4.13 
 NA 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 
 L PCU 
 −4 
 −68 
 34 
 970 
 5.82 
 7, 31 
 
 
 
 R Caudate Head 
 8 
 2 
 4 
 1102 
 5.32 
 NA 
 
 
 
 L AG 
 −40 
 −62 
 38 
 1417 
 5.26 
 39 
 
 
 
 L SFG: ACC 
 −18 
 62 
 6 
 860 
 4.72 
 10, 32 
 
 
 
 L MTG 
 −64 
 −26 
 −6 
 260 
 4.62 
 21, 20 
 
 
 
 L PCC/Calcarine 
 −26 
 −66 
 6 
 143 
 4.50 
 30 
 
 
 
 R SFG 
 12 
 36 
 40 
 465 
 4.50 
 6 
 
 
 
 L Lingual Gyrus 
 −12 
 −46 
 2 
 190 
 4.15 
 30 
 
 
 
 L MTG 
 
 L AG 
 −44 
 −58 
 22 
 1050 
 6.51 
 39 
 
 
 
 L SFG: SMA 
 −10 
 40 
 52 
 139 
 5.26 
 8, 6 
 
 
 
 L MTG 
 −64 
 −44 
 2 
 225 
 4.14 
 21 
 
 
 
 L/R Lingual Gyrus 
 −14 
 −92 
 −14 
 278 
 3.99 
 17 
 
 
 
 R Calcarine 
 24 
 −58 
 6 
 126 
 3.88 
 18 
 
 
 
 pVWFA 
 
 L SMG 
 −56 
 −30 
 38 
 744 
 5.25 
 40 
 
 
 
 L dlPFC 
 −30 
 18 
 42 
 133 
 4.59 
 8, 9 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 −54 
 4 
 −30 
 189 
 4.51 
 21, 38, 20 
 
 
 
 R TP 
 48 
 −2 
 −32 
 126 
 4.50 
 21, 38, 20 
 
 
 
 L AG 
 −38 
 −64 
 22 
 571 
 4.45 
 39 
 
 
 
 R Fusiform/Parahippocampal 
 38 
 −38 
 −26 
 342 
 4.42 
 37, 20 
 
 
 
 L Cingulate 
 −10 
 −32 
 40 
 282 
 4.40 
 31 
 
 
 
 L ITG 
 −58 
 −46 
 −18 
 227 
 4.38 
 20 
 
 
 
 L Thalamus 
 −6 
 −26 
 12 
 127 
 4.13 
 NA 
 
 
 
 L dlPFC 
 
 L AG 
 −40 
 −62 
 26 
 1222 
 6.77 
 39 
 
 
 
 L SFG 
 −14 
 24 
 62 
 1118 
 5.44 
 9, 8, 6 
 
 
 
 R Parahippocampal 
 28 
 −24 
 −28 
 319 
 4.85 
 36 
 
 
 
 L TP 
 −50 
 4 
 −22 
 392 
 4.54 
 38, 21, 20 
 
 
 
 R ITG 
 26 
 −4 
 −38 
 126 
 4.44 
 20, 36 
 
 
 
 L Thalamus 
 −12 
 −26 
 −8 
 151 
 3.49 
 NA 
 
 
 
 L PCC 
 −6 
 −56 
 6 
 184 
 3.46 
 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overlap 
 
 Regions 
 
 
 
 
 
 L AG 
 
 
 −41 
 −62 
 30 
 159 
 − 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 8 
 
 Seed-to-whole-brain connectivity analyses correlated with word reading and RC ability for Words > Symbols and Passages > Words, respectively. Reported results restricted to regions of interest in seed-to-whole-brain connectivity analyses (left IFG, MTG, and TP; pVWFA; dlPFC; L AG). Cluster size (k) in mm^3. BA, Brodmann Area. All T-values are significant at p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 Covariate and Seed Region 
 Result 
 MNI Coordinates 
 k 
 Max T 
 r 
 BA 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Words > Symbols 
 
 
 
 
 
 WA 
 
 
 
 pVWFA 
 L MTG 
 −44 
 −50 
 4 
 273 
 4.13 
 0.78 
 21, 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passages > Words 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gates McGinitie 
 
 
 
 L dlPFC 
 L AG 
 −44 
 −68 
 26 
 132 
 3.83 
 0.56 
 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Highlights 
 
 
 
 We examined the relationship of word-level and discourse-level neural processing in a range of adolescent readers. 
 
 
 We isolated regions of overlapping activation for word and passage reading, and observed differential functional connectivity networks of these regions for word-level and discourse-level processing. 
 
 
 Importantly, we found that word reading and reading comprehension ability predicted the strength of differential functional connectivity patterns of passage and word overlap regions. 
 
 
 Findings not only have significant implications for dynamic neural processes during reading, but more generally emphasize that shared regional activity across similar cognitive tasks is not necessarily indicative of shared function. 
 
 
 
 
