
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 9215515 
 20498 
 Neuroimage 
 Neuroimage 
 
 NeuroImage 
 
 1053-8119 
 1095-9572 
 
 
 27177762 
 5120675 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.020 
 NIHMS789190 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Sentence Understanding Depends on Contextual Use of Semantic and Real World Knowledge 
 
 
 
 
 Tune 
 Sarah 
 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 Matthias 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Nagels 
 Arne 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Small 
 Steven L. 
 
 1 
 ¶ 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel-Schlesewsky 
 Ina 
 
 3 
 ¶ 
 
 
 1 Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA 
 2 School of Psychology, Social Work and Social Policy, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia 
 3 Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany 
 
 * Corresponding author: Sarah Tune, Ph.D., Department of Psychology I, University of Lübeck, Maria-Goeppert-Str. 9a, 23562 Lübeck, Germany, phone: +49 – 451 – 3101 – 3627, fax: +49 – 451 – 3101 – 3604,  sarah.tune@uni-luebeck.de 
 
 ¶ 
 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
 
 
 
 2 
 6 
 2016 
 
 
 10 
 5 
 2016 
 
 
 1 
 8 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 8 
 2017 
 
 136 
 10 
 25 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Human language allows us to express our thoughts and ideas by combining entities, concepts and actions into multi-event episodes. Yet, the functional neuroanatomy engaged in interpretation of such high-level linguistic input remains poorly understood. Here, we used easy to detect and more subtle “borderline” anomalies to investigate the brain regions and mechanistic principles involved in the use of real-world event knowledge in language comprehension. Overall, the results showed that the processing of sentences in context engages a complex set of bilateral brain regions in the frontal, temporal and inferior parietal lobes. Easy anomalies preferentially engaged lower-order cortical areas adjacent to the primary auditory cortex. In addition, the left supramarginal gyrus and anterior temporal sulcus as well as the right posterior middle temporal gyrus contributed to the processing of easy and borderline anomalies. The observed pattern of results is explained in terms of (i) hierarchical processing along a dorsal-ventral axis and (ii) the assumption of high-order association areas serving as cortical hubs in the convergence of information in a distributed network. Finally, the observed modulation of BOLD signal in prefrontal areas provides support for their role in the implementation of executive control processes. 
 
 
 borderline anomalies 
 fMRI 
 language processing 
 prediction 
 semantic processing 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Human language, in conjunction with other sensory input, constitutes an important source of information that helps us to interact safely and successfully with our environment. To  make sense  of linguistic input, i.e., to associate it with known objects, concepts, actions, and events, we can draw upon a myriad of relations that comprise our extensive semantic knowledge. An individual's semantic knowledge, or semantic memory, is grounded in and continuously shaped by perceptual experience. It not only enables the linking of word forms to objects, individuals, actions and abstract concepts, but also provides information on their respective attributes, purposes or intentions, and the associations among them. As such, semantic memory plays an important role in guiding action. 
 One of the prevailing questions addressed in recent neurobiological models of semantic memory is how modality-specific aspects of memory (e.g., reflecting different sensory, motoric or affective dimensions) are bound together and whether, in addition to the binding of these components, there is evidence for modality-independent “hubs” or “convergence zones” ( Damasio 1989 ;  Damasio et al. 2004 ;  Martin 2007 ;  Patterson et al. 2007 ;  Binder and Desai 2011 ). The model proposed by Binder and Desai, for example, differentiates between low-level modal and high-level supramodal convergence zones: “ Modality-specific sensory, action, and emotion systems (…) provide experiential input to high-level temporal and inferior parietal convergence zones (…) that store increasingly abstract representations of entity and event knowledge ” ( Binder and Desai 2011 ). From this perspective, high-level convergence zones, particularly those involving parts of the inferior parietal lobule (IPL), are deemed important for the emergence and use of event knowledge by serving to bind together a wealth of modality-specific information converging onto entities and events that interact in space and time to make up a particular episode. Numerous studies on language processing have used descriptions of very simple events (e.g., “The man on vacation lost a bag and a wallet”;  Humphries et al. 2007 ) to investigate semantic processing at the single sentence level, and many of these study have implicated the angular gyrus and in some cases the adjacent supramarginal gyrus as critical regions ( Ni et al. 2000 ;  Friederici et al. 2003 ;  Newman et al. 2003 ). 
 Beyond the level of semantic knowledge required for the interpretation of these simple events, however, semantic memory must also encompass information on broader episodes arising from the combination of multiple events. Here, we use the term scenario to denote such complex sets of events. Scenarios can describe a wide array of topics, covering a continuum that ranges from unique personal experiences or particular historic events (e.g., the Titanic's maiden voyage) to recurring patterns of events that can be generalized in so-called event schemata or cognitive scripts (e.g., hosting a dinner party). Independent of whether they describe unique or generalizable situations, scenarios are defined by the involvement of specific entities and their respective roles in the series and/or co-occurrence of individual events. 
 However, little research has been conducted to date examining the functional neuroanatomy underlying the processing of such complex stimuli: the majority of studies on semantic processing using language have generally focused on single words that vary along different dimensions or on the comparison of semantically congruent and incongruent single sentences (e.g.,  Ni et al. 2000 ;  Newman et al. 2001 ;  Vandenberghe et al. 2002 ;  Friederici et al. 2003 ;  Humphries et al. 2006 ;  2007 ). Moreover, at the sentence level, these types of manipulations typically involve a word or phrase that has a poor fit to the global context (e.g.,  “The thunderstorm was ironed”  vs.  “The shirt was ironed” ; example from  Friederici et al., 2003 ). Given the lack of semantic association between the incongruent element and the surrounding context, it is unclear whether these types of experimental manipulations are adequate for tapping into the neural mechanisms of higher-level semantic processing. One might argue that changes in brain activity in response to such incongruent words or phrases embedded in single sentences reflect a lack of normally (ecologically) occurring contextual priming as opposed to an evaluation of message-level plausibility. 
 There are, however, other semantic anomalies, termed “anomalies at the borderline of awareness” or simply “borderline anomalies” ( Sanford et al. 2011 ) that represent an interesting exception. Borderline anomalies - the “Moses Illusion” being the most famous example – are particularly hard to detect because the anomaly-inducing word has a strong semantic relationship to the meanings of the words and even to the propositional content of the context. In other words, the critical word is closely associated with the scenario as a whole but it does not constitute the correct filler for the “slot” in which it occurs. Borderline anomalies frequently include incorrect but closely related protagonists who perform or are affected by a described action while in other cases the action itself may be incorrect but again strongly associated with the scenario as a whole. The original Moses Illusion  (“How many animals of each kind did Moses take on the ark?” ) is an example of a distorted question that falsely presents the biblical figure Moses as the builder and sailor of the ark. Due to the high degree of semantic similarity (in most people's semantic memory) between Moses and Noah, the correct agent for the role, very few people notice the anomaly ( Erickson and Mattson 1981 ). Other studies have embedded these types of semantic illusions in more elaborate contexts, thus creating the types of scenarios under discussion here:
 “A pay dispute between lorry drivers and their employers reached a crisis in negotiation; even the professional mediators seemed dejected. After five days of discussion the government rejected outright the final conciliatory pay-offer and halted the talks” ( Sanford et al. 2011 ). 
 In this case the incorrect term government is again closely related to the global scenario but its assigned role is unexpected given what we know about these kinds of situations. Scenarios of this type thus permit investigation of language comprehension in a way that requires the application of higher-level event knowledge, as it is not confounded with a lack of semantic association between the critical word or phrase and the overall scenario. 
 To date, several studies have investigated the processing of borderline (and easy to detect) anomalies using EEG, eye-tracking or fMRI. The fMRI study ( Raposo and Marques, 2013 ) contrasted obvious semantic anomalies with more subtle incongruencies in single sentences (e.g., “It was the terrible stepmother who tried to kill Cinderella with a poisoned apple”). The authors found higher levels of BOLD activity for subtle anomalies compared to true statements in the right IPL, which they link to processes of generating and integrating inferences. Comparing detected to undetected subtle anomalies increased activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex and insula, which they link to conflict monitoring and error detection. However, the choice of it-cleft structures as a means of directing the listeners' attention to a particular part of the sentence strongly discourages the integration of all involved components into a global meaning– the very process we aim to investigate. Moreover, it is unclear whether neural responses to isolated it-cleft sentences are reflective of brain mechanisms underlying ecological language comprehension, as these structures cannot be felicitously uttered without supporting context. 
 The EEG and eye-tracking studies contrasted obvious and borderline anomalies embedded in sentence pair structures or short paragraphs ( Daneman et al. 2007 ;  Bohan and Sanford 2008 ;  Sanford et al. 2011 ;  Bohan et al. 2012 ;  Tune et al. 2014 ). The results of these studies have provided important insights into the time course of semantic processing in context but they only allow limited conclusions about the underlying neural circuitry. 
 Thus, given the scarcity of functional neuroimaging studies focused on the question of how the brain accomplishes the interpretation of complex scenarios including the integration of multiple events and the evaluation of the derived global message against real-world knowledge, the neural mechanisms and circuitry involved in implementing these processes remain insufficiently characterized. Our study attempts to close this gap by taking advantage of the properties of contextually embedded borderline anomalies that cannot be categorized as anomalous based on a lack of semantic priming and therefore require a thorough semantic analysis and the application of world knowledge. As such, they provide a novel way of studying the brain mechanisms that support ecological language comprehension. 
 
 1.1 The present study 
 In the present study we set out to investigate the neuroanatomical substrates underlying the use of semantic knowledge to understanding sentences in context, with a particular focus on the interpretation of scenarios that call for extensive evaluation. More precisely, we were interested in identifying the set of brain regions and mechanistic principles implicated in the application of real-world event knowledge to sentence interpretation, i.e., the assessment of whether a described relation between events and their respective participants is consistent with expectations derived from previous experience. Further, we aimed to tease apart changes in brain activity that are the result of high-level comprehension processes from those that reflect processes at lower levels, e.g., effects of lexical-semantic associations. Finally, we aimed to address these issues in a way that would provide group-level results of high anatomical precision. 
 The experimental design and analysis of the present study address our specific goals in the following ways. We contrasted two different types of scenarios that were created by embedding borderline anomalies and easy (obvious) anomalies in a richer context. Each anomalous sentence was paired with a closely matched non-anomalous control sentence, thus yielding a 2×2 design with factors Plausibility (anomalous vs. non-anomalous) and Scenario Type (borderline vs. easy). Our study design builds on the logic that plausible, non-anomalous scenarios are more likely to confirm our expectations, whereas implausible, anomalous scenarios correspond less closely to our beliefs and assumptions about the world. The use of borderline anomalies is key to our goal of tapping into the mechanisms implementing high-level comprehension processes, since, in contrast to easy-to-detect anomalies, they cannot be classified as being anomalous simply based on the poor semantic fit of a single word or phrase and the broader semantic context. This specific design has been adapted from that successfully employed in several EEG studies ( Tune et al. 2014 ;  Sanford et al., 2011 ). 
 Based on results from previous EEG and eye-tracking studies suggesting that detected and non-detected trials are processed differently ( Bohan and Sanford 2008 ;  Sanford et al. 2011 ;  Bohan et al. 2012 ;  Tune et al. 2014 ), we used a plausibility judgment task that would allow us to distinguish these trials from one another. Finally, to obtain group-level results of high anatomical precision, we used a surface-based approach in conjunction with statistical analyses at the levels of both whole brain and anatomically defined regions of interest (ROIs). 
 For the regional analyses, we focused on the left and right superior and middle temporal cortices, inferior parietal lobule, prefrontal, and insular cortices as these brain areas are frequently found to be sensitive to semantic manipulations at different levels of language comprehension (for reviews see  Van Petten and Luka 2006 ;  Vigneau et al. 2006 ;  Lau et al. 2008 ;  Binder et al. 2009 ;  Price 2010 ;  Binder and Desai 2011 ) and are thought to play key roles in the ventral and dorsal functional streams of auditory language processing ( Hickok and Poeppel 2007 ;  Saur et al. 2008 ;  Friederici 2009 ;  2012 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2013 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky et al. 2015 ). 
 We had the following four specific hypotheses. First, since scenario interpretation requires both the convergence of partly modality-specific information about entities and events and its integration into more complex patterns in space and time ( Damasio 1989 ;  Damasio et al. 2004 ), we expected involvement of both modal and supramodal regions in the temporal and inferior parietal lobes. 
 Second, with regard to the comparison of borderline and easy anomalies, we assumed that the former would draw more strongly on multimodal regions in the posterior middle temporal gyrus, and more importantly, the inferior parietal lobule, as the interpretation and detection of borderline anomalies rely on an extensive analysis and application of event knowledge. The angular and supramarginal gyri of the IPL are thought to be involved in the combination and manipulation of high-order configuration of entities and actions set in time and space ( Binder et al. 2009 ), which is why we expected these regions to be particularly sensitive to scenarios describing conceivable but nevertheless unexpected events. 
 Third, we expected easy anomalies to rely more on regions of the anterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus and sulcus, which have lower multimodal and integrative roles and appear to be involved in the gradual abstraction within one given modality. The latter hypothesis is based on the assumption that superior temporal regions forming part of the ventral stream of auditory language processing engage in the mapping of spectro-temporal patterns to increasingly complex auditory objects that encode concepts of varying complexity as well as associations between these concepts ( Rauschecker and Scott 2009 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2013 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky et al. 2015 ). 
 Fourth, we expected certain brain responses to be engendered by the plausibility judgment task itself. Recall that the use of a behavioral task is essential to the design of our study since the classification of borderline anomalies into detected and non-detected trials would not be possible otherwise. In accordance with accounts that propose a domain general role of the left IFG in the implementation of cognitive control mechanisms ( Thompson-Schill et al. 1997 ;  Miller and Cohen 2001 ;  Thompson-Schill et al. 2005 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2013 ), we suggest that this region should show differential degrees of activation as a function of classification difficulty across the critical sentence conditions in our study. Based on previous results, we expect a similar response profile – i.e. higher activation with higher decision uncertainty – for left frontal regions adjacent to the IFG, and particularly the anterior insula and deep frontal operculum ( Grewe et al., 2005 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, Schlesewsky, & von Cramon, 2009 ). With respect to the decision-making processes leading up to the behavioral responses, we hypothesized that the classification of easy anomalies would be least demanding, while the degree of uncertainty should be higher for the plausible, easy-type control stimuli. In contrast to the easy anomalies, in which the non-fitting critical word provides a clear cue that the sentence is anomalous, the easy control stimuli do not include a clear cue for a judgment one way or the other. Finally, as the borderline stimuli are by definition difficult to classify as anomalous or non-anomalous, we expect that the decision uncertainty will be most pronounced for these sentences. 
 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Twenty-two healthy, right-handed (indicated by an adapted German version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory; ( Oldfield 1971 ), monolingually raised, native speakers of German participated in the fMRI study (11 women, mean age 24.5, range 20-30). All participants were recruited at the University of Marburg. They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no known neurological, psychiatric or auditory disorders. Prior to the scanning session, participants were screened to ensure that they met all safety and participation requirements and they gave written informed consent. Four participants had to be excluded: two due to excessive motion, one due to structural abnormalities and one because of an incomplete functional run. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Medical Faculty at the University of Marburg. 
 
 
 2.2 Materials 
 The materials of the present study were identical to those used in the German ERP experiments reported in  Tune et al. (2014) . They were a translated and adapted version of the English stimuli employed in an ERP study by  Sanford et al. (2011) . The experimental conditions (see  Table 1  for examples) belonged to two types of semantic violations: hard to detect (“borderline”) anomalies and more classic easy to detect anomalies (i.e., words with a poor fit to the context). Prior to the experiment, the materials were pre-tested in two separate questionnaire studies. The first study (n=70) ensured that borderline anomalies were reliably missed some of the time while easy anomalies were detected at least 95% of the time. The detection rates were 68.1 % (sd: 26.2%) for borderline anomalies and 98.4 % (sd: 8.6%) for easy anomalies. The second study (n=20) asked participants to rate the contextual fit of the anomaly-inducing word to the described scenario on a 7-point Likert scale. The ratings indicated a significantly better contextual fit for borderline anomalies compared to easy anomalies (mean ratings: 5.02 and 2.20;  t (210.201)=18.54,  p <0.0001). 1 
 In total, 180 stimulus sets consisting of an anomalous condition and a corresponding congruent control condition were constructed, 120 pairs for the borderline anomalies and 60 pairs for the easy to detect anomalies. All stimuli were composed of two semantically connected sentences, with the first sentence providing context, and a second, critical sentence, containing a target word that determined whether the sentence was semantically anomalous or not. All critical sentences consisted of 17 words. In the following, the different layouts will be described on the basis of German and English examples listed in  Table 1 . 
 
 Borderline anomalies 
 In the borderline anomaly condition, the second sentence was a thematic continuation of the context sentence and contained two alternative local context words (highlighted in italics in  Table 1 ) and the critical target word (set in bold print in  Table 1 ). The target word was always in the 13th word position and separated by five words from the contextual manipulation. It is the relation between local context word/phrase and target word that determines whether the latter is perceived to be anomalous. However, borderline anomalies are often missed because the target word is highly associated semantically to the overall context, despite its implausibility for the meaning of the particular sentence in which it appears. 
 
 
 Easy to detect anomalies 
 Sixty sets of easy to detect anomaly sentences were used. These sentence pairs were constructed in a similar manner to the borderline anomalies, but the internal structure of the critical sentences was less standardized because in these cases the anomaly is elicited by a single word with a very poor fit to both local and global context. The critical words (highlighted in bold print in  Table 1 ) appeared in different positions across stimulus sentences. This ensured that participants had to pay close attention to the whole sentence and could not predict the critical region in the stimuli presented. 
 The duration of context sentences across conditions ranged from 3.5 to 10.5s (mean = 5.4s ±1.5s), while the critical sentence had a more standardized length with a mean of 6.4s (± 0.8s) and a range of 5-8.5s. Auditory stimuli were recorded by a female native speaker of German who read the sentences with clear and natural intonation. To ensure equal volume levels, the stimuli were normalized digitally. On average, the target word was presented 4.0s (± 0.64s) after sentence onset in borderline anomaly sentences and 3.73s (± 1.3s) in easy to detect anomaly sentences. 
 The stimuli were distributed across eight lists, each composed of 180 sentence pairs, consisting of 120 borderline and 60 poor fit stimuli. While poor fit stimuli were divided evenly, of the 120 borderline items, 90 contained an anomaly and the remaining 30 were plausible controls. We employed this asymmetrical design, adopted from  Sanford et al. (2011) , to obtain a similar number of trials for each of the three experimental conditions (detected anomalies, missed anomalies, plausible controls) for the analysis. Within a final list, an item was presented as either an anomalous or control condition, while across all lists, each condition of a stimulus pair was presented at least once. This was accomplished by rotating the borderline materials over four lists with 120 stimuli each. Poor fit materials were divided into two lists consisting of 60 stimuli. Merging each borderline list with each poor fit list yielded the eight final lists. The order of stimuli was then pseudo-randomized. 
 
 
 
 2.3 Procedure 
 Prior to the imaging experiment, participants performed a short training session. Stimuli used for training purposes were not part of the imaging experiment. In the experimental sessions, participants listened to the auditory stimuli via MRI compatible noise-cancelling headphones. Visual cues were displayed on a monitor placed at the rear of the scanner and viewed by the participants via a mirror attached to the head coil. Each trial started with the presentation of a fixation cross in the center of the screen, followed by the auditory presentation of the context and critical sentence. After the second sentence had ended, the fixation cross was replaced by an answer screen that served as a cue for the participants to indicate via button press using their right index and middle finger whether they had detected an anomaly. A schematic description of this paradigm is shown in  Figure 1 . In order to avoid anticipatory motor response preparation following the processing of the critical word, we did not employ a fixed assignment of response buttons to the “plausible” and “implausible” categorizations per participant. Rather, the assignment of the left and right buttons to “plausible” and “implausible” responses varied on a trial-by-trial basis and was signaled by two smiley faces (one laughing and one frowning). Across each session, the assignment of the “plausible” and “implausible” categories to the left and right buttons was counterbalanced. The maximal response time was set to 2000ms. Onset and timing of stimuli in the event-related design was optimized for efficiency by introducing short jittered rest periods between the presentation of the context and critical sentence, as well as between the offset of the critical sentence and the presentation of the response screen and after the 2000ms response interval and the beginning of the next trial. Jittered rest intervals had a mean duration of 1020ms (± 622ms) and a range of 500-3000ms. Each participant was presented with one of the eight lists that were split into six 10-minute runs of 30 trials each. Between each pair of experimental runs, we collected resting state data for one minute. 
 
 
 2.4 fMRI data acquisition 
 Functional imaging was performed on a 3T MR Magnetom, Tim Trio scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen Germany). Twenty-nine axial slices were acquired using a T2-weighted gradient-echo echo-planar image (EPI) sequence optimized for blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) effects (TR = 1500ms, TE = 21ms, flip angle = 71°, slice thickness = 4mm, in-plane resolution = 3.8 × 3.8mm, 1mm gap, FOV = 240mm, matrix dimension = 64 × 64). Four dummy scans recorded at the beginning of the functional sequence were discarded to account for magnetization stabilization effects. A total of 2750 functional images were acquired. In addition, a high-resolution anatomical image was collected for each participant using a T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence (TR = 1900ms, TE = 2.52ms, flip angle = 9°, FOV = 256mm, 176 slices, voxel size = 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0mm). 
 
 
 2.5 fMRI data analysis 
 Analysis of the neuroimaging data was conducted using Analysis of Functional Neuroimages / Surface Mapping (AFNI/SUMA;  http://afni.nimh.nih.gov ;  Cox 1996 ;  2012 ;  Saad and Reynolds 2012 ) and Freesurfer software packages ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu ;  Dale et al. 1999 ;  Fischl 1999 ;  2004 ). The ROI analysis was carried out using the statistical software package R ( http://www.R-project.org ;  R Core Team 2014 ). 
 
 2.5.1 Pre-processing 
 All functional time series were subjected to the following pre-processing steps in the native volume domain: de-spiking, slice-timing correction, mean normalization, three-dimensional affine motion correction using a weighted linear least squares cost function for the alignment of three translational (x,y,z) and three rotational (pitch, roll, yaw) parameters, registration to the middle image of the functional run and to the structural image. Time points that showed excessive motion (> 1mm) were censored and subsequently excluded from regression analysis. 
 
 
 2.5.2 Single subject analysis 
 To assess the degree of event-related BOLD activity against an implicit resting baseline consisting of all jittered intervals plus the resting state data collected between runs, each voxel's time series was analyzed by multiple linear regression analysis. To model the hemodynamic response (HDR), we used fixed-shape impulse response functions (IRF) for context sentences and behavioral responses and data-driven deconvolution of the HDR for target sentences. AFNI's piecewise linear spline method allows the temporal shape of the response model to vary across voxels and thus provides a more accurate and flexible estimate of the brain response. Since we were primarily interested in the brain's response to target sentences, context sentences and behavioral response intervals were each collapsed across conditions and included in the analysis as single regressors. Context sentences showed substantial variation in length, this regressor was therefore convolved with a duration modulated square wave function by specifying onset and duration of each trial, while the regressor modeling the response was convolved with a fixed length (2s) square wave function. Depending on the behavioral response, target sentences were divided into five conditions of interest ( borderline detected, borderline non-detected, borderline control, easy detected, easy control ) and a condition of no interest that included false rejections and false alarm responses. The HDR to each target sentence condition was deconvolved by linear interpolation using AFNI's tent basis function. The HDR was modeled from the onset of the target sentence for a period of 21s to account for the initial delay and to cover the entire duration of the stimulus as well any ongoing processing after the end of the sentence. Each tent spanned an interval of 1.5s matching the length of a single volume acquisition (which equals the TR in this case). Mean, linear and quadratic trend components along with the six parameters obtained from the spatial alignment procedure were included as nuisance regressors. Finally, to further minimize the influence of nuisance variance unlikely to reflect signal of interest, we regressed out signal from both lateral ventricles and bilateral white matter ( Fox 2005 ;  Dick et al. 2010 ). 
 The analysis resulted in regression weights (reflecting percent signal change relative to the implicit resting baseline) along with an associated t statistic assessing their reliability. For regressors modeled with a fixed shape impulse response function (IRF), this first-level single-subject analysis resulted in individual regression coefficients per voxel and condition, while the data-driven, deconvolution analysis used for target sentences yielded an estimated HDR shape described by 15 regression coefficients per voxel and condition. All subsequent analyses used the average of the regression coefficients modeling the brain response in the time-window of 3-12s post stimulus onset. The choice of this time window respects the initial delay in the hemodynamic response and accounts for the entire duration of the target sentence. 
 In preparation for second-level group analysis, we used Freesurfer to create two-dimensional surface models from each participant's high-resolution anatomical scan. White and grey matter of the anatomical volumes were automatically segmented, the results inspected and manually improved when needed, separate cortical surfaces for each hemisphere were inflated and brought into registry with a common template of average gyral and sulcal folding ( Dale et al. 1999 ;  Fischl 1999 ;  Fischl et al. 1999 ). Using SUMA, the individual surface models were then imported into the AFNI three-dimensional space and regression coefficients obtained from first-level analysis were interpolated from the three-dimensional volume domain to the two-dimensional surface model. To decrease spatial noise due to inter-individual variation, functional data were smoothed on the surface using a 6mm full width at half maximum (FWHM) heat kernel ( Chung et al. 2005 ). Finally, for display purposes an average of all 18 individual cortical surface representations was created using Freesurfer. 
 
 
 2.5.3 Region of interest group analysis 
 For this analysis, we chose a set of 14 anatomically defined cortical regions per hemisphere using the automated parcellation scheme implemented in Freesurfer ( Fischl 2004 ;  Destrieux et al. 2010 ). The parcellation procedure that yields 74 cortical regions per hemisphere uses an algorithm based on macroanatomical landmarks that follow the anatomical conventions and nomenclature described by  Duvernoy (1999) . As we were mostly interested in examining the neural responses of regions that are i) situated along the ventral and dorsal streams of auditory language processing and ii) known to be sensitive to semantic manipulations in language stimuli, we focused on a set of bilateral frontal, temporal and inferior parietal regions, and in line with established practices in our lab, manually subdivided some of them into smaller sub-regions known to show distinct structural connectivity profiles ( Dick et al. 2009 ;  2012 ;  Mashal et al. 2012 ). A detailed definition of all ROIs is given in  Table 2 . Frontal regions encompassed the anterior insula (INSa), pars opercularis (IFG_Op), triangularis (IFG_Tr) and orbitalis (IFG_Orb) of the inferior frontal gyrus, while inferior parietal regions included the supramarginal (SMG) and angular gyri (AG). For the temporal regions, we subdivided the lateral superior temporal gyrus into an anterior (STGa) and a posterior portion (STGp) using a vertical plane drawn from the anterior tip of the transverse temporal gyrus as the boundary. The transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus were combined to form one region describing the primary auditory cortex (AUD). Using the same delimiting landmark as the STG, the superior temporal sulcus was partitioned into an anterior and a posterior portion that were subsequently further subdivided into their respective upper and lower banks with the fundus of the sulcus serving as boundary. This yielded four superior temporal regions per hemisphere (STSa_lower, STSa_upper, STSp_lower, STSp_upper). Lastly, we included the posterior middle temporal gyrus (MTGp) that was delimited from the anterior segment of the gyrus by the same vertical plane described above. All sub-regions were defined in reference to known differences in structural connectivity gleaned from non-human primate studies ( Jones and Powell 1970 ;  Seltzer and Pandya 1978 ;  Petrides and Pandya 1984 ;  Matelli et al. 1986 ;  Seltzer and Pandya 1989 ;  1994 ;  Gloor 1997 ;  Romanski et al. 1999 ;  Rizzolatti and Matelli 2003 ;  Schmahmann et al. 2007 ). 
 At the level of the single subject, we extracted mean beta values per region and experimental condition focusing only on correctly classified trials ( borderline detected, borderline control, easy detected, easy control ). At the group-level, we then ran repeated-measures ANOVAs including the factors Scenario Type (borderline vs. easy) and Plausibility (anomalous vs. non-anomalous) across all ROIs and proceeded by resolving significant interactions by Scenario Type. To correct for multiple comparisons across ROIs we applied an FDR procedure ( Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ;  Genovese et al. 2002 ). 
 
 
 2.5.4 Whole-brain group analysis 
 A mixed effects (repeated-measures) analysis of variance (ANOVA) with CONDITION (5) as a fixed factor and PARTICIPANT (18) as a random factor was performed on a vertex-by-vertex basis using the normalized beta weights from each individual's regression model as the dependent variable. Simple contrasts against the resting baseline were obtained for each condition. Following the results of the ROI analysis that revealed robust and widespread differences between the two scenario types (see Results section), we decided to restrict the exploratory whole-brain contrasts to comparisons within each type ( borderline detected  versus  borderline control  and  easy detected  versus  easy control ) 2 . A Monte Carlo simulation approach (cf  Forman et al. 1995 ) was used to identify significant clusters of activated vertices, with an individual vertex threshold of p < 0.001 for simple contrasts against resting baseline and p < 0.01 for comparisons among conditions, and a family-wise error (FWE) correction at the whole-brain level at p < 0.05. The difference in individual vertex thresholds is motivated by results obtained from signal-to-noise analyses that indicate a power advantage for contrasts against baseline compared to contrasts between conditions ( Dick et al. 2009 ). Given the individual vertex thresholds, the Monte Carlo simulation determined a required minimum cluster size of 83 nodes for simple contrasts and 234 nodes for contrasts between conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 3 Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral results 
 Analysis of the behavioral data showed that the detection rate for borderline anomalies was 78.1% (± 8.5%), while easy to detect anomalies were correctly judged as implausible at a rate of 96.8% (± 4.6%). Sentences without anomalies were correctly judged as plausible at a rate of 76.9% (± 11.5%) for borderline and 91.1% (± 4.4) for easy scenarios. 
 
 
 3.2 Neuroimaging results 
 
 3.2.1 Whole brain comparisons against baseline 
 We first computed both increases and decreases in BOLD signal for each of the five conditions with respect to the resting baseline at the level of the whole brain. The results of these analyses are presented in  Figure 2 . All five conditions show signal changes across a large set of activation clusters in the bilateral frontal, temporal and parietal lobes. Even though most of these activation clusters are bilateral, the activation intensity and volume tends to be greater in the left hemisphere. Areas showing an increase in brain activity relative to the baseline include regions of the bilateral lateral and medial frontal cortices, the superior and middle temporal cortices, parts of the left inferior parietal lobe, and the posterior thalamus bilaterally. Although this thalamic activation appears to be in the pulvinar, the chosen surface-based analysis approach does not provide complete or reliable results in areas of subcortical grey matter. To make a more substantiated statement about the role of subcortical structures like the thalamus, amygdala or basal ganglia, a separate analysis that encompasses these regions would be necessary. 
 Frontal activation is most pronounced and widespread in the three borderline conditions with bilateral activation covering large parts of the anterior insula, lateral orbital sulcus, pars opercularis and triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus, the inferior frontal sulcus extending into the middle frontal gyrus, and the medial portion of the superior frontal gyrus. In the temporal lobe, all borderline conditions show a cluster of positive signal change in the left – and in the  borderline detected  condition also the right – superior temporal sulcus that extends into the middle temporal gyrus. In the parietal lobe, all conditions elicited an increase in activity in the left intraparietal sulcus, and for the two conditions involving successful anomaly detection, also in the neighboring left supramarginal gyrus. 
 The examination of negative signal deflections from baseline revealed large clusters centered bilaterally around the middle and posterior portions of the superior temporal lobe that also include portions of the subcentral gyrus and sulcus, the central sulcus and in some cases the inferior portion of the supramarginal gyrus. Additional clusters with higher levels of activity during baseline than during language processing are found in the medial portions of the parietal and occipital lobes bilaterally. In principle, there are at least two possible explanations for the observed negative signal deflections (“deactivation”) from baseline. One explanation relates to the fact that our implicit baseline included longer periods of rest collected between experimental runs. During this time, participants may have engaged in daydreaming or mind-wandering which has been shown to draw on similar cognitive mechanisms and anatomical areas as many semantic tasks ( Binder et al., 1999 ;  Humphreys et al., 2015 ). However, to explain the observed pattern along these lines, one would need to assume that conceptual processing during rest led to higher levels of neural activity than semantic processes underlying scenario comprehension. In the present study, a more likely explanation is that the decrease found in regions of the primary auditory cortex and neighboring areas reflects effects of habituation and concomitant repetition suppression in the BOLD signal. We suggest that these effects are due to the persistent auditory stimulation throughout the entire duration of the trials as context and target sentences were separated only by a short jittered inter-stimulus interval. 3  These findings will not be further addressed in the discussion. 
 
 
 3.2.2 ROI Analysis 
 In the ROI analysis, we examined changes in brain responses in 14 regions per hemisphere with the main goal of identifying brain regions that are preferentially responsive to either borderline or easy anomalous sentences compared to their plausible counterparts, i.e., regions showing an interaction of Plausibility and Scenario Type. In line with our hypotheses, significant interactions were resolved by Scenario Type. In addition, we also wanted to investigate if any of the included ROIs would show higher (or lower) levels of hemodynamic activity for anomalous compared to non-anomalous sentences irrespective of the particular scenario type (main effect Plausibility). The results of the ROI analysis are shown in  Figure 3  below and the effects per region are described in detail in  Table 3 . 
 The most stable pattern revealed by the analysis was a main effect of Scenario Type, reflecting a difference in activation between the two scenario types irrespective of whether or not they contained an anomaly. This effect was found in 22 of the 28 examined regions. Among these regions sensitive to the Scenario Type, three showed an additional and independent main effect of Plausibility: the upper and lower bank of the left anterior STS and the right posterior MTG. In all but one region, the right SMG, the effect reflects higher levels of brain activity for borderline compared to easy target sentences. 
 We found a significant two-way interaction in one left hemisphere regions (AUD) and two right hemisphere regions (INSa and STGp). When resolved by Scenario Type, all regions showed a significant main effect of Plausibility for easy but not for borderline sentences. Finally, the left SMG was the only region with a significant main effect of Plausibility but not Scenario Type. This main effect reflects a relative increase in signal for anomalous versus non-anomalous target sentences of both scenario types. 
 To rule out that the pronounced differences in activation across the two stimulus types were induced by differences in the preceding context sentences, we ran a follow-up analysis in which we split the context sentences based on the categorization of subsequent target sentences and included them as separate regressors in the analysis. Next, we ran comparisons between the two anomalous (borderline detected vs. easy detected) and the two control conditions (borderline control vs. easy control) separately for context and target sentences. The results, depicted in  Figure S1 and S2 of the supplementary materials , clearly show that the extensive differences in brain responses found for the comparisons of target sentences are not mirrored by comparable effects for the context sentences. In fact, little to no differences were revealed by contrasting brain response to context sentences across stimulus types. The contrast of context sentences leading up to easy and borderline anomalies produced a single cluster in the left precentral sulcus. The comparison of contexts preceding plausible control sentences resulted in three clusters, two of which where located in the anterior cingulate gyrus of each hemisphere and one in the marginal branch of the right cingulate sulcus. 
 
 
 3.2.3 Whole brain: Easy detected versus easy control 
 In light of the widespread and pronounced differences between target sentences of the two scenario types, we decided to focus the whole brain analysis on differences between anomalous and non-anomalous target sentences for each scenario type. The results of the contrast of detected easy anomalous and (correctly classified) easy control sentences are shown in  Figure 4  and  Table 4 . At the chosen threshold, we found eight significant clusters in the left hemisphere and nine in the right. Several of the reported clusters fall into regions examined in the ROI analysis and the observed patterns of brain responses are in line with the regional signal averages. The analysis revealed additional clusters along the medial wall of the left and right temporal and parietal lobes as well as the right prefrontal cortex. Notably, all lateral frontal clusters show higher level of BOLD signal for easy control sentences than for easy detected anomalies. 
 
 
 3.2.4 Whole brain: Borderline detected versus borderline control 
 The comparison of detected borderline anomalies with their plausible controls produced a number of significant clusters all of which reflect relatively stronger brain responses for the anomalous sentences. The results are detailed in  Figure 5  and  Table 4 . Again, the analysis of direct contrasts at the whole brain level extends the results of the ROI analysis by revealing differential involvements of several medial wall structures. Here, detected borderline anomalies elicited stronger responses than correctly classified control sentences in the left anterior cingulate cortex, the right amygdala and both thalami. Furthermore, we found two distinct clusters in the anterior and posterior part of the superior supramarginal gyrus, which provides additional detail to the pattern observed in the ROI analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 The aim of the present study was to shed light on how the brain accomplishes the comprehension of multiple event scenarios by using easy and borderline anomaly stimuli and their plausible counterparts. The most striking finding was unexpected, i.e., widespread and robust differences between the two scenario types that were independent of their plausibility. Since this main effect is independent of the effects of interests, i.e., plausibility effects and their modulation across the two scenario types, the discussion will only briefly touch upon this finding. Given the considerable overlap in the pattern of results revealed by whole brain direct contrasts and the regional analysis, the discussion will mostly focus on the findings of the more detailed two-factor ROI analysis. 
 
 Scenario comprehension engages a bilateral frontal-temporal-parietal network 
 For the comparison against baseline, we found that analysis and interpretation of all stimulus types involved a large set of brain regions in the frontal, temporal and inferior parietal lobes. In contrast to the results of single sentence studies (e.g.,  Ni et al. 2000 ;  Newman et al. 2001 ;  Vandenberghe et al. 2002 ;  Friederici et al. 2003 ;  Humphries et al. 2006 ;  2007 ), most of the observed clusters were bilateral, though the activation intensity and volume was found to be slightly greater in the left hemisphere. The quite extensive right hemispheric contribution observed here is in line with a growing body of evidence that supports an important role of the right hemisphere in ecological language comprehension. Virtually all studies of sentence comprehension and discourse comprehension that do not rely on contrasts between highly similar conditions show bilateral activation ( Mazoyer et al. 1993 ;  Indefrey and Cutler 2004 ;  Vigneau et al. 2006 ;  Wilson et al. 2008 ;  Dick et al. 2009 ;  Straube et al. 2009 ;  Dick et al. 2010 ). Various theories have been proposed to account for functional differentiation of the two hemispheres, but suffice it to say that an enormous network of brain activation for ecological language, encompassing many regions in both hemispheres, reflects a very large number of concurrent processes, including those at the level of sounds, words, meaning, grammar, prosody, emotion, inference, memory, and others. 
 
 
 Familiarity as a potential influence on scenario comprehension 
 The ROI analysis revealed an increase in BOLD signal for borderline compared to easy stimuli in virtually all ROIs (expect for the left SMG and right AG and IFG_Op). However, it seems highly unlikely that it was caused by differences in specific low-level stimulus or design properties. Target sentences were matched for overall length as well as length and frequency of the critical word and our follow-up analysis showed that the observed differences in easy and borderline target sentences could not be attributed to the preceding context sentences. Furthermore, based on the results of the same analysis, it seems unlikely that the effect is driven by a difference in the number of trials per stimulus type. As described in the results section and shown in  Figures S1 and S2 , both contrasts yield the same robust effect despite the fact that trials numbers were much more similar for the contrast of control sentences across stimulus types. 4 
 We reasoned  post hoc  that the widespread differences were most likely triggered by a factor that would impact the processes underlying scenario processing within a large distributed network. In interpreting scenarios, the particular components (e.g., people, objects, events and their associated modality-specific and/or modality-independent information) need to be bound together at different levels of abstraction in order to arrive at the global meaning of the received input. We hypothesized that participants were more familiar with the everyday events described in easy scenarios than with the predominantly non-recurring events described in borderline scenarios, and that the degree of familiarity has implications for how the brain accomplishes scenario comprehension. 5 
 
 
 Scenario processing is implemented by a hierarchically organized neural architecture 
 One of our specific aims was to tease apart the processing of low-level lexical-semantic mismatches in easy anomalies and message-level scenario comprehension necessary for successful detection of borderline anomalies. Following the idea of a hierarchically organized neural architecture implementing anterior ventral and posterior dorsal streams of auditory language processing ( Rauschecker and Scott 2009 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2013 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky et al. 2015 ), we hypothesized that easy anomalies would rely primarily on processing in early association areas of the ventral stream in the anterior superior temporal lobe, whereas borderline anomalies would engage higher-order association cortices in the dorsal pathways of the posterior temporal and inferior parietal lobes. We found an interaction of Scenario Type and Plausibility in a number of regions, including the left primary auditory cortex and right posterior STG. In these regions, the plausibility effect was observable for the easy anomalies but not for the borderline anomalies relative to the control conditions. The presence of plausibility effects for easy but not borderline anomalies has previously been found using EEG. While the processing of easy stimuli compared to controls elicits strong N400 effects, depending on the tested language and task settings, the N400 effect for detected borderline anomalies compared to controls is greatly reduced and in some cases even completely absent ( Sanford et al. 2011 ;  Bohan et al. 2012 ;  Tune et al. 2014 ). 
 Contrary to our hypothesis, we did not find that the processing of easy anomalies preferentially engaged portions of the anterior superior temporal lobe. Nevertheless, the effects of plausibility for easy anomalies were mostly found in primary auditory cortex and adjacent association cortices in the superior temporal lobe, thus lending some support to the idea of hierarchical processing. The fact that we see these effects in early auditory regions suggest that they may reflect expectation mismatches at a sensory level due to the high degree of predictability for the correct target word. This assumption is supported by a number of observations: The majority of sentences with easy to detect anomalies described very general, everyday occurrences such as the following example (Original in German; English translation given):
 Fred was feeling really tired when he got home. All he wanted was to sleep after he closed his bedroom curtains and curled up in  bed/crayons . 
 In this example, the context renders the correct sentence final word  bed  highly predictable. In fact, as revealed by a sentence completion task, target words of easy scenarios show higher cloze probability rates than those of borderline scenarios ( Heinen, 2013 ; unpublished B.A. Thesis). Therefore, it could be argued that the relatively high expectation for a specific continuation led to a predictability down to the level of sensory representations. This is in line with the notion of predictive coding via hierarchically organized internal models, serving to link more abstract predictions with concrete predictions at a sensory level ( Friston and Kiebel 2009 ;  Friston 2012 ; for an application to higher-order language see  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky et al. 2015 ). The stronger activity observed for anomalous items would thus reflect the mismatch between a context-based expectation pertaining the physical form of a stimulus and the effectively encountered input. Evidence for this assumption stems from a series of visual MEG studies that showed that violation of form-related predictions led to an increased amplitude of an early event-related component localized in the visual cortex ( Dikker et al. 2009 ;  2010 ;  Dikker and Pylkkänen 2011 ). These results demonstrate that context-based predictions that pertain to the physical form of future input can have an impact even on the earliest sensory processing of words. 
 
 
 Contributions of temporal and parietal higher-order association areas to the processing of message-level plausibility 
 The processing of meaning requires the orchestration of a multitude of neural computations even for the simplest tasks such as object recognition and naming. Therefore, there can be no doubt that semantic analysis in more ecologically valid contexts such as scenario comprehension builds on a distributed network of regions acting in concert. In such a large-scale network, higher-order multimodal association cortices are assumed play an important role in the convergence of information across different scales, modalities and systems. The following three brain regions are frequently discussed as critical components in the neural circuitry that implements conceptual processing in language: the anterior temporal lobe, the middle temporal gyrus, and the inferior parietal lobule ( Stowe et al. 2005 ;  Binder et al. 2009 ;  Visser et al. 2010 ;  Binder and Desai 2011 ;  Hoffman et al. 2012 ;  Noonan et al. 2013 ;  Seghier 2013 ). 
 The results of our ROI analysis found evidence for involvement of all three regions in the analysis of scenario plausibility. More specifically, we observed plausibility effects for the upper and lower banks of the left anterior STS, the left supramarginal gyrus, and the right posterior MTG. The left supramarginal gyrus was the only ROI that showed a main effect of Plausibility without an effect of Scenario Type, i.e., stronger responses to detected anomalies (easy and borderline) than to plausible control sentences. The direct contrasts between conditions performed at the whole brain level extend these findings by revealing increased BOLD signal in the right supramarginal gyrus and angular gyrus for easy anomalies compared to control sentences. 
 A detailed review of the literature on the role of all three regions in the processing of semantic information in linguistic contexts is beyond the scope of this discussion. We will thus focus on the most robust and novel result - the involvement of the supramarginal gyri in both hemispheres (and the angular gyrus of the right hemisphere) – and only briefly address the contributions of anterior and middle temporal cortices as part of a distributed semantic network. 
 
 Inferior parietal lobule 
 The inferior parietal lobule, encompassing the supramarginal and angular gyri, is a functionally heterogeneous brain region consistently implicated in neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies of semantic processing ( Ni et al. 2000 ;  Friederici et al. 2003 ;  Newman et al. 2003 ;  Humphries et al. 2006 ;  2007 ;  Lau et al. 2008 ;  Binder et al. 2009 ;  Menenti et al. 2009 ;  Binder and Desai 2011 ). The observed responses of the two inferior parietal sub-regions to the differing degree of message-level plausibility fits well with the following assumption that Binder et al. (2009, p. 2776) made on the basis of their extensive meta-analysis on semantic processing:
 “Considering these various lines of evidence, we propose that the AG occupies a position at the top of a processing hierarchy underlying concept retrieval and conceptual integration. Though it is involved in all aspects of semantic processing, it may play a particular role in behaviors requiring fluent conceptual combination, such as sentence comprehension, discourse, problem solving, and planning.” 
 Notably, several of the clusters reported in this meta-analysis extended into the adjacent posterior portion of the SMG (which corresponds most closely to the areas PFG and PF in the monkey; ( Pandya and Seltzer 1982 ), similar to the location the significant clusters in our whole-brain analysis. Due to its strategic location in the heteromodal parietal association cortex and its rich structural and functional connectivity, the inferior parietal lobule is considered a multimodal association area, with functional characterizations as “convergence zone” ( Damasio, 1989 ) or “hub” for cross-modal integration ( Joseph 1982 ;  Hagmann et al. 2008 ;  Tomasi and Volkow 2011 ) that plays a role in a number of core processes, such as categorization of events, access to semantic representations, fact retrieval and attention shifting ( Seghier 2013 ). This perspective is in line with the processing demands imposed by anomalous sentences embedded in context and more specifically with hard to detect anomalies that call for a more extensive analysis and application of world knowledge and for which we observed two distinct clusters in the SMG at the whole-brain level. 
 Another explanation for the increased engagement of the supramarginal gyri in the processing of detected anomalies relative to control sentences lies in accounts on task- and attention-related processes ( Shulman et al. 2003 ;  Corbetta et al. 2008 ;  Kristensen et al. 2013 ).  Shulman and colleagues (2003)  found sustained “deactivation” (negative deflection from baseline during task compared to rest) in the temporal-parietal region bilaterally during periods in which attention was strongly focused on the search for a behaviorally relevant target stimulus until a significant target had been detected. The authors argue that suppression of activity in the ventral attention network acts as a filter to protect the attention system from distractions caused by irrelevant stimuli and thus improves task performance. In the present task environment that emphasized the detection of anomalies, the attenuation of this negative deflection observed for semantic anomalies of both types could therefore indicate that detection of an anomaly has taken place, while the usual pattern for control sentences could point to a prolonged search for a relevant target. 
 Note that the suggested contributions of both inferior parietal lobules to attention-related or conceptual processes are not necessarily mutually exclusive as the anatomical heterogeneity and close proximity to several neural pathways of this region highlight the possibility of several functionally distinct sub-regions and their participation in a variety of different neural computations. However, more work will be required to disentangle and determine the precise contributions of the left and right SMG and AG to the implementation of these (and other) processes. 
 
 
 Anterior temporal lobe and posterior middle temporal gyrus 
 There is a growing body of evidence encompassing both functional neuroimaging and neuropsychological findings that consistently implicate the middle temporal gyrus – and more specifically its left posterior portion – and various parts of the bilateral anterior temporal lobe in processes of multimodal convergence and conceptual combinatorics ( Martin 2007 ;  Binder et al. 2009 ;  Visser et al. 2010 ;  2012 ;  Binder and Desai 2011 ;  Noonan et al. 2013 ). Both regions are defined as higher-order association cortices based on their rich structural connectivity: The lateral anterior temporal lobe receives inputs from three different sensory systems (auditory, visual, olfactory) and is tightly connected to limbic and paralimbic regions ( Olson et al. 2007 ). The posterior MTG lies at the confluence of several major white matter pathways including direct and indirect segments of the arcuate fasciculus (AF), the inferior occipito-frontal fasciculus (IOFF), and the inferior and medial longitudinal fasciculus (ILF; MLF). The posterior MTG is connected to the angular gyrus via short fibers of the indirect segment of the AF and to anterior parts of the superior temporal lobes via the MLF ( Buckner et al. 2009 ;  Turken and Dronkers 2011 ). The functional relevance of these connections as part of a neural circuit underlying conceptual processing is supported by the results of recent studies examining functional connectivity during task and rest, as well as by detailed meta-analyses ( Simmons et al. 2010 ;  de Zubicaray et al. 2011 ;  Visser et al. 2012 ;  Noonan et al. 2013 ;  Hurley et al. 2015 ). The fact that the discussed regions in the temporal and inferior parietal lobule appear to be functionally connected and show similar response profiles to semantic manipulations, however, does not entail that their specific contributions to the processing of semantic information are the same. Examining the differences in their structural and functional connections with other brain regions and systems can provide valuable information for conclusions about their respective roles within a common network. Anterior temporal regions, for example, have been linked to encoding emotional and social aspects of semantic memory based to their connections to the limbic system ( Olson et al. 2007 ;  Simmons et al. 2010 ). The posterior MTG, on the other hand, has been suggested to participate in mechanisms of controlled semantic retrieval in light of its frequent coactivation with the left IFG in tasks requiring semantic selection and control ( Whitney, Jefferies, et al. 2011 ;  Whitney, Kirk, et al. 2011 ;  Dick et al. 2012 ;  Noonan et al. 2013 ). 
 Most of these proposals are based on results from strictly controlled experimental designs of simple verbal and non-verbal stimuli such as single words, phrases or pictures. The present study provides additional and converging evidence to the emerging picture of a distributed network supporting conceptual processing by including results from high-level language comprehension. We used semantically complex stimuli that require transfer and convergence of information along different modalities and scales and found support for the involvement of cortical hubs in the anterior and middle temporal lobe. The challenge for future research lies not only in more precisely identifying the respective components of the network based on structural and functional connectivity during task and rest, but also in uncovering the basic mechanistic principles of information transfer and convergence, as well as their dynamic, contextual adaptions. 
 
 
 
 Task-related effects in the prefrontal cortex and the anterior insula 
 Our analyses revealed distinct levels of BOLD activation across stimulus types as well as for detected anomalies compared to control sentences in several prefrontal regions and in the anterior insula. We argue that the observed modulation of neural responses can be linked to the use of an overt plausibility judgment task and to distinct contributions of these brain regions in the implementation of goal-directed behavior. 
 The effects found in the ROI and whole-brain analysis for the anterior insula are particularly interesting as they show stronger responses to control than to anomalous scenarios of the easy type. We suggest that these findings reflect the varying degree of uncertainty associated with arriving at a final decision for the plausibility judgment ( Bornkessel-Schlesewsky et al. 2009 ;  Chang et al. 2013 ). Why might easy control sentences be more difficult to judge than sentences with easy to detect anomalies? Recall that the different types of sentences were presented in pseudorandom order and required an overt decision. Sentences with easy to detect anomalies can be quickly and easily categorized as anomalous upon encountering the critical word, whereas sentences with a hard to detect anomaly or no anomaly at all both require more extensive and complete processing. This assumption is corroborated by the behavioral results: participants were most accurate in judging easy anomalies, while the accuracy rate was considerably lower for easy control stimuli and lowest for borderline stimuli. Note that only correctly judged control sentences were included in the analysis. 
 The role of (left) prefrontal areas, particularly the inferior frontal gyrus, in language processing is a topic of intense debate. At the core of this debate lies the question whether these regions are involved in language-specific operations or whether their contributions to language processing reflect domain general executive functions ( Thompson-Schill et al. 1997 ;  Stowe et al. 1998 ;  Miller and Cohen 2001 ;  Stowe et al. 2005 ;  Thompson-Schill et al. 2005 ;  Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and Schlesewsky 2013 ). The results of the present study lend support to the latter perspective: The observed graded levels of hemodynamic activity across the four critical conditions that mirror the relative ease or difficulty of decision making in these cases (as evidenced by the behavioral results). Moreover, the results cannot be explained by accounts assuming a role of the prefrontal cortex in operations such as semantic unification ( Hagoort 2005 ;  2014 ) since they would predict generally higher levels of activation for anomalous compared to non-anomalous sentences as unification would be more effortful for the former. As such, both prefrontal cortex and anterior insula appear to be engaged in goal-directed behavior as required by the experimental task. However, we argue that prefrontal regions are engaged in very general mechanisms of cognitive control, whereas the (anterior) insula serves as an interface between affective processing, higher order cognition and action. 
 
 
 
 5. Conclusion 
 We have shown here that scenario processing draws on a large set of brain areas distributed across the bilateral frontal, temporal and inferior parietal lobes. The present study provides novel evidence for the involvement of the supramarginal gyri of both hemispheres in the comprehension of linguistic stimuli at the level of more complex scenarios. Overall, our pattern of results supports the notion of a processing hierarchy, as the processing of easy anomalies preferentially engaged brain regions close to primary sensory regions involved in lower-level processes. The observed contributions of the anterior temporal and posterior middle temporal lobes and IPL in the processing of plausibility points to a distributed network engaged in ensuring the convergence of information along different dimensions and degrees of abstraction. This contrasts with the view that contextual integration occurs in a single specialized brain region. Lastly, we observed effects in the anterior insular cortex and inferior frontal gyrus bilaterally that seem to correlate with task-related demands of goal-directed behavior. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 When this research was performed, ST and IBS were at the University of Marburg. We would like to thank Sabine Frenzel for her help in the preparation of the stimulus materials, Fiona Weiß for assistance in the data acquisition, Matthew Schiel and Forrest Hippensteel for their support in data analysis, as well as Michael Andric, Anthony Dick, and Salomi Asaridou for helpful discussions. We also thank Jessica Heinen for conducting the sentence completion test. 
 Funding: This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health (grant DC-R01-3378 to SLS) and by a German Academic Exchange Service scholarship awarded to ST. 
 
 
 
 1 
 For further information on the translation of materials and a description of the questionnaire studies, please refer to the details provided in  Tune et al. (2014) . 
 
 
 2 
 In a third contrast, which was not directly related to our specific research questions, we also compared the brain responses to non-detected borderline anomalies and borderline control sentences. The contrast, presented in  Figure S3 of the supplementary materials , revealed only a single bilateral cluster in the ventral part of the central sulcus reflecting higher levels of activity for control sentences compared to non-detected anomalies. Therefore, the results do not provide any evidence for a subconscious detection of the anomaly. 
 
 
 3 
 This interpretation is corroborated by the following observations: The deactivation is most pronounced in the primary auditory cortex and decreases as a function of distance from this area. Moreover, the activation found for preceding context sentences merged across all conditions (data not shown) indicates an increase in signal relative to baseline throughout the primary auditory cortex and neighboring regions, thereby providing evidence for a neural habituation effect specific to auditory processing. 
 
 
 4 
 In fact, in the comparison of borderline control vs. easy control target sentences, more trials were included in the easy condition (due to lower accuracy for borderline sentences), whereas the opposite was true for the contrast of borderline detected vs. easy detected target sentences. 
 
 
 5 
 To further test this hypothesis, we conducted an additional post hoc questionnaire study to assess potential differences in familiarity across the two scenario types using a group of participants comparable to that of the fMRI study. The results show that participants were indeed more familiar with the events described in easy scenarios than with those of borderline scenarios. The details of this study and an extended discussion of the results can be found in the  supplementary materials . 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benjamini 
 Y 
 
 
 Hochberg 
 Y 
 
 
 1995 
 Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing 
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B 
 57 
 289 
 300 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Frost 
 JA 
 
 
 Hammeke 
 TA 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1999 
 Conceptual Processing during the Conscious Resting State: A Functional MRI Study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 11 
 80 
 93 
 9950716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 2011 
 The neurobiology of semantic memory 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 15 
 527 
 536 
 22001867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 2009 
 Where Is the Semantic System? A Critical Review and Meta-Analysis of 120 Functional Neuroimaging Studies 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 2767 
 2796 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bohan 
 J 
 
 
 Leuthold 
 H 
 
 
 Hijikata 
 Y 
 
 
 Sanford 
 AJ 
 
 
 2012 
 The processing of good-fit semantic anomalies: An ERP investigation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 50 
 3174 
 3184 
 22975191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bohan 
 J 
 
 
 Sanford 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Semantic anomalies at the borderline of consciousness: An eye-tracking investigation 
 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 61 
 232 
 239 
 17886160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel-Schlesewsky 
 I 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 2013 
 Reconciling time, space and function: A new dorsal-ventral stream model of sentence comprehension 
 Brain and Language 
 125 
 60 
 76 
 23454075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel-Schlesewsky 
 I 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Cramon von 
 DY 
 
 
 2009 
 Word order and Broca's region: Evidence for a supra-syntactic perspective 
 Brain and Language 
 111 
 125 
 139 
 19853290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bornkessel-Schlesewsky 
 I 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 Rauschecker 
 JP 
 
 
 2015 
 Neurobiological roots of language in primate audition: common computational properties 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 19 
 142 
 150 
 25600585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Talukdar 
 T 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Liu 
 H 
 
 
 Hedden 
 T 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Sperling 
 RA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 KA 
 
 
 2009 
 Cortical Hubs Revealed by Intrinsic Functional Connectivity: Mapping, Assessment of Stability, and Relation to Alzheimer's Disease 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 29 
 1860 
 1873 
 19211893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chang 
 LJ 
 
 
 Yarkoni 
 T 
 
 
 Khaw 
 MW 
 
 
 Sanfey 
 AG 
 
 
 2013 
 Decoding the Role of the Insula in Human Cognition: Functional Parcellation and Large-Scale Reverse Inference 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 23 
 739 
 749 
 22437053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chung 
 MK 
 
 
 Robbins 
 SM 
 
 
 Dalton 
 KM 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 Alexander 
 AL 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 2005 
 Cortical thickness analysis in autism with heat kernel smoothing 
 NeuroImage 
 25 
 1256 
 1265 
 15850743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Patel 
 G 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2008 
 The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: From Environment to Theory of Mind 
 Neuron 
 58 
 306 
 324 
 18466742 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for Analysis and Visualization of Functional Magnetic Resonance Neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 2012 
 AFNI: What a long strange trip it's been 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 743 
 747 
 21889996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical surface-based analysis: I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 1989 
 Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: A systems-level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition 
 Cognition 
 33 
 25 
 62 
 2691184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 H 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Grabowski 
 T 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Damasio 
 A 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural systems behind word and concept retrieval 
 Cognition 
 92 
 179 
 229 
 15037130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daneman 
 M 
 
 
 Lennertz 
 T 
 
 
 Hannon 
 B 
 
 
 2007 
 Shallow semantic processing of text: Evidence from eye movements 
 Language and Cognitive Processes 
 22 
 83 
 105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Zubicaray 
 GI 
 
 
 Rose 
 SE 
 
 
 McMahon 
 KL 
 
 
 2011 
 The structure and connectivity of semantic memory in the healthy older adult brain 
 NeuroImage 
 54 
 1488 
 1494 
 20807579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Destrieux 
 C 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Halgren 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci using standard anatomical nomenclature 
 NeuroImage 
 53 
 1 
 15 
 20547229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Goldin-Meadow 
 S 
 
 
 Hasson 
 U 
 
 
 Skipper 
 JI 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2009 
 Co-speech gestures influence neural activity in brain regions associated with processing semantic information 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 30 
 3509 
 3526 
 19384890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Mok 
 EH 
 
 
 Beharelle 
 AR 
 
 
 Goldin-Meadow 
 S 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2012 
 Frontal and temporal contributions to understanding the iconic co-speech gestures that accompany speech 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 35 
 900 
 917 
 23238964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Solodkin 
 A 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2010 
 Neural development of networks for audiovisual speech comprehension 
 Brain and Language 
 114 
 101 
 114 
 19781755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dikker 
 S 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 2011 
 Before the N400: Effects of lexical–semantic violations in visual cortex 
 Brain and Language 
 118 
 23 
 28 
 21458057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dikker 
 S 
 
 
 Rabagliati 
 H 
 
 
 Farmer 
 TA 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 2010 
 Early Occipital Sensitivity to Syntactic Category Is Based on Form Typicality 
 Psychological Science 
 21 
 629 
 634 
 20483838 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dikker 
 S 
 
 
 Rabagliati 
 H 
 
 
 Pylkkänen 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 Sensitivity to syntax in visual cortex 
 Cognition 
 110 
 293 
 321 
 19121826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duvernoy 
 HM 
 
 
 1999 
 The Human Brain 
 Springer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Erickson 
 TD 
 
 
 Mattson 
 ME 
 
 
 1981 
 From words to meaning: A semantic illusion 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 20 
 540 
 551 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 1999 
 Cortical Surface-Based Analysis II: Inflation, Flattening, and a Surface-Based Coordinate System 
 NeuroImage 
 9 
 195 
 207 
 9931269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 2004 
 Automatically Parcellating the Human Cerebral Cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 14 
 11 
 22 
 14654453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Tootell 
 RB 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1999 
 High-resolution intersubject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 8 
 272 
 284 
 10619420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved Assessment of Significant Activation in Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI): Use of a Cluster-Size Threshold 
 Magn Reson Med 
 33 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 2005 
 From The Cover: The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks 
 PNAS 
 102 
 9673 
 9678 
 15976020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 2009 
 Pathways to language: fiber tracts in the human brain 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 13 
 175 
 181 
 19223226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 2012 
 The cortical language circuit: from auditory perception to sentence comprehension 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 16 
 262 
 268 
 22516238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 Rüschemeyer 
 SA 
 
 
 Hahne 
 A 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 CJ 
 
 
 2003 
 The role of left inferior frontal and superior temporal cortex in sentence comprehension: localizing syntactic and semantic processes 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 13 
 170 
 177 
 12507948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 2012 
 Predictive coding, precision and synchrony 
 Cognitive Neuroscience 
 3 
 238 
 239 
 24171746 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 K 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Predictive coding under the free-energy principle 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
 364 
 1211 
 1221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Genovese 
 CR 
 
 
 Lazar 
 NA 
 
 
 Nichols 
 T 
 
 
 2002 
 Thresholding of Statistical Maps in Functional Neuroimaging Using the False Discovery Rate 
 NeuroImage 
 15 
 870 
 878 
 11906227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gloor 
 P 
 
 
 1997 
 The Temporal Lobe and Limbic System 
 Oxford University Press 
 USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grewe 
 T 
 
 
 Bornkessel 
 I 
 
 
 Zysset 
 S 
 
 
 Wiese 
 R 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 The emergence of the unmarked: A new perspective on the language-specific function of Broca's area 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 26 
 178 
 190 
 15929098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Wedeen 
 Van J 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 2008 
 Mapping the Structural Core of Human Cerebral Cortex 
 PLoS Biol 
 6 
 1479 
 1493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 2005 
 On Broca, brain, and binding: a new framework 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 9 
 416 
 423 
 16054419 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 2014 
 ScienceDirectNodes and networks in the neural architecture for language: Broca's region and beyond 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 28 
 136 
 141 
 25062474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heinen 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 Kann eine Satzvervollständigungsaufgabe Aufschluss über die Generierung von kontextbasierten Prädiktionen geben? Eine empirische Studie zur Moses-Illusion. [= Can a sentence completion task provide insights into the generation of context-based predictions? An empirical study on the Moses Illusion.] 
 Unpublished BA Thesis 
 University of Marburg 
 Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hickok 
 G 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 D 
 
 
 2007 
 The cortical organization of speech processing 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 393 
 402 
 17431404 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 P 
 
 
 Pobric 
 G 
 
 
 Drakesmith 
 M 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2012 
 Posterior middle temporal gyrus is involved in verbal and non-verbal semantic cognition: Evidence from rTMS 
 Aphasiology 
 26 
 1119 
 1130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GF 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 P 
 
 
 Visser 
 M 
 
 
 Binney 
 RJ 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2015 
 Establishing task- and modality-dependent dissociations between the semantic and default mode networks 
 PNAS 
 112 
 7857 
 7862 
 26056304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 2006 
 Syntactic and Semantic Modulation of Neural Activity during Auditory Sentence Comprehension 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 18 
 665 
 679 
 16768368 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 2007 
 Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension: An fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 36 
 924 
 932 
 17500009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hurley 
 RS 
 
 
 Bonakdarpour 
 B 
 
 
 Wang 
 X 
 
 
 Mesulam 
 MM 
 
 
 2015 
 Asymmetric Connectivity between the Anterior Temporal Lobe and the Language Network 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 27 
 464 
 473 
 25244113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Huynh 
 H 
 
 
 Feldt 
 LS 
 
 
 1970 
 Conditions under which the mean-square ratios in repeated measurement designs have exact F-distributions 
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 
 65 
 1582 
 1589 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indefrey 
 P 
 
 
 Cutler 
 A 
 
 
 2004 
 Prelexical and lexical processing in listening 
 The cognitive neurosciences 
 3 
 759 
 774 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jones 
 EG 
 
 
 Powell 
 T 
 
 
 1970 
 An anatomical study of converging sensory pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey 
 Brain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joseph 
 R 
 
 
 1982 
 The neuropsychology of development: Hemispheric laterality, limbic language, and the origin of thought 
 J Clin Psychol 
 38 
 4 
 33 
 7056873 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kristensen 
 LB 
 
 
 Wang 
 L 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 2013 
 The Interface Between Language and Attention: Prosodic Focus Marking Recruits a General Attention Network in Spoken Language Comprehension 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 23 
 1836 
 1848 
 22763170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lau 
 EF 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Poeppel 
 D 
 
 
 2008 
 A cortical network for semantics: (de)constructing the N400 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 920 
 933 
 19020511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 2007 
 The representation of object concepts in the brain 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 58 
 25 
 45 
 16968210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mashal 
 N 
 
 
 Solodkin 
 A 
 
 
 Dick 
 AS 
 
 
 Chen 
 EE 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 2012 
 A Network Model of Observation and Imitation of Speech 
 Front Psychology 
 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Matelli 
 M 
 
 
 Camarda 
 R 
 
 
 Glickstein 
 M 
 
 
 1986 
 Afferent and efferent projections of the inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 251 
 281 
 298 
 3021823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 BM 
 
 
 Tzourio 
 N 
 
 
 Frak 
 V 
 
 
 Syrota 
 A 
 
 
 Murayama 
 N 
 
 
 Levrier 
 O 
 
 
 Salamon 
 G 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Mehler 
 J 
 
 
 1993 
 The cortical representation of speech 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 5 
 467 
 479 
 23964919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menenti 
 L 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Scheeringa 
 R 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 When elephants fly: differential sensitivity of right and left inferior frontal gyri to discourse and world knowledge 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 21 
 2358 
 2368 
 19016600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 EK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2001 
 An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Function 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 24 
 167 
 202 
 11283309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 AJ 
 
 
 Pancheva 
 R 
 
 
 Ozawa 
 K 
 
 
 Neville 
 HJ 
 
 
 Ullman 
 MT 
 
 
 2001 
 An Event-Related fMRI Study of Syntactic and Semantic Violations 
 J Psycholinguist Res 
 30 
 339 
 364 
 11523278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Newman 
 SD 
 
 
 Just 
 MA 
 
 
 Keller 
 TA 
 
 
 Roth 
 J 
 
 
 Carpenter 
 PA 
 
 
 2003 
 Differential effects of syntactic and semantic processing on the subregions of Broca's area 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 16 
 297 
 307 
 12668239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ni 
 W 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Shankweiler 
 D 
 
 
 2000 
 An Event-related Neuroimaging Study Distinguishing Form and Content in Sentence Processing 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 12 
 120 
 133 
 10769310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noonan 
 KA 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Visser 
 M 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2013 
 Going beyond Inferior Prefrontal Involvement in Semantic Control: Evidence for the Additional Contribution of Dorsal Angular Gyrus and Posterior Middle Temporal Cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 25 
 1824 
 1850 
 23859646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 1971 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 9 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Plotzker 
 A 
 
 
 Ezzyat 
 Y 
 
 
 2007 
 The Enigmatic temporal pole: a review of findings on social and emotional processing 
 Brain 
 130 
 1718 
 1731 
 17392317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 Seltzer 
 B 
 
 
 1982 
 Association areas of the cerebral cortex 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 5 
 386 
 390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Nestor 
 PJ 
 
 
 Rogers 
 TT 
 
 
 2007 
 Where do you know what you know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 976 
 987 
 18026167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1984 
 Projections to the frontal cortex from the posterior parietal region in the rhesus monkey 
 Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 228 
 105 
 116 
 6480903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2010 
 The anatomy of language: a review of 100 fMRI studies published in 2009 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1191 
 62 
 88 
 20392276 
 
 
 
 
 R Core Team 
 2014 
 R: A language and environment for statistical computing 
 R Foundation for Statistical Computing 
 Vienna, Austria 
 URL  http://www.R-project.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raposo 
 A 
 
 
 Marques 
 JF 
 
 
 2013 
 The contribution of fronto-parietal regions to sentence comprehension: Insights from the Moses illusion 
 NeuroImage 
 83 
 431 
 437 
 23796543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rauschecker 
 JP 
 
 
 Scott 
 SK 
 
 
 2009 
 Maps and streams in the auditory cortex: nonhuman primates illuminate human speech processing 
 Nat Neurosci 
 12 
 718 
 724 
 19471271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rizzolatti 
 G 
 
 
 Matelli 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Two different streams form the dorsal visual system: anatomy and functions 
 Exp Brain Res 
 153 
 146 
 157 
 14610633 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Romanski 
 LM 
 
 
 Tian 
 B 
 
 
 Fritz 
 J 
 
 
 Mishkin 
 M 
 
 
 Goldman-Rakic 
 PS 
 
 
 Rauschecker 
 JP 
 
 
 1999 
 Dual streams of auditory afferents target multiple domains in the primate prefrontal cortex 
 Nat Neurosci 
 2 
 1131 
 1136 
 10570492 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 RC 
 
 
 2012 
 SUMA 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 768 
 773 
 21945692 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sanford 
 AJ 
 
 
 Leuthold 
 H 
 
 
 Bohan 
 J 
 
 
 Sanford 
 AJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Anomalies at the borderline of awareness: An ERP study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 23 
 514 
 523 
 19925201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saur 
 D 
 
 
 Kreher 
 BW 
 
 
 Schnell 
 S 
 
 
 Kummerer 
 D 
 
 
 Kellmeyer 
 P 
 
 
 Vry 
 MS 
 
 
 Umarova 
 R 
 
 
 Musso 
 M 
 
 
 Glauche 
 V 
 
 
 Abel 
 S 
 
 
 Huber 
 W 
 
 
 Rijntjes 
 M 
 
 
 Hennig 
 J 
 
 
 Weiller 
 C 
 
 
 2008 
 Ventral and dorsal pathways for language 
 PNAS 
 105 
 18035 
 18040 
 19004769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schmahmann 
 JD 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 Wang 
 R 
 
 
 Dai 
 G 
 
 
 D'Arceuil 
 HE 
 
 
 de Crespigny 
 AJ 
 
 
 Wedeen 
 VJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Association fibre pathways of the brain: parallel observations from diffusion spectrum imaging and autoradiography 
 Brain 
 130 
 630 
 653 
 17293361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 2013 
 The Angular Gyrus Multiple Functions and Multiple Subdivisions 
 The Neuroscientist 
 19 
 43 
 61 
 22547530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seltzer 
 B 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1978 
 Afferent cortical connections and architectonics of the superior temporal sulcus and surrounding cortex in the rhesus monkey 
 Brain Research 
 149 
 1 
 24 
 418850 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seltzer 
 B 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1989 
 Frontal lobe connections of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey 
 J Comp Neurol 
 281 
 97 
 113 
 2925903 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seltzer 
 B 
 
 
 Pandya 
 DN 
 
 
 1994 
 Parietal, temporal, and occipita projections to cortex of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey: A retrograde tracer study 
 J Comp Neurol 
 343 
 445 
 463 
 8027452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Cowan 
 MC 
 
 
 Astafiev 
 SV 
 
 
 Tansy 
 AP 
 
 
 d'Avossa 
 G 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Quantitative analysis of attention and detection signals during visual search 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 90 
 3384 
 3397 
 12917383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simmons 
 WK 
 
 
 Reddish 
 M 
 
 
 Bellgowan 
 PSF 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 The Selectivity and Functional Connectivity of the Anterior Temporal Lobes 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 20 
 813 
 825 
 19620621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stowe 
 LA 
 
 
 Broere 
 CA 
 
 
 Paans 
 AM 
 
 
 Wijers 
 AA 
 
 
 Mulder 
 G 
 
 
 Vaalburg 
 W 
 
 
 Zwarts 
 F 
 
 
 1998 
 Localizing components of a complex task: sentence processing and working memory 
 NeuroReport 
 9 
 2995 
 2999 
 9804304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stowe 
 LA 
 
 
 Haverkort 
 M 
 
 
 Zwarts 
 F 
 
 
 2005 
 Rethinking the neurological basis of language 
 Lingua 
 115 
 997 
 1042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Straube 
 B 
 
 
 Green 
 A 
 
 
 Weis 
 S 
 
 
 Chatterjee 
 A 
 
 
 Kircher 
 T 
 
 
 2009 
 Memory Effects of Speech and Gesture Binding: Cortical and Hippocampal Activation in Relation to Subsequent Memory Performance 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 21 
 821 
 836 
 18578601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 Bedny 
 M 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 RF 
 
 
 2005 
 The frontal lobes and the regulation of mental activity 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 15 
 219 
 224 
 15831406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 SL 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 GK 
 
 
 Farah 
 MJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge: A reevaluation 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 94 
 14792 
 14797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomasi 
 D 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 2011 
 Association between Functional Connectivity Hubs and Brain Networks 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 21 
 2003 
 2013 
 21282318 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tune 
 S 
 
 
 Schlesewsky 
 M 
 
 
 Small 
 SL 
 
 
 Sanford 
 AJ 
 
 
 Bohan 
 J 
 
 
 Sassenhagen 
 J 
 
 
 Bornkessel-Schlesewsky 
 I 
 
 
 2014 
 Cross-linguistic variation in the neurophysiological response to semantic processing: Evidence from anomalies at the borderline of awareness 
 Neuropsychologia 
 56 
 147 
 166 
 24447768 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turken 
 U 
 
 
 Dronkers 
 NF 
 
 
 2011 
 The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses 
 Frontiers in systems neuroscience 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Van Petten 
 C 
 
 
 Luka 
 BJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Neural localization of semantic context effects in electromagnetic and hemodynamic studies 
 Brain and Language 
 97 
 279 
 293 
 16343606 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vandenberghe 
 R 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2002 
 The response of left temporal cortex to sentences 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 14 
 550 
 560 
 12126497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Beaucousin 
 V 
 
 
 Herve 
 PY 
 
 
 Duffau 
 H 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Houde 
 O 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 2006 
 Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: phonology, semantics, and sentence processing 
 NeuroImage 
 30 
 1414 
 1432 
 16413796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visser 
 M 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Embleton 
 KV 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2012 
 Both the middle temporal gyrus and the ventral anterior temporal area are crucial for multimodal semantic processing: distortion-corrected fMRI evidence for a double gradient of information convergence in the temporal lobes 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 24 
 1766 
 1778 
 22621260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visser 
 M 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2010 
 Semantic Processing in the Anterior Temporal Lobes: A Meta-analysis of the Functional Neuroimaging Literature 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 
 1083 
 1094 
 19583477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitney 
 C 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Kircher 
 T 
 
 
 2011 
 Heterogeneity of the Left Temporal Lobe in Semantic Representation and Control: Priming Multiple versus Single Meanings of Ambiguous Words 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 21 
 831 
 844 
 20732899 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whitney 
 C 
 
 
 Kirk 
 M 
 
 
 O'Sullivan 
 J 
 
 
 Ralph 
 MAL 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 2011 
 The neural organization of semantic control: TMS evidence for a distributed network in left inferior frontal and posterior middle temporal gyrus 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 21 
 1066 
 1075 
 20851853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wilson 
 SM 
 
 
 Molnar-Szakacs 
 I 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Beyond Superior Temporal Cortex: Intersubject Correlations in Narrative Speech Comprehension 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Schematic depiction of the fMRI paradigm for a single trial. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Whole-brain analysis results for each condition compared to baseline in the time window of 3-12 sec post target sentence onset. The individual per-vertex threshold was  p  < .001 (corrected FWE  p  < .05). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Results of the region of interest analysis including 14 regions per hemisphere. Regions are outlined on the white matter surface model of one representative subject. Error bars depict standard error of the mean. B = borderline scenarios. E = easy scenarios. * p < 0.05 (corrected); ** p < 0.01 (corrected). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Results of the whole-brain comparison between the  easy detected  and  easy control  condition for the time window of 3-12 sec post sentence onset shown on inflated average brain surfaces of the left and right hemisphere. Labels refer to the local activation maximum of each cluster. The individual per-vertex threshold was p < .01 (corrected FWE p < .05). Warm colors indicate higher levels of activation for  easy detected ; cold colors reflect greater activation for the  easy control  sentences. Bar graphs present the difference between conditions for the local activation maximum of each cluster. Error bars depict standard error of the mean. AG=angular gyrus, CUN=cuneus, EC=entorhinal cortex, HIP= hippocampus, INS= anterior insula, LOcTS=lateral occipito-temporal sulcus, MCC=middle cingulate cortex, MFG=middle frontal gyrus, POcS=posterior occipital sulcus, SFS=superior frontal sulcus, SFG=superior frontal gyrus, SMG=supramarginal gyrus, STS=superior temporal sulcus, STG=superior temporal gyrus, TTG=transverse temporal gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Results of the whole-brain comparison between the  borderline detected  and  borderline control  condition for the time window of 3-12 sec post sentence onset shown on inflated average brain surfaces of the left and right hemisphere. Labels refer to the local activation maximum of each cluster. The individual per-vertex threshold was p < .01 (corrected FWE p < .05). Warm colors indicate higher levels of activation for  borderline detected ; cold colors reflect greater activation for the  borderline control  sentences. Bar graphs present the difference between conditions for the local activation maximum of each cluster. Error bars depict standard error of the mean. ACC=anterior cingulate cortex, AMYG=amygdala, IFG_Tr=pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus, MTG=middle temporal gyrus, SMG=supramarginal gyrus, TH=thalamus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Example items for each of the four experimental conditions. For each sentence, a word-by-word translation is given along with the corresponding English example from  Sanford et al. (2011) . Each trial consists of a context sentence followed by an anomalous or control target sentence. Target words are highlighted in bold print, contextual manipulations are given in italics. 
 
 
 
 
 Context Sentence 
 Target Sentence 
 
 
 
 
 Ein amerikanischer Jumbo Jet wurde von bewaffneten Extremisten gezwungen, An American jumbo jet was by armed extremists forced in Kanada zu landen und Experten waren schnell vor Ort, um zu vermitteln. in Canada to land and experts were quickly on site for to mediate. A North American jumbo jet was forced at gunpoint to land in Canada, and experts were quickly on hand to help. 
 Borderline anomalous 
 
 
 Die Lage beruhigte sich durch die  Verhandlungen  der Behörden mit den verängstigten  Geiseln , The situation calmed itself by the  negotiations  of-the authorities with the scared hostages die im Flugzeug saßen. who in-the plane sat. First of all the authorities' initial  negotiations  with the scared and desperate  hostages  helped calm the situation. 
 
 
 Borderline control 
 
 
 Die Lage beruhigte sich durch die  Kommunikation  der Behörden mit den verängstigten  Geiseln , The situation calmed itself by the  communications  of-the authorities with the scared hostages die im Flugzeug saßen. who in-the plane sat. First of all the authorities' initial  communications  with the scared and desperate  hostages  helped calm the situation. 
 
 
 Christian und Julias gemeinsamer Abend in dem neuen Restaurant war ein Christian and Julia's joint evening in the new restaurant was a richtiger Reinfall. proper letdown. Denise and Fred's date to the new restaurant was a complete disaster. 
 Easy anomalous 
 
 
 Zuerst servierte ihnen der  Maler  die falschen Gerichte und dann wurde ihnen auch noch zu viel berechnet. First served them the painter the wrong meals and then was them also still too much charged. They were given the wrong meals by the  painter  and then they were overcharged for their meals. 
 
 
 Easy control 
 
 
 Zuerst servierte ihnen der  Kellner  die falschen Gerichte und dann wurde ihnen auch noch zu viel berechnet. First served them the waiter the wrong meals and then was them also still too much charged. They were given the wrong meals by the  waiter  and then they were overcharged for their meals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Anatomical description of the cortical regions of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 ROI 
 Anatomical structure 
 Delimiting Landmarks 
 
 
 
 
 IFG_Op 
 Pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus 
 A = Anterior vertical ramus of the lateral fissure P = Inferior precentral sulcus S = Inferior frontal sulcus I = Anterior horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure to the border with insular cortex 
 
 
 IFG_Tr 
 Pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus 
 A = Coronal plane defined as the rostral end of the anterior horizontal ramus of the sylvian fissure P = Vertical ramus of the lateral fissure S = Inferior frontal sulcus I = Anterior horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure 
 
 
 IFG_Orb 
 Pars orbitalis of the inferior frontal gyrus 
 A = Posterior lateral orbital sulcus P = Vertical ramus of the lateral fissure S = Anterior horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure I = Orbital gyrus 
 
 
 INSa 
 Anterior segment of the circular sulcus of the insult 
 A = Lateral orbital gyrus P = Short insular gyri S = Superior segment of the circular sulcus of the insula I = Inferior segment of the circular sulcus of the insula 
 
 
 STGa 
 Anterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus and planum polare 
 A = Inferior circular sulcus of the insula P = Vertical plane drawn from the anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus S = Anterior horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure I = Dorsal aspect of the upper bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 AUD 
 Transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus (Heschl's gyrus and sulcus) 
 A = Planum polare and inferior circular sulcus of the insula P = Planum temporale M = Lateral fissure L = Superior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 STGp 
 Posterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus and planum temporale 
 A = Vertical plane drawn from the anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus P = Angular gyrus S = Supramarginal gyrus I = Dorsal aspect of the upper bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 STSa_upper 
 Anterior portion of the upper bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 A = Superior and middle temporal gyrus P = Vertical plane drawn from the anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus S = Superior temporal gyrus I = Fundus of the sulcus 
 
 
 STSa_lower 
 Anterior portion of the lower bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 A = Superior and middle temporal gyrus P = Vertical plane drawn from the anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus S = Fundus of the sulcus I = Middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 STSp_upper 
 Posterior portion of the upper bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 A = Vertical plane drawn from the anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus P = Angular gyrus and middle occipital gyrus and sulcus S = Angular gyrus I = Fundus of the sulcus 
 
 
 STSp_lower 
 Posterior portion of the lower bank of the superior temporal sulcus 
 A = Vertical plane drawn from anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus P = Angular gyrus and middle occipital gyrus and sulcus S = Fundus of the sulcus I = Middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 MTGp 
 Posterior portion of the middle temporal gyrus 
 A = Vertical plane drawn from anterior extent of the transverse temporal gyrus P = Anterior occipital sulcus and temporo-occipital incisure S = Superior temporal sulcus I = Inferior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 SMG 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 A = Postcentral sulcus P = Sulcus intermedius primus of Jensen S = Intraparietal sulcus I = Lateral fissure 
 
 
 AG 
 Angular gyrus 
 A = Sulcus intermedius primus of Jensen P = Dorsal part of the anterior occipital sulcus S = Intraparietal sulcus I = Superior temporal sulcus and lateral occipital sulcus 
 
 
 
 
 
 A = anterior limit. P = posterior limit. S = superior limit. I = inferior limit. M = medial limit. L = lateral limit. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Results of the repeated-measures ANOVA per region of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 Region of Interest 
 Left Hemisphere 
 Right Hemisphere 
 
 
 
 
 
 INSa 
 
 Type,  F (1,17) = 84.8,  p  < 0.001 
 Plausibility × Type,  F (1,17)=13.7,  p =  0.007 Easy: Type,  F (1,17)=9.1,  p  = 0.026 
 
 
 
 IFG_Orb 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 88.9,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 33.2,  p  < 0.001 
 
 
 
 IFG_Tr 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 111.3,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 10.8,  p  = 0.016 
 
 
 
 IFG_Op 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 35.3,  p  < 0.001 
 ---- 
 
 
 
 STGa 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 97.1,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 77.5,  p  < 0.001 
 
 
 
 STGp 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 73.7,  p  < 0.001 
 Plausibility × Type,  F (1,17)=7.2,  p =  0.04 Easy: Type,  F (1,17)=12.0,  p  = 0.009 
 
 
 
 AUD 
 
 Plausibility × Type,  F (1,17) = 7.6,  p  = 0.037 Easy: Type,  F (1,17) = 9.8,  p  = 0.02 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 139.2,  p  < 0.001 
 
 
 
 STSa_lower 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 51.0,  p  < 0.001 Plaus:  F (1,17) = 7.9,  p  = 0.034 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 12.3,  p  = 0.01 
 
 
 
 STSa_upper 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 77.4,  p  < 0.001 Plaus:  F (1,17) = 8.8,  p  = 0.028 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 48.6,  p  < 0.001 
 
 
 
 STSp_lower 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 68.5,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 8.0,  p  = 0.034 
 
 
 
 STSp_upper 
 
 Type,  F (1,17)=150.5,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 18.9,  p  = 0.002 
 
 
 
 MTGp 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 27.6,  p  < 0.001 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 8.4,  p  = 0.03 Plaus:  F (1,17) = 12.8,  p  = 0.009 
 
 
 
 SMG 
 
 Plaus:  F (1,17) = 7.9,  p  = 0.034 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 18.0,  p  = 0.002 
 
 
 
 AG 
 
 Type:  F (1,17) = 29.8,  p  < 0.001 
 ---- 
 
 
 
 
 
 Only statistically significant effects (p < 0.05) are reported. Listed p-values are FDR-corrected (q= 0.05). All two-way interactions were resolved by Scenario Type. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regions showing reliable differences for the whole-brain contrasts of  easy detected  versus  easy control  and  borderline detected  versus  borderline control,  respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 Hemi 
 Local Maximum/Cluster Extent 
 MNI Coordinates 
 Cluster Size 
 MI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 Nodes 
 Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 Easy detected > Easy control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LEFT 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 -61 
 -32 
 26 
 956 
 257.2 
 0.12 
 
 
 Transverse temporal gyrus and sulcus 
 -50 
 -15 
 2 
 700 
 212.3 
 0.10 
 
 
 Lateral occipito-temporal sulcus extending to the inferior temporal gyrus 
 -47 
 -43 
 -18 
 387 
 196.8 
 0.11 
 
 
 Cuneus extending into the parieto-occipital sulcus 
 -7 
 -82 
 31 
 401 
 166.3 
 0.10 
 
 
 Middle portion of the cingulate cortex 
 -4 
 -16 
 33 
 415 
 117.4 
 0.08 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 -22 
 -37 
 1 
 356 
 67.9 
 0.09 
 
 
 RIGHT 
 Superior frontal gyrus 
 17 
 54 
 23 
 523 
 196.7 
 0.08 
 
 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 58 
 -29 
 35 
 318 
 145.8 
 0.12 
 
 
 Entorhinal cortex 
 33 
 5 
 -16 
 799 
 127.3 
 0.17 
 
 
 Angular gyrus 
 47 
 -58 
 38 
 384 
 101.4 
 0.11 
 
 
 Superior frontal sulcus 
 27 
 15 
 43 
 329 
 82.7 
 0.06 
 
 
 Superior temporal gyrus 
 65 
 -22 
 1 
 304 
 72.4 
 0.16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Easy control > Easy detected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LEFT 
 Superior temporal sulcus extending dorsally into the superior temporal sulcus and ventrally into the middle temporal gyrus 
 -53 
 1 
 -17 
 303 
 164.5 
 0.12 
 
 
 Insula 
 -28 
 23 
 0 
 335 
 120.2 
 0.08 
 
 
 RIGHT 
 Insula 
 31 
 28 
 -5 
 1006 
 373.1 
 0.16 
 
 
 Parieto-occipital sulcus extending into the posterior-dorsal part of the cingulate gyrus 
 11 
 -54 
 13 
 349 
 130.3 
 0.08 
 
 
 Middle frontal gyrus 
 47 
 26 
 30 
 272 
 87.6 
 0.12 
 
 
 Superior frontal sulcus 
 27 
 15 
 43 
 329 
 82.7 
 0.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Borderline detected > Boderline control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LEFT 
 Supramarginal gryus extending dorsally into the intraparietal sulcus 
 -49 
 -45 
 45 
 645 
 300.0 
 0.14 
 
 
 Anterior portion of the cingulate cortex 
 -7 
 40 
 4 
 356 
 161.4 
 0.08 
 
 
 Thalamus 
 -2 
 -9 
 12 
 679 
 157.8 
 0.28 
 
 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 -59 
 -34 
 39 
 359 
 82.4 
 0.10 
 
 
 RIGHT 
 Middle temporal gyrus extending ventrally into the inferior temporal sulcus and gyrus 
 63 
 -47 
 -2 
 395 
 173.8 
 0.14 
 
 
 Amygdala 
 18 
 -4 
 -14 
 592 
 148.2 
 0.30 
 
 
 Pars triangularis of the IFG extending rostrally into the lateral orbital sulcus 
 51 
 33 
 -1 
 436 
 144.1 
 0.13 
 
 
 Thamalus 
 2 
 -7 
 9 
 497 
 119.1 
 0.28 
 
 
 Middle temporal gyrus 
 63 
 -32 
 -14 
 266 
 103.8 
 0.12 
 
 
 
 
 
