
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101282001 
 33781 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 
 Brain structure & function 
 
 1863-2653 
 1863-2661 
 
 
 27372336 
 5205581 
 10.1007/s00429-016-1264-3 
 NIHMS800247 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 A seed-based cross-modal comparison of brain connectivity measures 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 Andrew T. 
 
 1 
 9 
 * 
 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 Felix 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Gong 
 Gaolang 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 Angela R. 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 Peter 
 
 5 
 6 
 
 
 
 Evans 
 Alan C. 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 Amunts 
 Katrin 
 
 1 
 8 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 Simon B. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 1 Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Jülich Research Center, Wilhelm-Johnen-Straße, 52428 Jülich, Germany 
 2 Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Medicine, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany 
 3 School of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing, China 
 4 Department of Physics, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA 
 5 University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA 
 6 South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA 
 7 McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 
 8 C. & O. Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany 
 9 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
 
 * Corresponding author :  a.reid@donders.ru.nl , +31 24 36 55931 
 
 
 9 
 7 
 2016 
 
 
 02 
 7 
 2016 
 
 
 4 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 4 
 2018 
 
 222 
 3 
 1131 
 1151 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Human neuroimaging methods have provided a number of means by which the connectivity structure of the human brain can be inferred. For instance, correlations in blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal time series are commonly used to make inferences about “functional connectivity”. Correlations across samples in structural morphometric measures, such as voxel-based morphometry (VBM) or cortical thickness (CT), have also been used to estimate connectivity, putatively through mutually trophic effects on connected brain areas. In this study, we have compared seed-based connectivity estimates obtained from four common correlational approaches: resting-state functional connectivity (RS-fMRI), meta-analytic connectivity modelling (MACM), VBM correlations, and CT correlations. We found that the two functional approaches (RS-fMRI and MACM) had the best agreement. While the two structural approaches (CT and VBM) had better-than-random convergence, they were no more similar to each other than to the functional approaches. The degree of correspondence between modalities varied considerably across seed regions, and also depended on the threshold applied to the connectivity distribution. These results demonstrate some degree of similarity between connectivity inferred from structural and functional covariance, particularly for the most robust functionally connected regions (e.g., the default mode network). However, they also caution that these measures likely capture very different aspects of brain structure and function. 
 
 
 multimodal comparison 
 cortical thickness 
 VBM 
 resting-state fMRI 
 MACM 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 One of the promising aspects of neuroimaging methods such as MRI, PET, EEG, and MEG, is their use in compiling the human “connectome”: in other words, how the brain’s distinct regions are wired up via long-range axonal projections to produce functional networks. Myriad methodologies have been designed to obtain networks from imaging data, and myriad analytic methods have been introduced to analyze them. Graph theory has figured prominently. Despite the understandable enthusiasm, however, it is important to understand the assumptions and limitations of these approaches; in particular, what do we mean by the term “connectivity”, and how does this definition differ (and converge) across imaging modalities, methodologies, and analysis techniques? 
 One approach to this question is to characterize how connectomes obtained via different approaches compare to one another. Where do they agree and disagree? Is there a systematic pattern to this correspondence that can help us interpret it in biological or physical terms? Are there specific factors that affect the degree of correspondence? Such a characterization does not directly address the question of how inferred connectivity relates to biology, but it can help establish constraints on this question. Recent studies have begun to approach this issue, finding a good correspondence between resting-state functional ( Miranda-Dominguez et al. 2014 ) and diffusion-weighted imaging- (DWI-) based structural ( Goulas et al. 2014 ) connectivity estimates, and tract tracing evidence obtained from macaque monkeys.  Honey et al. (2009)  similarly found a substantial agreement between structural connectivity, measured through DWI tractography, and both empirical and simulated resting-state BOLD correlations. More recently,  Reid et al. (2015)  compared macaque tract tracing evidence to human DWI, resting-state fMRI, and structural covariance estimates of connectivity, and found a fairly poor general correspondence, with fMRI/DWI having the strongest agreement. In general, however, these studies utilized relatively coarse parcellation schemes, which limits the spatial specificity of the signals being compared. Additionally, while they provide useful global characterizations of how connectivity compares across modalities, they provide less insight into patterns specific to particular regions of interest (ROIs). The use of seed-based ROIs, on the other hand, allows the connectivity of a specific parcel of cortical grey matter to be assessed with respect to all other voxels or vertices in an imaging dataset, and the determination of these ROIs can be achieved via principled functional, anatomical, and meta-analytic approaches. Meta-analytic techniques such as activation likelihood estimation (ALE;  Eickhoff et al. 2009 ), for example, allow one to define a seed ROI based upon data drawn from a large database of task-based fMRI results, using a specific set of criteria and statistical contrasts. 
 The term “functional connectivity” (FC) is now ubiquitous in the brain connectivity literature, but more accurately refers to covariance or co-activation in functional brain signals, most commonly the MRI-based blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal. FC has been measured under both “task-free” resting-state conditions (RS-fMRI), meant to capture intrinsic connectivity; and task-based conditions, using a meta-analytic approach which assesses the degree of co-activation between brain regions, across many types of task. The latter is typically referred to as meta-analytic connectivity mapping (MACM;  Laird et al. 2013 ;  Eickhoff et al. 2010 ;  Fox et al. 2014 ). While the covariance structure of functional signals can certainly carry information about the underlying physical networks that mediate them, the interpretation of such covariance is ambiguous, due both to the fact that correlations do not support causal inference, and the poor temporal resolution of the BOLD signal (typically 1–2 s, although new multiband acquisition techniques achieve as low as 370 ms;  Xu et al. 2013 ;  Narsude et al. 2015 ), in relation to the rate at which information is transferred along axons (the average conduction delay of a myelinated corticocortical axon in monkeys is estimated at 7 ms, and the generation of a somatic postsynaptic potential requires approximately 5 ms;  Swadlow and Waxman 2012 ;  Roland, Hilgetag, and Deco 2014 ). The consequential temporal averaging of activation patterns suggests that BOLD correlations are likely a convolution of simultaneous and sequential activations, which capture a general pattern of activation, rather than the underlying physical connectivity directly ( Messé et al. 2015 ). As such, FC measures are most useful for identifying sets of regions which activate together over this relatively coarse time interval, which are commonly referred to as “networks” in the literature. 
 Structural covariance (SCov), which captures covariance of gross morphological features (typically of grey matter) across a population, in turn represents a much coarser temporal scale ( Alexander-Bloch et al. 2013 ;  Evans 2013 ). The idea behind this approach is that covarying structural features may capture long-term “mutually trophic” influences on particular brain regions, a subset of which likely reflects the physical connectivity structure ( Mechelli et al. 2005 ). This hypothesis is premised on the notion that “form follows function”; i.e, that the gross morphological features measured by methods such as voxel-based morphometry (VBM;  Ashburner and Friston 2000 ) or cortical thickness (CT;  MacDonald et al. 2000 ;  Kim et al. 2005 ;  Dale, Fischl, and Sereno 1999 ) are driven to some extent by their rate of functional activation, in turn determined by long-range connectivity patterns. At the cellular/molecular level, there is certainly evidence of such a relationship. It is well established, for instance, that the success with which afferent signals produce excitatory post-synaptic potentials (EPSPs) in their target neurons drives the formation/retraction of synapses as a means of modifying the strength of those specific connections (cf.  Engert and Bonhoeffer 1999 ;  Bi and Poo 2001 ;  Trachtenberg et al. 2002 ). Moreover, blocking visual input via prenatal enucleation (eye removal) in rats has been shown to result in increased metabolism in somatosensory cortical areas (barrel cortex), as well as significant growth in these areas, as measured histologically ( Zheng and Purves 1995 ). Indeed, such relationships may be a key mechanism through which developing nervous systems adapt to environmental conditions, although it remains unclear the extent to which morphological plasticity remains in a mature organism (reviewed in  Li et al. 2006 ). At the grosser scale of anatomical MRI, localized grey matter increases have also been reported for experienced taxi drivers ( Maguire et al. 2000 ), adults learning to juggle ( Draganski et al. 2004 ), and bi-/multilingualism across the lifespan (reviewed in  Li, Legault, and Litcofsky 2014 ). 
 The “mutually trophic” hypothesis suggests that SCov may capture functional covariance on a much coarser time scale. However, the empirical relationship between FC and SCov remains largely uncharacterized. In a previous analysis using whole brain parcellations, we reported a modest agreement ( r 2  = 0.2) between connectivity estimates generated by RS-fMRI and cortical thickness covariance ( Reid et al. 2015 ). In this study, we investigate this relationship further, by comparing seed-based connectivity inferred through four distinct approaches, two measuring SCov and two FC. Firstly, we estimated SCov using: voxel-based morphometry, a volumetric method which estimates grey matter density from T1-weighted intensities ( Ashburner and Friston 2000 ); and surface-based morphometry, which estimates the thickness of the cortical grey matter by modeling the interface between grey matter and its neighbouring white matter and cerebrospinal fluid ( MacDonald et al. 2000 ;  Kim et al. 2005 ;  Dale, Fischl, and Sereno 1999 ). Secondly, we estimated FC using: MACM, in which functional co-activation patterns were obtained across thousands of task-based fMRI experiments compiled in the BrainMap database; and resting-state fMRI, capturing average within-subject covariance across time in resting-state BOLD data obtained from a large, publicly available dataset (the Nathan Klein Institute Enhanced Rockland Sample; NKI-E) ( Nooner et al. 2012 ). This approach allowed us to quantify the correspondence of connectivity estimates both within structural and functional modalities, and between them. We expected high agreement between the two functional and the two structural measures, since these methods are likely to capture highly overlapping phenomena. Moreover, given the putative associations between structure and function, we also expected a lower but significant agreement between these modalities. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Data sets 
 For the MACM approach, we employed the BrainMap database ( Laird, Lancaster, and Fox 2009 ;  Laird et al. 2011 ) ( www.brainmap.org ), only including studies that reported group analyses of functional mapping experiments with healthy subjects. Studies including clinical cohorts or testing drug effects were excluded from the analysis. No further constraints (e.g., on acquisition and analysis details, experimental design, or stimulation procedures) were enforced. This resulted in an analysis of approximately 6,500 experiments. Notably, this inclusive approach avoided bias which would otherwise have been imposed by preselecting specific taxonomic categories. We elected for this conservative approach, considering our currently limited understanding of how specific psychological constructs, such as action and cognition, map onto regional brain responses ( Laird et al. 2011 ;  Poldrack et al. 2011 ;  Poldrack 2006 ). 
 Resting-state fMRI and anatomical T1-weighted images of 132 healthy volunteers (mean age 42.3 ± 18.08 years; 78 males) from the Enhanced NKI/Rockland sample ( Nooner et al. 2012 ) were obtained through the 1000 functional connectomes project ( www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/ ). This imaging data for this cohort was collected using the same Siemens TimTrio 3T MRI scanner (see below for a more detailed description), and has been made publicly available for research. 
 
 
 Seed regions 
 In any seed-based connectivity analysis, the derivation of the seed regions is a critical consideration. We selected nine seed ROIs in order to maximize the spatial sampling of the cortical sheet, as well as the variety of functional systems which these regions likely subserve (see  Figure 1 ). Furthermore, we utilized ROIs derived from multiple distinct approaches, in order to obtain a more generic set of regions, independent of how they were derived. Accordingly, seed ROIs were obtained from previous published studies, and were derived using functional, anatomical, and meta-analytic approaches. In the case of meta-analytic data, we obtained images from the Archive of Neuroimaging Data (ANIMA;  Reid et al. 2015 ), an open data source providing the results of published meta-analytic studies, which is available at  http://anima.fz-juelich.de .  Table I  lists each seed region, along with the coordinates of their peak locations in standard MNI-152 space, the study from which it was derived, and its size in voxels. 
 A brief description of each ROI follows. Left primary motor cortex (M1) was obtained through a bimanual repetitive finger tapping task, as an fMRI contrast with baseline (Rosky et al., 2013). Right middle frontal gyrus (MFG) was obtained through Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE), showing convergence of fMRI activations across studies investigating sustained attention (Langner & Eickhoff, 2013). Right middle temporal gyrus (MTG) was obtained from  Bzdok et al. (2012) , who performed an ALE analysis across studies investigating theory of mind and empathy. Left anterior insula (aINS) was isolated using an ALE analysis of 14 functional paradigms known to activate insula ( Kurth et al., 2010 ).  Hoffstaedter et al. (2013)  identified anterior middle cingulate cortex (aMCC) bilaterally, through a convergence of resting-state fMRI and meta-analytic connectivity modelling (MACM) results. Left anterior lateral prefrontal cortex (aLPFC) was obtained through an ALE analysis of working memory ( Rottschy et al., 2012 ). Right ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) was obtained from a study showing convergence across resting-state fMRI and MACM results focused on default mode network (DMN) areas specifically associated with social-affective processes (Amft et al., 2015).  Schilbach et al. (2012)  identified the bilateral precuneus (PrC) using an ALE approach to find a conjunction between regions associated with emotional and social processing, and the DMN. Finally, Malikovic et al. (2007) user observer-independent cytoarchitectonic mapping to identify the boundaries of visual area V5. 
 
 
 Meta-analytic connectivity mapping 
 Meta-analytic connectivity mapping (MACM) assesses co-activation of brain regions across a broad spectrum of task-based fMRI experiments. To delineate co-activation of a seed region, we first identified all experiments in the BrainMap database ( Laird et al. 2011 ) that reported group analyses of functional mapping experiments of healthy subjects, and which featured at least one focus of activation in the respective seed. The convergence of foci reported in these experiments was quantified using the revised ALE algorithm ( Eickhoff et al., 2010 ) for coordinate-based meta-analysis of neuroimaging results ( Laird et al. 2009 ;  Eickhoff et al. 2009 ). Reported activation foci are not treated as single points, but rather as centres for 3D Gaussian probability distributions capturing the spatial uncertainty associated with each focus. The probabilities of all foci reported in a given experiment are then combined for each voxel, resulting in a modelled activation (MA) map ( Turkeltaub et al. 2012 ). Taking the union across these MA maps yielded voxel-wise ALE scores describing the convergence of results at each particular location of the brain. To distinguish ‘true’ convergence between studies from random convergence (i.e., noise), ALE scores were compared to a null distribution reflecting a random spatial association between experiments (Eickhoff et al., 2012). Hereby, a random-effects inference was invoked, focussing on the above-chance convergence between studies, rather than clustering foci within a particular study. Significant convergence of reported foci in other brain regions than the seed indicates consistent co-activation, i.e., functional connectivity with the seed. 
 
 
 Resting-state functional connectivity 
 Resting-state fMRI images of 132 healthy volunteers (mean age 42.3 ± 18.08 years; 78 males) from the Enhanced NKI/Rockland sample ( Nooner et al. 2012 ) were obtained through the 1000 functional connectomes project ( http://www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/ ). During the resting-state scan, a fixation cross was presented and participants were instructed to: “Keep your eyes open and stay awake” before each resting-state scan. For each subject 260 resting state EPI images were acquired on a Siemens TimTrio 3T scanner using blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast [gradient-echo EPI pulse sequence, TR = 1.4s, TE = 30ms, flip angle = 80°, in plane resolution = 3.0 × 3.0mm2, 38 axial slices (3.0 mm thickness) covering the entire brain]. The first four scans were excluded from further analysis. The EPI images were first corrected for movement artifacts by affine registration using a two pass procedure in which the images were first aligned to the initial volumes and subsequently to the mean. The obtained mean EPI was then spatially normalized to the MNI-152 template using the ‘unified segmentation’ approach ( Ashburner and Friston 2000 ). The ensuing deformation was applied to all individual EPI volumes. To improve signal-to-noise ratio and compensate for residual anatomical variations, images were smoothed by a 5-mm FWHM Gaussian. For each each voxel, the BOLD time series was pre-processed as follows. To reduce spurious correlations, variance that could be explained by the following nuisance variables was regressed out: (1) six motion parameters derived from the image realignment; (2) the first derivative of the realignment parameters ( Satterthwaite et al. 2013 ); (3) mean grey matter, white matter, and CSF signal per time-point, obtained by averaging across voxels attributed to the respective tissue class in the SPM8 segmentation ( Weissenbacher et al. 2009 ); and (4) coherent signal changes across the whole brain, as reflected by the first five components of a principal component analysis (PCA) decomposition of the whole-brain time-series [CompCor denoising ( Behzadi et al. 2007 ;  Chai et al. 2012 )]. All nuisance variables entered the model as first- and (with the exception of the PCA components) second-order terms. Data were then band-pass filtered to preserve only BOLD frequencies between 0.01 and 0.08 Hz ( Cordes et al. 2001 ). 
 For each subject, time series were extracted for all voxels within a given seed region, and the first eigenvariate of these was used as a region-wise time series. Pearson correlation coefficients between this regional time series and all other grey matter voxels in the brain were subsequently computed to quantify resting-state functional connectivity ( Eulenburg et al. 2012 ). These voxel-wise correlation coefficients were then transformed into Fisher’s Z-scores and tested for consistency across subjects in a random-effects analysis. 
 
 
 Voxel-based morphometry 
 To assess population-wise structural covariance with each seed region, we used anatomical T1-weighted images from the same subjects as described above for the RS-FC analysis. These images were acquired on a Siemens TimTrio 3T scanner using an MP-RAGE sequence (TR = 2.5 s, TE = 3.5 ms, TI = 1200 ms, flip angle = 8°, FOV = 256 mm, 192 slices, voxel size 1 × 1 × 1 mm). The anatomical scans were preprocessed using the VBM8 toolbox ( http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm ) in SPM8 using standard settings (DARTEL normalization, spatially adaptive non-linear means denoising, a Markov random field weighting of 0.15 and bias field modeling with a regularization term of 0.0001 and a 60 mm FWHM cut-off). The resulting normalized gray matter segments were modulated only for the non-linear components of the deformation; this ensured that only local, non-linear deformations were used to estimate grey matter volume (GMV). Normalized images were then smoothed using an 8 mm isotropic FWHM Gaussian kernel, and statistically analyzed by non-parametrical permutation testing, using the “permute” function in FSL. In particular, we first computed the volume of the seed region by integrating the modulated voxel-wise gray matter probabilities for each subject. This vector of subject-specific local volumes represented the covariate of interest in the voxel-wise SPM analysis, and age and sex were included as nuisance variables. Because we used only local, non-linear modulation, total brain volume was not included in this analysis. 
 
 
 Cortical thickness 
 Cortical thickness measures the width of the cortical sheet using a surface-based geometric modelling approach. Here, thickness was computed using the CIVET pipeline ( Zijdenbos, Forghani, and Evans 2002 ). This involves an initial N3 correction for field non-uniformities ( Sled, Zijdenbos, and Evans 1998 ), linear and nonlinear registration to the MNI152 population template ( Mazziotta et al. 2001 ), tissue classification with partial-volume estimation ( Tohka, Zijdenbos, and Evans 2004 ), and the approximation of GM/WM and GM/CSF boundaries using the Constrained Laplacian Anatomic Segmentation using Proximity (CLASP) algorithm ( Kim et al. 2005 ;  MacDonald et al. 2000 ). CLASP uses a deformable surface model approach to find the optimal surface mesh representing borders between tissue classes. Cortical GM thickness is then computed as the distance between the two surface meshes along a pre-computed Laplacian field ( t laplace  constraint). The resultant surface meshes contain 40,962 vertices per hemisphere, and are subsequently coregistered to a population average surface template using an iterative vertex resampling approach, which finds an optimal fit between the sulcal depth patterns of each individual surface. This approach ensures vertex correspondence across all subjects, allowing for intersubject comparisons ( Lyttelton et al. 2007 ). Thickness values were smoothed with a 5 mm Gaussian kernel and adjusted for the age, sex, and mean cortical thickness. Correlations in thickness were then computed between each vertex in the seed region and every other vertex in the surface. 
 
 
 Projection to cortical surface 
 Because cortical thickness is expressed on the cortical surface, and in order to perform all comparisons in the same space, we projected fMRI, MACM, and VBM statistical maps to the iterative ICBM-152 middle template surface. Statistical analyses performed in surface rather than volumetric space have a number of benefits ( Anticevic et al., 2008 ); perhaps most importantly, explicitly modelling the cortical sheet as a surface prevents the attribution of spatial correspondences to regions separated by sulci. Notably, both the volumetric and surface representations were already coregistered in ICBM-152 coordinate space. The volume-to-surface transfer was done using an anisotropic Gaussian projection, biased along the surface normal, as described in  Bojak et al. (2010) . We used a Gaussian kernel with μ tangent  = 3 mm and μ normal  = 4 mm. The projection was performed using ModelGUI software version 0.0.21-alpha ( http://www.modelgui.org ). All subsequent comparisons were performed in this surface space (i.e., vertices as opposed to voxels). Since cortical thickness values are only possible to estimate for neocortex, a medial wall and brainstem mask was applied to all projected volumetric stats, to ensure comparable distributions. Thus, all comparisons were exclusive to the cortical sheet. 
 
 
 Measures of comparison, thresholding, and permutation testing 
 
 Bimodal similarity 
 For a comparison between two modalities, we required that each distribution had an equal threshold density δ (percentage of non-zero vertices). This is an important requirement, as comparisons between matrices of unequal density are known to produce trivial differences ( Wijk, Stam, and Daffertshofer 2010 ). Thus, for a single comparison, connectivity scores were thresholded to match a specific density, and a Bimodal Similarity ( BS ) score was derived from the ratio of the intersection and union of thresholded voxels (adjacency matrix  A ) for the two modalities. To compute  BS , we first obtained the Jaccard index ( Jaccard 1912 ), denoted Φ, for each pair of modalities  f  and  g :
 Φ ( f , g , δ ) = | A f ∩ A g | | A f ∪ A g | 
 
 In a typical fMRI/SCov analysis or meta-analysis, the density of a distribution is determined by the application of a statistical threshold; e.g., α = 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons. However, while such an approach is sufficiently conservative to limit Type I error, it does not likely represent the “true” density, as far as such a quantity is determinable. Indeed, the choice of any specific threshold is more or less arbitrary, given our lack of direct knowledge about the underlying physical connectivity of the networks we are investigating. Thus, to obtain a score independent of a particular choice of threshold, Φ was computed across the range of threshold densities [0.025 0.8], at intervals of 0.025. At each threshold, a certain degree of agreement is expected by chance, with a probability determined by the connection density. Given a matrix with a density δ, the probability of any element being non-zero is  P x =1  = δ (for all  x  ∈  A ). For a pair of matrices with identical density δ, we can derive the probabilities for intersection ( P ∩ ) and union ( P ∪ ) as:
 P ∩   = P x = 1 2 = δ 2 
 P ∪   = 2 · P x = 1 − P ∩ = 2 · δ − δ 2 
 
 Thus, given that 𝔼(| A f |) =  P f  ·  N , where  N  is the total vertex count, the expected value of Φ, or Φ rand , is given by:
 Φ rand ( δ ) = P ∩ · N P ∪ · N = δ 2 2 · δ − δ 2 = δ 2 − δ 
 
 To characterize a null distribution (in other words, the distribution of agreement expected between entirely random distributions), we generated 500 random permutations of the thresholded connectivity maps and computed Φ for each of these, across all thresholds. A permutation was generated as a randomly-ordered binary distribution, at a fixed threshold density. Notably, the mean of this null distribution will be approximately equal to the theoretical expected value Φ rand . The resulting distribution provides a point of comparison to non-permuted Φ scores; specifically, the degree to which Φ exceeds Φ rand  indicates the magnitude of agreement between two modalities above that expected by chance. This formulation also allows us to characterize the relationship between threshold and agreement. Accordingly, the final score  BS  was normalized at each density from the range [Φ rand (δ),1] to [0,1], where maximal agreement indicates  P ∩  =  P ∪ :
 B S ( f , g , δ ) = Φ ( f , g , δ ) − Φ rand ( δ ) 1 − Φ rand ( δ ) 
 
 Negative values of  BS  were clamped to 0. To obtain a summary score of agreement between two modalities, independent of threshold, we integrated  BS  across values of δ. The resulting value represents the area under the curve (AUC), and gives an indication of the overall agreement between modalities, above that expected by chance:
 B S total ( f , g ) = ∫ B S ( f , g , δ ) d δ 
 
 
 
 Cross-modal similarity 
 While Φ and  BS  give an indication of how individual pairs of modalities compare to one another, we are also interested in summarizing agreement  across  all four modalities. This score can be used, for instance, to characterize each seed ROI with respect to the similarity of connectivity estimates it generates. To obtain a summary metric of agreement across all modalities, we used the proportion Ψ, defined for a given vertex  i  as:
 Ψ ( δ , i ) = 1 M | ∑ f = 1 M A f ( i ) | 
where  M  is the total number of modalities (here,  M  = 4). Ψ thus represents the degree of cross-modal correspondence, for a given density δ. Similarly to the  BS  analysis, the Correspondence Index  CI  was obtained by normalizing Ψ to the range [Ψ rand ,1]:
 C I ( δ , i ) = Ψ ( δ , i ) − Ψ rand ( δ ) 1 − Ψ rand ( δ ) 
where Ψ rand  is equivalent to the probability of finding  M  coincident above-threshold vertices by random chance. This was determined numerically, using 500 randomly generated distributions at each density. As for  BS , negative values of  CI  were clamped to 0. 
 CI  was computed across the same range of thresholds [0.025 0.8], at intervals of 0.025. This allowed us to assess the degree of correspondence across all modalities, and how this is associated with density. A summary  CI  score was also computed as the integral across densities:
 C I total = ∫ C I ( δ ) d δ 
 
 
 
 
 Interhemispheric symmetry 
 Statistical parametric fMRI/SCov maps of the cortex tend to have a high degree of interhemispheric symmetry (see, for instance,  Lyttelton et al. 2009 ). Thus, covariance in a left-hemisphere cortical region confers a higher probability of covariance with its homotopic right-hemisphere region, and vice versa. It is thus interesting to examine the degree to which intermodal correspondence can be explained by the degree of symmetry in the corresponding maps. Interhemispheric symmetry was measured by comparing seed-based distributions across hemispheres, using the symmetric ICBM 152 surface template (40th generation;  Lyttelton, 2009 ). Symmetry was assessed simply as the ratio of corresponding interhemispheric vertex pairs above threshold, to the total above-threshold vertices per hemisphere. In other words, given a density δ, the average number of above-threshold vertices per hemisphere will be δ ·  N hemi , where  N hemi  is the number of vertices in a single hemisphere. Thus, the symmetry measure Θ is determined as:
 Θ ( δ ) = | A left ∩ A right | δ · N hemi 
 
 As for the comparisons above, we computed Θ across all densities for 500 random permutations, using the mean value at each δ to obtain a normalized measure of symmetry, ranging from 0 (equal or worse symmetry than that expected by chance) to 1 (perfect symmetry).
 Θ norm ( δ ) = Θ ( δ ) − Θ rand 1 − Θ rand 
 
 
 
 Distance estimation 
 Since a large proportion of all distributions appears to occur proximal to the seed ROI or its contralateral homotope, we were interested in assessing the association between the cortical distance of a vertex from a seed ROI and its bimodal similarity. To do this, we first computed, for each seed region, an approximate geodesic distance map. This was performed using a simple Matlab routine. Distances were also computed for the contralateral hemisphere, by mirroring the seed ROI onto this hemisphere and computing geodesic distance from it. To make seed ROIs more comparable, and to obtain subsurfaces with which to compute individual similarity scores, we next discretized these distance maps into octiles ( Figure 7 , inset). Homotopic ROI vertices, but not seed ROI vertices themselves, were included in these octiles. Finally,  BS  scores were obtained, as above, for the individual subsurfaces corresponding to each octile. This yielded the same density-by-similarity relationship as described above, but added a distance dimension. 
 
 
 Specific agreement between structural and functional covariance 
 Finally, in order to better quantify the patterns of systematic disagreement between structural and functional covariance measures, we compared instances where either both functional modalities agreed that a connection existed whereas both structural modalities agreed that it did not, or vice versa. This simple measure, hereafter referred to as  specific agreement , allowed us to better elucidate cases where the correspondence index  CI  was worse than expected by random chance (i.e., signifying a systematic rather than random divergence). 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Connectivity distributions for individual modalities 
 The distributions for each modality and the aLPFC and vmPFC seed regions (as exemplars) are shown in  Figure 2  (please refer to Supplementary Figure S1 for distributions of all seed/modality combinations). Distributions are thresholded at 10% and 30%, to illustrate how they differ as a function of density for different modalities. As a general observation, we find that distributions for all modalities include the region proximal to the seed, as well as its homotopic contralateral region. The majority of distributions are symmetric (see below) and also include clusters which are spatially distal from the seed and its homologue, but these clusters tended to be tighter for both functional modalities, and more dispersed and “noisy” for both structural ones. Moreover, the functional distributions appear qualitatively more similar to one another. 
 
 
 Correspondence index 
 Figure 2  illustrates the relationship between distributions produced by individual modalities, and the cross-modal correspondence Ψ, for 10% and 30% density. Increasing the density increased the extent of agreement (red and orange), but also increased disagreement (blue and green) across the cortex. For all seed regions, full agreement (red) occurred in regions proximal to the seed region, and its contralateral homotope. For some (but not all) regions, full agreement was also found in distal regions; for instance, in vmPFC (bottom row of  Figure 2 ), full agreement was found in the posterior cingulate and inferior parietal cortex, bilaterally, as well as the ipsilateral inferior temporal cortex. The existence of such distal correspondence depended both on the specific seed region, and the threshold density, and provides a more spatially intuitive representation of the  BS /δ curves. 
 Figure 2  (rightmost plots) shows the correspondence Ψ for two selected seed regions, at two selected threshold densities (10% and 30%). This value gives an indication of how convergence or divergence across modalities is distributed across the cortex. As a general observation, patterns of full agreement (red) were mostly excluded to the region proximal to the seed and its contralateral homotopic region. In some cases (for instance, vmPFC,  Figure 2  at bottom), full agreement extended to regions distant from the seed/homotope. In most cases, there was partial (3-modality) correspondence in distal regions. These relationships were also modulated by density, as is summarized in line plots ( Figure 3 , right column). Mean Ψ ( Figure 4A ) was fairly stable across the density range [0,0.4], after which it converged with random.  CI  also varied across seeds ( Figure 4B ), with vmPFC having the best correspondence, and V5 the worst. 
 
 
 Bimodal comparisons 
 To obtain bimodal comparisons independent of any particular thresholding choice, we thresholded across a large range of densities, [0.025,0.8]. This allowed us to plot the Φ score as a function of density. Φ vs. δ plots for four selected seed regions are shown in  Figure 3  (please refer to Supplementary Figure S2 for similar plots of all seed regions). Importantly, because no statistical threshold was applied to these data, many values – particularly at higher densities – are likely to be spurious (i.e., not significantly different from a null hypothesis of zero correlation). To address this, we analytically determined random values (i.e., values expected by random chance) at all densities (Φ rand , see Methods). These values are shown in  Figure 3  as a dashed line. The degree to which the curves for actual and random values differs indicates how much better the similarity is between two modalities than would be expected by chance. This can be represented as the integral of Φ, minus the integral of Φ rand , across all density values (orange region in  Figure 3 ). To remove any bias towards a particular density range, the  BS  values were further normalized such that random scores were set to zero, and integrals were obtained for these normalized scores. This yielded a summary measure of similarity, which is interpretable as a continuum for which zero signifies no different from random chance, and one signifies full agreement. 
 As shown in  Figures 3  and S3, the  BS /δ relationship differs remarkably across both seed regions and bimodal comparisons. A summary of these patterns across all seed regions is presented in  Figure 5 .  Figure 5A  shows the average and standard deviation (in grey) of Φ and Φ rand  for each bimodal comparison. These patterns differed somewhat across comparisons, but as a general trend, agreement was higher at lower densities and converged to random at higher ones. The mean and standard deviation of the normalized integral scores are shown in  Figure 5B . Notably, the two functional modalities (fMRI and MACM) had the best agreement, which was significantly higher than all other scores ( p  < 0.05, Bonferroni corrected). All other scores, including the CT/VBM, were better than chance, but not significantly different from one another. 
 
 
 Symmetry 
 Both functional and structural covariance patterns show strong interhemispheric symmetry, and it is interesting to investigate how this symmetry might relate to the degree of correspondence across modalities. For instance, do some modalities produce more symmetry than others? Does symmetry predict the degree to which two patterns agree? We find that distributions for all modalities are generally symmetric, with average normalized symmetry Θ norm  being stronger for functional than for structural modalities ( Figure 6A,B ), with the order RS-fMRI > MACM > VBM > CT. Additionally, when averaged across all comparisons involving a single modality,  BS  was strongly correlated with Θ norm  ( Figure 4C ;  r 2  = 0.5,  p  < 0.001), indicating that higher symmetry predicts higher bimodal similarity. 
 
 
 Distance from seed region 
 The relationship between the distance from the seed ROI, density, and bimodal similarity is illustrated in  Figure 7 . For all bimodal comparisons, the strongest similarity occurred in the nearest octile, which corroborates observations from visual inspection of individual surface distributions (cf.  Figures 2  and Supplementary Figure S1), of consistent agreement in areas proximal to the seed ROI or its homotopic region. Generally, some similarity was also observed in the second octile, but only for higher densities (i.e., consisting primarily of the weaker connectivity estimates that survive only low threshold values). Most notably, only for the RS-fMRI/MACM comparison did we find substantial correspondence for distances beyond the second octile. For this comparison, some degree of similarity was found even at large distances for lower densities, illustrating strong agreement between the two functional modalities even at distal locations. 
 
 
 Divergence in structural and functional measures 
 Figure 8  shows the  specific agreement  for functional and structural modalities, both using PrC as an exemplar, and computed as a summary across all nine seed regions. Specific agreement is defined as the case where the two functional modalities show connectivity at a specific density, but the two structural modalities do not – or vice versa. The line plot of  Figure 8  demonstrates that specific agreement is substantially more frequent for the functional modalities, and that this agreement is maximal at a density of ~0.25. The exemplar distribution for PrC was thus obtained at a density of 0.25, and its general pattern is also typical of the other seed ROIs. In particular, this distribution shows that specific functional agreement occurs for larger contiguous regions – in this case for the medial prefrontal cortex, anterior middle temporal cortex, and the angular gyrus – while the pattern for specific structural agreement is comprised of smaller and more diffuse clusters. The general pattern across seed regions is shown at the bottom of  Figure 8 , and shows consistency in the anterior middle cingulate and superior medial prefrontal regions, as well as the anterior insula, angular gyrus, and supplementary motor area. The structural agreement pattern is less widespread, but shows consistency in the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and the inferior lateral parietal cortex. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 
 Summary 
 Both functional and structural covariance are popular means of inferring “connectivity” in whole brain analyses of human imaging data. For structural covariance in particular, the relationship to physical connectivity is premised on the notion that mutually trophic functional activation patterns can lead to covarying morphology ( Mechelli et al. 2005 ). This hypothesis suggests that structural covariance patterns should have an association with functional covariance, i.e., more robust functional activations should drive coordinated morphological growth. Evidence from histology ( Zheng and Purves 1995 ), VBM ( Maguire et al. 2000 ;  Draganski et al. 2004 ), and cortical thickness ( Lerch et al. 2006 ) lends support to this possibility. However, our results suggest that this relationship is rather limited – both cortical thickness and VBM covariance patterns had a better correspondence with RS-fMRI and MACM than would be expected by random chance, but only marginally so; with the most consistent cross-modal correspondence occurring in regions proximal to the seed region, or homotopic regions in the opposite hemisphere. Perhaps more surprisingly, the agreement between covariance patterns produced by both morphological approaches was also quite low; indeed, it did not statistically differ from the comparisons between structural and functional modalities. In contrast, the agreement between RS-fMRI and MACM was substantially higher than for all other comparisons. 
 
 
 Spatial patterns of convergence and divergence 
 The correspondence index,  CI , measures the degree to which patterns from all four modalities agree. This measure allows us to compare individual seed regions on how consistently they generate a connectivity estimate, across multiple modalities. We found significant variance across seed regions on the  CI  measure, as an integral across densities ( Figure 4B ). Specifically, vmPFC and MTG showed the highest correspondence, while V5 and aINS showed relatively low correspondence. The reasons for these differences are not readily interpretable. The relative symmetry of a seed region’s distribution is one likely factor (see below). The specific methodological differences between modalities is also likely a significant factor. Interestingly, at very high densities,  CI  actually assumes values which are  less  than those expected by random chance (see  Figure 3  and  Figure 4A ). This observation may reflect systematic differences between modalities, i.e., differential patterns of “structured noise” which may result in a non-random divergence at these high densities. These differences also vary by seed region, and thus may partly explain the variation in correspondence across seeds. 
 The most consistent pattern of cross-modal convergence across seed regions occurred in regions proximal to the seed, as well as its contralateral homotope. The relationships between distance from the seed ROI (or its homotope) and bimodal similarity,  BS , are summarized as an average across seed ROIs in  Figure 7 . Here, we divided the geodesic distance from the seed ROI into eight quantiles, and assessed similarity for each subsurface. In general, the highest  BS  occurred for the first octile (i.e., vertices closest to the seed ROI or its homotopic region), which substantiates the qualitative observations shown in  Figures 2  and S1, and described in more detail below. For further distances, only the RS-fMRI/MACM comparison yielded a substantially better-than-random  BS . For this comparison, we found substantial agreement even at higher distances, for lower densities, indicating some consistency in the whole-brain agreement of these two functional approaches. The consistent agreement for proximal regions is not particularly surprising, given the smoothness of each dataset. However, in many cases, the extent of the distribution went beyond that expected from the intrinsic smoothness. It is thus also likely that a large proportion of spatially proximal agreement reflects a robust connectivity pattern for neighbouring regions. Such connectivity bias for short connections has been demonstrated in macaque tract tracing ( Markov et al. 2011 ), and may contribute to the spatial smoothness of both the BOLD signal and brain morphology. 
 Similarly, the robustness of cross-modal correspondence for homotopic regions likely reflects the degree of functional and structural symmetry of the cortex. For functional activations, such symmetry is an ubiquitous observation, and may reflect a combination of well-characterized parallel processing streams, and interhemispheric cross-talk via callosal fibers (although such symmetry is also found in the absence of callosal fibers; see  Tyszka et al. 2011 ;  Uddin et al. 2008 ;  Hinkley et al. 2012 ). The brain also exhibits a high degree of morphological symmetry, consistent with the patterns found here, which are likely due to a combination of genetic determination and symmetrical functional co-activations which drive growth in a coordinated way. Here, we here find a strong association between the relative symmetry of the covariance distribution for a particular seed/modality and the average  BS  of that modality ( r 2  = 0.5;  Figure 6C ), which supports such a relationship. An association between the symmetry of brain morphology and function has also been reported in earlier studies. For instance,  Aboitiz, Scheibel, and Zaidel (1992)  found a correlation between corpus callosum size and symmetry of the Sylvian fissure, while negative associations have been reported for corpus callosum size and the degree of behavioural asymmetry in language processing tasks ( O’Kusky et al. 1988 ;  Yazgan et al. 1995 ). On the other hand, functional covariance was generally more symmetric than structural ( Figure 4A,B ). Since RS-fMRI and MACM also had a higher similarity with one another, the relationship with symmetry may also be reflecting this difference. Future studies could address the relationship between symmetry, correspondence, and genetic influence, using heritability analyses (cf.  Winkler et al. 2010 ). 
 Notwithstanding the average BS/distance relationships described above, full convergence (Ψ = 1) was also observed for some seed regions in spatially distal, non-homotopic regions of cortex. As there is no a priori reason to expect such distal correspondence, these patterns represent the strongest evidence of robust long-range connectivity patterns captured both by structural and functional covariance. These patterns of convergence and divergence between distributions produced by each modality varied according to seed region, and as a complement to summarizing across seeds, it is also interesting to consider patterns for each particular region. The left aLPFC ( Figure 2 , top), for instance, showed strong bilateral cross-modal correspondence (orange and red regions) in the aMCC and PrC. Corroborating this finding, several lines of evidence have demonstrated dense structural connectivity between LPFC and cingulate regions (medial PFC), using tract tracing in nonhuman primates ( Saleem, Miller, and Price 2014 ), as well as DWI tractography in humans ( Beckmann, Johansen-Berg, and Rushworth 2009 ). On the other hand, morphological measures disagreed with functional ones in widespread areas of the lateral temporal lobe and other parts of medial PFC, resulting in poor general correspondence for this seed region (green and blue regions). The morphological measures themselves diverged in their correlational patterns, which reduces the confidence with which inferences about connectivity can be drawn in these regions of cortex. 
 As a second example, the left vmPFC ( Figure 2 , bottom) showed strong correspondence for the posterior cingulate and inferior parietal cortex bilaterally, with divergence occurring primarily in lateral temporal and prefrontal regions. These regions comprise the well-known default mode network (DMN), which has been studied using resting-state fMRI ( Fox and Raichle 2007 ;  Greicius et al. 2003 ), PET ( Raichle et al. 2001 ), DWI, and macaque tract tracing ( Margulies et al. 2009 ). vmPFC had the best mean  CI , which likely reflects the robust connectivity of the DMN, a network which has been topologically characterized as a “rich club” ( Heuvel and Sporns 2011 ), comprised of strongly interconnected “hub” regions, including PCC, PrC (which also shows high correspondence as a seed region), vmPFC, and inferior parietal cortex. The ubiquitous activation of this network may account for the morphological correlations observed here, and supports the idea of gross-scale activity-dependent plasticity, being most prominent for those regional pairs which are most continuously co-activated across the lifespan. 
 Plotted as a function of density,  BS , differs remarkably across individual comparisons (see  Figure 3 ,  Figure 7 , and Supplementary Figure S1, for reference). In some cases,  BS  converges to zero (random) at higher densities (typically δ > 0.4), while in other cases it remains fairly stable across the entire range. As a general trend (see summary in  Figure 5A ),  BS  is highest at lower densities and decreases progressively at higher ones. This is not particularly surprising, since at higher densities, an increasing number of above-threshold edges will be based on very weak or spurious correlations. Similarly, at lower densities, modalities are expected to have higher agreement based mostly on the robust proximal and homotopic agreement which are common to all modalities. However, the relationship between  BS  and density is not trivially linear, and the present results help us characterize the density ranges over which the different modalities produce convergent patterns of connectivity estimates. Based on the patterns we observe, considered on the whole, only fMRI/MACM converge at rates substantially better than random. This is not universally true, however, since similarity between other modality pairs can be considerably higher for specific seed regions (see, for instance, area M1 in  Figure 3 ). 
 
 
 Structural versus functional covariance 
 Bimodal similarity was significantly higher between the two functional modalities (RS-fMRI and MACM), whereas there was no significant difference in agreement between any of the other modality pairs, including the two structural covariance approaches. This higher agreement for fMRI likely reflects both functional and methodological factors. Functionally, these results support the idea that seed regions are robustly co-activated with a “core” set of other regions, regardless of whether a specific task is presented to the subject. This agrees with evidence from  Smith et al. (2009) , who found a strong overlap between independent components derived from RS-fMRI, and networks corresponding to task activations from the BrainMap database. Methodologically, the two modalities are based upon an identical observation (the BOLD signal), while the morphometric techniques may estimate substantially different quantities. Additionally, the overlap between functional approaches may reflect the poor temporal resolution of the BOLD signal, with respect to the time scales on which neurons communicate. This temporal blurring likely captures only the accumulated activity as information is propagated through a network, which is evident both in task-driven and resting-state conditions. 
 Interestingly, we found that the structural and functional modalities were no less similar than the two structural modalities ( Figure 5B ). All comparisons were better than chance, but also exhibited a high degree of divergence. The former observation suggests that structural covariance indeed does capture functional co-activation, to some degree, which is consistent with the notion that SCov represents mutually trophic influences. The latter observation suggests that this similarity is limited, however. Additionally, we found that the pattern of specific agreement (where functional modalities find connectivity but structural ones do not, or vice versa) is much stronger and more widespread for the functional modalities, with a peak at density δ = 0.25 ( Figure 8 ). This suggests that structural covariance fails to capture functional associations across a wide swathe of cortex, while only marginally adding complementary information (i.e., in the form of specific structural agreement). It is a notable caveat, however, that we are summarizing on the basis of only nine selected seed ROIs; a more global analysis would be necessary to more thoroughly characterize this relationship. 
 Given the similar objective of both CT and VBM analysis (i.e., an anatomical estimate of grey matter morphology), the poor correspondence between them is somewhat unexpected. However, there are a number of distinct differences between these approaches which may help elucidate this divergence. While cortical thickness has the advantage of explicitly modelling the cortical sheet, and thus respecting its convoluted geometry, its accuracy depends on the accuracy with which GM is estimated, since this estimation determines the location of the modelled interface between cortical GM and WM. At present, most approaches – including CIVET – estimate GM using a global intensity distribution. However, as the cellular composition (e.g., the number of myelinated axons) of the cortical mantle varies substantially across the cortex, this estimate is likely to underestimate GM in some regions, and overestimate in others. More critically, it is impossible, using only T1-weighted information, to disambiguate the relative contribution of myelinated axons, neuronal somata, glia, and other cell types and supporting tissue, to an observed difference or correlation in this estimated value. In other words, given the heterogeneity of GM and WM tissue across the cortex ( Elston 2002 ;  Glasser and Van Essen 2011 ), the use of a single T1-weighted intensity value to classify tissue is fundamentally limited. 
 VBM analysis, on the other hand, estimates the deformation necessary to transform an individual T1-weighted image to a pre-defined template image. Firstly, this approach is designed to estimate grey matter volume, rather than thickness, which is conceptually a quite different quantity. This transformation is limited by the fact that no prior model (e.g., a cortical surface) is specified for the tissue of interest, and thus deformation is free to occur in three dimensions equally. Due to this lack of definitive model, VBM typically relies upon a smoothing kernel to better ensure alignment between images, which often results in a misalignment across individuals, particularly in regions where gyral morphology varies substantially across individuals (cf.  Zilles et al. 1997 ). Thus, while VBM escapes the limitation of defining fast boundaries between tissue classes, it loses spatial specificity and sensitivity to identify localized effects, which are better captured using surface-based alignment ( Frost and Goebel 2012 ;  Desai et al. 2005 ;  Anticevic et al. 2008 ). Moreover, discrepancies between different VBM approaches (FSL versus SPM) have been reported, which suggest that this method is highly sensitive to the statistical assumptions and specific methods used ( Rajagopalan and Pioro 2015 ). 
 The poor correspondence between structural and functional covariance patterns suggests that SCov derived from neither structural modality captures functional connectivity patterns well. Using an ROI-based approach, we have recently reported a similar lack of correspondence between (cortical thickness) SCov and RS-fMRI (and indeed DWI- and tract-tracing-based estimates as well;  Reid et al. 2015 ). SCov was also found to have a poor stability for moderate correlations, measured as a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) across random subsamples of the data, relative to RS-fMRI. SNR for individual ROI pairs was furthermore strongly associated with the degree of cross-modal correspondence in this study, which suggests that structural covariance is less sensitive to moderate associations than functional approaches, and may help account for the discrepancies observed here. Notably, in both studies, we used relatively large sample sizes (89 and 132). These findings are not completely unexpected, given the numerous influences which likely contribute to brain morphology over time. Both cortical thickness and volume have strong genetic determinants, for instance ( Panizzon et al. 2009 ;  Winkler et al. 2010 ), which may operate largely independently of functional activations. Correlations in structural morphometry may thus be driven by global variations which are largely accountable to these genetic influences. Moreover, the vastly different time scales of the BOLD signal and morphological growth ensure that only very robust and ubiquitous functional correlations are likely to be captured by measuring the coordination of brain morphology. Here, we find the best functional/structural correspondence in regions of the DMN (vmPFC and PrC), as well as MTG, which may reflect the robustness with which these “hub” regions are activated across the lifespan. It is likely that the utility of SCov to capture functional covariance patterns is limited to such networks. Indeed, while SCov patterns may be a useful means of differentiating between groups on the basis of clinical or psychological scores ( Lerch et al. 2006 ;  Alexander-Bloch et al. 2013 ;  Evans 2013 ), we would conclude that their usefulness for inferring functional brain connectivity, at least in the healthy adult population considered here, is rather limited. 
 
 
 Limitations and Perspectives 
 Connectivity estimates from each modality considered here are subject to the particular set of preprocessing steps which were applied to the raw imaging data. Each preprocessing regime entails a set of choices that a researcher must make, and in many cases, there is a lack of consensus in the neuroimaging community over which choice is most ideal. For example, all four approaches considered here require than some smoothing kernel be applied to the data, which helps deal with noise and spatial uncertainty. The choice of smoothing kernel (typically an isotropic Gaussian with a specific full-width-at-half-maximum parameter, or FWHM) differs between modalities, and is motivated by various factors which are often unique to a particular approach. Standard kernels generally reflect the degree of spatial uncertainty in a given modality, thus leading to a different inherent smoothness in each distribution being compared here. Similarly, it is common in preprocessing pipelines to include steps which attempt to remove nuisance factors from the raw image acquisitions. This is particularly pertinent for BOLD time series, for which artifacts from subject motion, respiration, and cardiovascular rhythms are well characterized (e.g.,  Birn et al. 2008 ;  Power et al. 2014 ). Numerous approaches have been proposed for isolating the neural signal from these noise components. However, each of these methods has limitations in terms of how well it removes nuisance variance, while not also removing the neural signal of interest ( Power et al. 2012 ) or even inducing spurious variance ( Murphy et al. 2009 ). For the sake of simplicity, we chose in this study to select one particular set of smoothing, artifact removal, and other preprocessing steps, for each modality. A natural extension of the current approach would be to systematically manipulate these parameters with the goal of maximizing cross-modal correspondence. 
 Another necessary choice for this study was the selection of seed ROIs. For this purpose, we chose a set of ROIs that have been previously derived through various approaches, including meta-analysis, cytoarchitectonic classification, and task-based fMRI experiments. Our choice was further motivated by a desire to provide a good representation of the whole cortex. This approach allowed us to relate our results to the specific methodologies and studies from which they were derived, but it also entails a number of limitations. Firstly, since the extent of each ROI was determined by the specific methodology from which it was derived, it varied in size and shape across ROIs. Secondly, our choice of nine ROIs, while spatially diffuse, does not provide substantial coverage of the cortical sheet. It is likely that both ROI extent and coverage will provide additional insight into how each connectivity estimate behaves across the cortex, and another useful extension of this study would be to systematically investigate how ROI size and position influence cross-modal correspondence in whole-brain parcellations with equal-sized parcels. These can be derived, for instance, using a “patch” approach, as in  Hagmann et al. (2008) . 
 The use of DWI-based tractography has become a popular and promising means of estimating “structural” connectivity between brain regions, due to its relatively more direct estimation of white matter microstructure. In a recent study, we compared probabilistic DWI tractography to both RS-fMRI and SCov based on cortical thickness, finding a moderately high correspondence for the former, and poor correspondence for the latter ( Reid et al., 2015 ). However, in this article we also highlight a number of substantial biases in the tractography approach, which are not trivial to address. Specifically, both the distance and anisotropy profile of a given streamline will bias its apparent connectivity (i.e., number of streamlines originating in region A and terminating in region B) in a way that is difficult to model. While excellent methods have been proposed to deal with complex fibre configurations and allow a better sampling of potential streamline orientations (e.g.,  Behrens et al., 2007 ), there remains an inherent ambiguity in the relationship between tractography and the structural connectivity it is meant to model. In this study, we have chosen not to include DWI tractography or other alternative estimates of brain connectivity. While this limits the generalizability of our findings to alternative estimation approaches, our intention was to specifically investigate correspondence between functional and structural covariance estimates, to test and establish constraints on the “mutually trophic” hypothesis. However, the method we present is easily extensible to broader investigations of any method with attempts to estimate connectivity in a seed-based fashion. 
 Finally, while the NKI sample used here to obtain RS-fMRI and T1 images has a fairly wide age range, it does not include a representation of either early-life neurodevelopment, late-life neurodegeneration, or disease states associated with systematic cortical atrophy. Similarly, the sample chosen for MACM analysis was filtered to exclude studies of clinical populations. Focusing on such populations will likely alter the observed lack of correspondence for our SCov-based connectivity estimates. Specifically, the distribution of brain morphology across the population considered here is expected to be relatively stable, and individual differences are highly heritable ( Baaré et al. 2001 ;  Chouinard-Decorte et al. 2014 ). On the other hand, in early life, the morphology of the brain changes according to a stereotypical developmental pattern, and its covariance can potentially help elucidate developmental processes and abnormalities in these processes ( Khundrakpam et al. 2013 ). Similarly, late-life neurodegenerative conditions such as small vessel disease ( Laat et al. 2012 ;  Reid et al. 2010 ), Alzheimer’s disease ( Lerch et al. 2005 ;  Reid and Evans 2013  for review), or Parkinson’s disease ( Xia et al. 2013 ;  Fioravanti et al. 2015 ) also result in stereotypical changes to brain morphology, which give rise to observable changes in structural covariance ( Tuladhar et al. 2015 ;  He, Chen, and Evans 2008 ;  Zhou et al. 2012 ). Psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia and depression have also been shown to have common patterns of grey matter atrophy, focused mainly on “hub” regions ( Goodkind et al. 2015 ;  Crossley et al. 2014 ). Thus it is likely that the poor cross-modal correspondence observed here might improved if one were to apply the present methodology to developing or specific clinical populations. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 Our findings provide a number of insights into the use of functional and structural covariance to infer brain connectivity. Firstly, while the two functional approaches had a substantially better correspondence than all other comparisons, the same was not true of the two structural covariance measures, which had a better-than-chance agreement, but did not agree better than comparisons of different modalities (i.e., structural vs. functional). While this difference may reflect methodological and conceptual differences, these results indicate that functional and structural covariance do not generally capture the same underlying phenomena, and calls into question the degree to which SCov analyses truly capture activity-related “mutually trophic influences”, at least in the healthy adult population. Secondly, the degree to which connectivity inferred from different modalities corresponds is highly dependent on how these distributions are thresholded, and this relationship is not trivial. This indicates that arbitrary thresholding (including statistical p-value thresholds) will likely bias seed-based connectivity results in a way which is difficult to predict  a priori . Based on these observations, we recommend the use of the approach introduced herein, whereby thresholding was performed across all plausible threshold densities, compared to random expected values, and finally integrated to obtain a non-biased estimate of connectivity and correspondence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding 
 
 This study was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, EI 816/4-1; EI 816/6-1 and LA 3071/3-1.), the National Institute of Mental Health (R01-MH074457) and the European EFT program (Human Brain Project). 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Aboitiz 
 F 
 
 
 Scheibel 
 AB 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Morphometry of the Sylvian fissure and the corpus callosum, with emphasis on sex differences 
 Brain 
 1992 
 115 
 1521 
 1541 
 1422802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alexander-Bloch 
 A 
 
 
 Raznahan 
 A 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 E 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 The convergence of maturational change and structural covariance in human cortical networks 
 J Neurosci 
 2013 
 33 
 2889 
 2899 
 23407947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Dierker 
 DL 
 
 
 Gillespie 
 SK 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Csernansky 
 JG 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Comparing surface-based and volume-based analyses of functional neuroimaging data in patients with schizophrenia 
 Neuroimage 
 2008 
 41 
 835 
 848 
 18434199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Voxel-based morphometry–the methods 
 Neuroimage 
 2000 
 11 
 805 
 821 
 10860804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Baaré 
 WF 
 
 
 Hulshoff Pol 
 HE 
 
 
 Boomsma 
 DI 
 
 
 Posthuma 
 D 
 
 
 Geus 
 EJ de 
 
 
 Schnack 
 HG 
 
 
 Haren 
 NE van 
 
 
 Oel 
 CJ van 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 Quantitative genetic modeling of variation in human brain morphology 
 Cerebral cortex (New York, NY: 1991) 
 2001 
 11 
 816 
 824 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 M 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MFS 
 
 
 Connectivity-based parcellation of human cingulate cortex and its relation to functional specialization 
 The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 
 2009 
 29 
 1175 
 1190 
 19176826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Berg 
 HJ 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 MF 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Probabilistic diffusion tractography with multiple fibre orientations: What can we gain? 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 34 
 1 
 144 
 155 
 17070705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behzadi 
 Y 
 
 
 Restom 
 K 
 
 
 Liau 
 J 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 A component based noise correction method (CompCor) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 37 
 90 
 101 
 17560126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bi 
 G 
 
 
 Poo 
 M 
 
 
 Synaptic modification by correlated activity: Hebb’s postulate revisited 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 2001 
 24 
 139 
 166 
 11283308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Smith 
 MA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 The respiration response function: The temporal dynamics of fMRI signal fluctuations related to changes in respiration 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 40 
 644 
 654 
 18234517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bojak 
 I 
 
 
 Oostendorp 
 TF 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Kotter 
 R 
 
 
 Connecting mean field models of neural activity to EEG and fMRI data 
 Brain Topogr 
 2010 
 23 
 139 
 149 
 20364434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Schilbach 
 L 
 
 
 Vogeley 
 K 
 
 
 Schneider 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition: ALE meta-analysis on morality, theory of mind, and empathy 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2012 
 217 
 783 
 796 
 22270812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 ALE meta-analysis of action observation and imitation in the human brain 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 50 
 1148 
 1167 
 20056149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chai 
 XJ 
 
 
 Castanon 
 AN 
 
 
 Ongur 
 D 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Anticorrelations in resting state networks without global signal regression 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 1420 
 1428 
 21889994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chouinard-Decorte 
 F 
 
 
 McKay 
 DR 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Khundrakpam 
 B 
 
 
 Zhao 
 L 
 
 
 Karama 
 S 
 
 
 Rioux 
 P 
 
 
 Sprooten 
 E 
 
 
 Knowles 
 E 
 
 
 JW 
 JK 
 
 
 Curran 
 JE 
 
 
 Göring 
 HH 
 
 
 Dyer 
 TD 
 
 
 Olvera 
 RL 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 Duggirala 
 R 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Almasy 
 L 
 
 
 Blangero 
 J 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Heritable changes in regional cortical thickness with age 
 Brain Imaging and Behavior 
 2014 
 8 
 208 
 216 
 24752552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cordes 
 D 
 
 
 Haughton 
 VM 
 
 
 Arfanakis 
 K 
 
 
 Carew 
 JD 
 
 
 Turski 
 PA 
 
 
 Moritz 
 CH 
 
 
 Quigley 
 MA 
 
 
 Meyerand 
 ME 
 
 
 Frequencies Contributing to Functional Connectivity in the Cerebral Cortex in “Resting-state” Data 
 American Journal of Neuroradiology 
 2001 
 22 
 1326 
 1333 
 11498421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crossley 
 NA 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Scott 
 J 
 
 
 Carletti 
 F 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 McGuire 
 P 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders 
 Brain: A Journal of Neurology 
 2014 
 137 
 2382 
 2395 
 25057133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Sereno 
 MI 
 
 
 Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction 
 Neuroimage 
 1999 
 9 
 179 
 194 
 9931268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Liebenthal 
 E 
 
 
 Possing 
 ET 
 
 
 Waldron 
 E 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Volumetric vs. surface-based alignment for localization of auditory cortex activation 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 26 
 1019 
 1029 
 15893476 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Draganski 
 B 
 
 
 Gaser 
 C 
 
 
 Busch 
 V 
 
 
 Schuierer 
 G 
 
 
 Bogdahn 
 U 
 
 
 May 
 A 
 
 
 Neuroplasticity: changes in grey matter induced by training 
 Nature 
 2004 
 427 
 311 
 312 
 14737157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Jbabdi 
 S 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TE 
 
 
 Anatomical and functional connectivity of cytoarchitectonic areas within the human parietal operculum 
 J Neurosci 
 2010 
 30 
 6409 
 6421 
 20445067 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Wang 
 LE 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Coordinate-based activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: a random-effects approach based on empirical estimates of spatial uncertainty 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2009 
 30 
 2907 
 2926 
 19172646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elston 
 GN 
 
 
 Cortical heterogeneity: implications for visual processing and polysensory integration 
 J Neurocytol 
 2002 
 31 
 317 
 335 
 12815250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Engert 
 F 
 
 
 Bonhoeffer 
 T 
 
 
 Dendritic spine changes associated with hippocampal long-term synaptic plasticity 
 Nature 
 1999 
 399 
 66 
 70 
 10331391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eulenburg 
 P zu 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Meta-analytical definition and functional connectivity of the human vestibular cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 162 
 169 
 22209784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Networks of anatomical covariance 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 80 
 489 
 504 
 23711536 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fioravanti 
 V 
 
 
 Benuzzi 
 F 
 
 
 Codeluppi 
 L 
 
 
 Contardi 
 S 
 
 
 Cavallieri 
 F 
 
 
 Nichelli 
 P 
 
 
 Valzania 
 F 
 
 
 MRI Correlates of Parkinson’s Disease Progression: A Voxel Based Morphometry Study, MRI Correlates of Parkinson’s Disease Progression: A Voxel Based Morphometry Study 
 Parkinson’s Disease, Parkinson’s Disease 2015 
 2015 
 2015 
 e378032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 MD 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2007 
 8 
 700 
 711 
 17704812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Meta-analysis in human neuroimaging: Computational modeling of large-scale databases 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2014 
 37 
 409 
 434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 MA 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Measuring structural-functional correspondence: spatial variability of specialised brain regions after macro-anatomical alignment 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 59 
 1369 
 1381 
 21875671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Mapping human cortical areas in vivo based on myelin content as revealed by T1- and T2-weighted MRI 
 J Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 11597 
 11616 
 21832190 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goodkind 
 M 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Oathes 
 D 
 
 
 Jiang 
 Y 
 
 
 Chang 
 A 
 
 
 Jones-Hagata 
 L 
 
 
 Ortega 
 B 
 
 
 Zaiko 
 Y 
 
 
 Roach 
 E 
 
 
 Korgaonkar 
 M 
 
 
 Grieve 
 S 
 
 
 Galatzer-Levy 
 I 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness 
 JAMA Psychiatry 
 2015 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goulas 
 A 
 
 
 Bastiani 
 M 
 
 
 Bezgin 
 G 
 
 
 Uylings 
 HB 
 
 
 Roebroeck 
 A 
 
 
 Stiers 
 P 
 
 
 Comparative analysis of the macroscale structural connectivity in the macaque and human brain 
 PLoS Comput Biol 
 2014 
 10 
 e1003529 
 24676052 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Greicius 
 MD 
 
 
 Krasnow 
 B 
 
 
 Reiss 
 AL 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A network analysis of the default mode hypothesis 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2003 
 100 
 253 
 258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Wedeen 
 VJ 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Mapping the Structural Core of Human Cerebral Cortex 
 PLoS Biol 
 2008 
 6 
 e159 
 18597554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He 
 Y 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Structural insights into aberrant topological patterns of large-scale cortical networks in Alzheimer’s disease 
 J Neurosci 
 2008 
 28 
 4756 
 4766 
 18448652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heuvel 
 MP van den 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Rich-Club Organization of the Human Connectome 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2011 
 31 
 15775 
 15786 
 22049421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hinkley 
 LB 
 
 
 Marco 
 EJ 
 
 
 Findlay 
 AM 
 
 
 Honma 
 S 
 
 
 Jeremy 
 RJ 
 
 
 Strominger 
 Z 
 
 
 Bukshpun 
 P 
 
 
 Wakahiro 
 M 
 
 
 Brown 
 WS 
 
 
 Paul 
 LK 
 
 
 Barkovich 
 AJ 
 
 
 Mukherjee 
 P 
 
 
 Nagarajan 
 SS 
 
 
 Sherr 
 EH 
 
 
 The role of corpus callosum development in functional connectivity and cognitive processing 
 PLoS ONE 
 2012 
 7 
 e39804 
 22870191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 F 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 The “what” and “when” of self-initiated movements 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2013 
 23 
 520 
 530 
 22414772 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Honey 
 CJ 
 
 
 Sporns 
 O 
 
 
 Cammoun 
 L 
 
 
 Gigandet 
 X 
 
 
 Thiran 
 JP 
 
 
 Meuli 
 R 
 
 
 Hagmann 
 P 
 
 
 Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 2035 
 2040 
 19188601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jaccard 
 P 
 
 
 The distribution of flora in the alpine zone 
 New Phytologist 
 1912 
 11 
 37 
 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khundrakpam 
 BS 
 
 
 Reid 
 A 
 
 
 Brauer 
 J 
 
 
 Carbonell 
 F 
 
 
 Lewis 
 J 
 
 
 Ameis 
 S 
 
 
 Karama 
 S 
 
 
 Lee 
 J 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Das 
 S 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Brain Development Cooperative Group 
 Developmental Changes in Organization of Structural Brain Networks 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2013 
 23 
 2072 
 2085 
 22784607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 JS 
 
 
 Singh 
 V 
 
 
 Lee 
 JK 
 
 
 Lerch 
 J 
 
 
 Ad-Dab’bagh 
 Y 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 D 
 
 
 Lee 
 JM 
 
 
 Kim 
 SI 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Automated 3-D extraction and evaluation of the inner and outer cortical surfaces using a Laplacian map and partial volume effect classification 
 Neuroimage 
 2005 
 27 
 210 
 221 
 15896981 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kurth 
 F 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 A link between the systems: functional differentiation and integration within the human insula revealed by meta-analysis 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2010 
 214 
 519 
 534 
 20512376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laat 
 KF de 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Grim 
 DC 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Kötter 
 R 
 
 
 Norden 
 AGW van 
 
 
 Leeuw 
 F-E de 
 
 
 Cortical thickness is associated with gait disturbances in cerebral small vessel disease 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 59 
 1478 
 1484 
 
 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21854857 
 
 21854857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Uecker 
 AM 
 
 
 Ray 
 KL 
 
 
 Saenz 
 JJ 
 
 
 McKay 
 DR 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Laird 
 RW 
 
 
 Robinson 
 JL 
 
 
 Turner 
 JA 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 The BrainMap strategy for standardization, sharing, and meta-analysis of neuroimaging data 
 BMC Res Notes 
 2011 
 4 
 349 
 21906305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Li 
 K 
 
 
 Robin 
 DA 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Investigating the functional heterogeneity of the default mode network using coordinate-based meta-analytic modeling 
 J Neurosci 
 2009a 
 29 
 14496 
 14505 
 19923283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Lost in localization? The focus is meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 2009b 
 48 
 18 
 20 
 19559800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Ray 
 KL 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Networks of Task Co-Activations 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 80 
 505 
 514 
 23631994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Worsley 
 K 
 
 
 Shaw 
 WP 
 
 
 Greenstein 
 DK 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 J 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Mapping anatomical correlations across cerebral cortex (MACACC) using cortical thickness from MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2006 
 31 
 993 
 1003 
 16624590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lerch 
 JP 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 JC 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 Hampel 
 H 
 
 
 Teipel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Focal decline of cortical thickness in Alzheimer’s disease identified by computational neuroanatomy 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY: 1991) 
 2005 
 15 
 995 
 1001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 P 
 
 
 Legault 
 J 
 
 
 Litcofsky 
 KA 
 
 
 Neuroplasticity as a function of second language learning: anatomical changes in the human brain 
 Cortex 
 2014 
 58 
 301 
 324 
 24996640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li 
 SC 
 
 
 Brehmer 
 Y 
 
 
 Shing 
 YL 
 
 
 Werkle-Bergner 
 M 
 
 
 Lindenberger 
 U 
 
 
 Neuromodulation of associative and organizational plasticity across the life span: empirical evidence and neurocomputational modeling 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 2006 
 30 
 775 
 790 
 16930705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lyttelton 
 O 
 
 
 Boucher 
 M 
 
 
 Robbins 
 S 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 An unbiased iterative group registration template for cortical surface analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 2007 
 34 
 1535 
 1544 
 17188895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lyttelton 
 OC 
 
 
 Karama 
 S 
 
 
 Ad-Dab’bagh 
 Y 
 
 
 Zatorre 
 RJ 
 
 
 Carbonell 
 F 
 
 
 Worsley 
 K 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Positional and surface area asymmetry of the human cerebral cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 46 
 895 
 903 
 19345735 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 D 
 
 
 Kabani 
 N 
 
 
 Avis 
 D 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Automated 3-D extraction of inner and outer surfaces of cerebral cortex from MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2000 
 12 
 340 
 356 
 10944416 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Gadian 
 DG 
 
 
 Johnsrude 
 IS 
 
 
 Good 
 CD 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2000 
 97 
 4398 
 4403 
 10716738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 C 
 
 
 Lohmann 
 G 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Villringer 
 A 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 20069 
 20074 
 19903877 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Markov 
 NT 
 
 
 Misery 
 P 
 
 
 Falchier 
 A 
 
 
 Lamy 
 C 
 
 
 Vezoli 
 J 
 
 
 Quilodran 
 R 
 
 
 Gariel 
 MA 
 
 
 Giroud 
 P 
 
 
 Ercsey-Ravasz 
 M 
 
 
 Pilaz 
 LJ 
 
 
 Huissoud 
 C 
 
 
 Barone 
 P 
 
 
 Dehay 
 C 
 
 
 Toroczkai 
 Z 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 H 
 
 
 Knoblauch 
 K 
 
 
 Weight consistency specifies regularities of macaque cortical networks 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY: 1991) 
 2011 
 21 
 1254 
 1272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 J 
 
 
 Toga 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 J 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Woods 
 R 
 
 
 Paus 
 T 
 
 
 Simpson 
 G 
 
 
 Pike 
 B 
 
 
 Holmes 
 C 
 
 
 Collins 
 L 
 
 
 Thompson 
 P 
 
 
 MacDonald 
 D 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Schormann 
 T 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 Geyer 
 S 
 
 
 Parsons 
 L 
 
 
 Narr 
 K 
 
 
 Kabani 
 N 
 
 
 Le Goualher 
 G 
 
 
 Boomsma 
 D 
 
 
 Cannon 
 T 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Mazoyer 
 B 
 
 
 A probabilistic atlas and reference system for the human brain: International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM) 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B, Biol Sci 
 2001 
 356 
 1293 
 1322 
 11545704 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Structural covariance in the human cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 2005 
 25 
 8303 
 8310 
 16148238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Messé 
 A 
 
 
 Hutt 
 MT 
 
 
 König 
 P 
 
 
 Hilgetag 
 CC 
 
 
 A closer look at the apparent correlation of structural and functional connectivity in excitable neural networks 
 Sci Rep 
 2015 
 5 
 7870 
 25598302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miranda-Dominguez 
 O 
 
 
 Mills 
 BD 
 
 
 Grayson 
 D 
 
 
 Woodall 
 A 
 
 
 Grant 
 KA 
 
 
 Kroenke 
 CD 
 
 
 Fair 
 DA 
 
 
 Bridging the gap between the human and macaque connectome: a quantitative comparison of global interspecies structure-function relationships and network topology 
 J Neurosci 
 2014 
 34 
 5552 
 5563 
 24741045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murphy 
 K 
 
 
 Birn 
 RM 
 
 
 Handwerker 
 DA 
 
 
 Jones 
 TB 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 The impact of global signal regression on resting state correlations: Are anti-correlated networks introduced? 
 NeuroImage 
 2009 
 44 
 893 
 905 
 18976716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Narsude 
 M 
 
 
 Gallichan 
 D 
 
 
 Zwaag 
 W van der 
 
 
 Gruetter 
 R 
 
 
 Marques 
 JP 
 
 
 Three-dimensional echo planar imaging with controlled aliasing: A sequence for high temporal resolution functional MRI 
 Magnetic resonance in medicine 
 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nooner 
 KB 
 
 
 Colcombe 
 SJ 
 
 
 Tobe 
 RH 
 
 
 Mennes 
 M 
 
 
 Benedict 
 MM 
 
 
 Moreno 
 AL 
 
 
 Panek 
 LJ 
 
 
 Brown 
 S 
 
 
 Zavitz 
 ST 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Sikka 
 S 
 
 
 Gutman 
 D 
 
 
 Bangaru 
 S 
 
 
 Schlachter 
 RT 
 
 
 Kamiel 
 SM 
 
 
 Anwar 
 AR 
 
 
 Hinz 
 CM 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 MS 
 
 
 Rachlin 
 AB 
 
 
 Adelsberg 
 S 
 
 
 Cheung 
 B 
 
 
 Khanuja 
 R 
 
 
 Yan 
 C 
 
 
 Craddock 
 CC 
 
 
 Calhoun 
 V 
 
 
 Courtney 
 W 
 
 
 King 
 M 
 
 
 Wood 
 D 
 
 
 Cox 
 CL 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Petkova 
 E 
 
 
 Reiss 
 PT 
 
 
 Duan 
 N 
 
 
 Thomsen 
 D 
 
 
 Biswal 
 B 
 
 
 Coffey 
 B 
 
 
 Hoptman 
 MJ 
 
 
 Javitt 
 DC 
 
 
 Pomara 
 N 
 
 
 Sidtis 
 JJ 
 
 
 Koplewicz 
 HS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Leventhal 
 BL 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 The NKI-Rockland Sample: A Model for Accelerating the Pace of Discovery Science in Psychiatry 
 Front Neurosci 
 2012 
 6 
 152 
 23087608 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Kusky 
 J 
 
 
 Strauss 
 E 
 
 
 Kosaka 
 B 
 
 
 Wada 
 J 
 
 
 Li 
 D 
 
 
 Druhan 
 M 
 
 
 Petrie 
 J 
 
 
 The corpus callosum is larger with right-hemisphere cerebral speech dominance 
 Annals of Neurology 
 1988 
 24 
 379 
 383 
 3228272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panizzon 
 MS 
 
 
 Fennema-Notestine 
 C 
 
 
 Eyler 
 LT 
 
 
 Jernigan 
 TL 
 
 
 Prom-Wormley 
 E 
 
 
 Neale 
 M 
 
 
 Jacobson 
 K 
 
 
 Lyons 
 MJ 
 
 
 Grant 
 MD 
 
 
 Franz 
 CE 
 
 
 Xian 
 H 
 
 
 Tsuang 
 M 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Seidman 
 L 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 Kremen 
 WS 
 
 
 Distinct genetic influences on cortical surface area and cortical thickness 
 Cereb Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 2728 
 2735 
 19299253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? 
 Trends Cogn Sci (Regul Ed) 
 2006 
 10 
 59 
 63 
 16406760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Kittur 
 A 
 
 
 Kalar 
 D 
 
 
 Miller 
 E 
 
 
 Seppa 
 C 
 
 
 Gil 
 Y 
 
 
 Parker 
 DS 
 
 
 Sabb 
 FW 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 The cognitive atlas: toward a knowledge foundation for cognitive neuroscience 
 Front Neuroinform 
 2011 
 5 
 17 
 21922006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Barnes 
 KA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 59 
 2142 
 2154 
 22019881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Mitra 
 A 
 
 
 Laumann 
 TO 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Schlaggar 
 BL 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Methods to detect, characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 2014 
 84 
 320 
 341 
 23994314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AM 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Powers 
 WJ 
 
 
 Gusnard 
 DA 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 A default mode of brain function 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2001 
 98 
 676 
 682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rajagopalan 
 V 
 
 
 Pioro 
 EP 
 
 
 Disparate voxel based morphometry (VBM) results between SPM and FSL softwares in ALS patients with frontotemporal dementia: which VBM results to consider? 
 BMC Neurol 
 2015 
 15 
 32 
 25879588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Structural networks in Alzheimer’s disease 
 European neuropsychopharmacology: the journal of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology 
 2013 
 23 
 63 
 77 
 23294972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Genon 
 S 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Müller 
 VI 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 CR 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 F 
 
 
 Cieslik 
 E-C 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 ANIMA: A data-sharing initiative for neuroimaging meta-analyses 
 NeuroImage 
 2015a 
 124 
 B 
 1245 
 1253 
 26231246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Lewis 
 J 
 
 
 Bezgin 
 G 
 
 
 Khundrakpam 
 B 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Bellec 
 P 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 A cross-modal, cross-species comparison of connectivity measures in the primate brain 
 NeuroImage 
 2015b 
 125 
 311 
 331 
 26515902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Norden 
 AG van 
 
 
 Laat 
 KF de 
 
 
 Oudheusden 
 LJ van 
 
 
 Zwiers 
 MP 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Leeuw 
 F-E de 
 
 
 Kötter 
 R 
 
 
 Patterns of cortical degeneration in an elderly cohort with cerebral small vessel disease 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2010 
 31 
 1983 
 1992 
 20336684 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 Hilgetag 
 CC 
 
 
 Deco 
 G 
 
 
 Cortico-cortical communication dynamics 
 Front Syst Neurosci 
 2014 
 8 
 19 
 24847217 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roski 
 C 
 
 
 Caspers 
 S 
 
 
 Lux 
 S 
 
 
 Hoffstaedter 
 F 
 
 
 Bergs 
 R 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Activation shift in elderly subjects across functional systems: an fMRI study 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 2014 
 219 
 707 
 718 
 23455650 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rottschy 
 C 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Dogan 
 I 
 
 
 Reetz 
 K 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Schulz 
 JB 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Modelling neural correlates of working memory: a coordinate-based meta-analysis 
 Neuroimage 
 2012 
 60 
 830 
 846 
 22178808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saleem 
 KS 
 
 
 Miller 
 B 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Subdivisions and connectional networks of the lateral prefrontal cortex in the macaque monkey 
 The Journal of Comparative Neurology 
 2014 
 522 
 1641 
 1690 
 24214159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satterthwaite 
 TD 
 
 
 Elliott 
 MA 
 
 
 Gerraty 
 RT 
 
 
 Ruparel 
 K 
 
 
 Loughead 
 J 
 
 
 Calkins 
 ME 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Hakonarson 
 H 
 
 
 Gur 
 RC 
 
 
 Gur 
 RE 
 
 
 Wolf 
 DH 
 
 
 An improved framework for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 64 
 240 
 256 
 22926292 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schilbach 
 L 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Timmermans 
 B 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Vogeley 
 K 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Introspective minds: using ALE meta-analyses to study commonalities in the neural correlates of emotional processing, social & unconstrained cognition 
 PLoS ONE 
 2012 
 7 
 e30920 
 22319593 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sled 
 JG 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 AP 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 A nonparametric method for automatic correction of intensity nonuniformity in MRI data 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 1998 
 17 
 87 
 97 
 9617910 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Fox 
 PM 
 
 
 Mackay 
 CE 
 
 
 Filippini 
 N 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Toro 
 R 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 2009 
 106 
 13040 
 13045 
 19620724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Swadlow 
 HA 
 
 
 Waxman 
 SG 
 
 
 Axonal conduction delays 
 Scholarpedia 
 2012 
 7 
 1451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tohka 
 J 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 A 
 
 
 Evans 
 A 
 
 
 Fast and robust parameter estimation for statistical partial volume models in brain MRI 
 Neuroimage 
 2004 
 23 
 84 
 97 
 15325355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Trachtenberg 
 JT 
 
 
 Chen 
 BE 
 
 
 Knott 
 GW 
 
 
 Feng 
 G 
 
 
 Sanes 
 JR 
 
 
 Welker 
 E 
 
 
 Svoboda 
 K 
 
 
 Long-term in vivo imaging of experience-dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex 
 Nature 
 2002 
 420 
 788 
 794 
 12490942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tuladhar 
 AM 
 
 
 Reid 
 AT 
 
 
 Shumskaya 
 E 
 
 
 Laat 
 KF de 
 
 
 Norden 
 AGW van 
 
 
 Dijk 
 EJ van 
 
 
 Norris 
 DG 
 
 
 Leeuw 
 F-E de 
 
 
 Relationship between white matter hyperintensities, cortical thickness, and cognition 
 Stroke; a Journal of Cerebral Circulation 
 2015 
 46 
 425 
 432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 M 
 
 
 Wiener 
 M 
 
 
 Fox 
 P 
 
 
 Minimizing within-experiment and within-group effects in Activation Likelihood Estimation meta-analyses 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 2012 
 33 
 1 
 13 
 21305667 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tyszka 
 JM 
 
 
 Kennedy 
 DP 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Paul 
 LK 
 
 
 Intact bilateral resting-state networks in the absence of the corpus callosum 
 J Neurosci 
 2011 
 31 
 15154 
 15162 
 22016549 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Mooshagian 
 E 
 
 
 Zaidel 
 E 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AM 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Adelstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Castellanos 
 FX 
 
 
 Biswal 
 BB 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 Residual functional connectivity in the split-brain revealed with resting-state functional MRI 
 Neuroreport 
 2008 
 19 
 703 
 709 
 18418243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weissenbacher 
 A 
 
 
 Kasess 
 C 
 
 
 Gerstl 
 F 
 
 
 Lanzenberger 
 R 
 
 
 Moser 
 E 
 
 
 Windischberger 
 C 
 
 
 Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state functional connectivity MRI: a quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies 
 Neuroimage 
 2009 
 47 
 1408 
 1416 
 19442749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wijk 
 BCM van 
 
 
 Stam 
 CJ 
 
 
 Daffertshofer 
 A 
 
 
 Comparing Brain Networks of Different Size and Connectivity Density Using Graph Theory 
 PLoS ONE 
 2010 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winkler 
 AM 
 
 
 Kochunov 
 P 
 
 
 Blangero 
 J 
 
 
 Almasy 
 L 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Duggirala 
 R 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Cortical thickness or grey matter volume? The importance of selecting the phenotype for imaging genetics studies 
 Neuroimage 
 2010 
 53 
 1135 
 1146 
 20006715 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xia 
 J 
 
 
 Miu 
 J 
 
 
 Ding 
 H 
 
 
 Wang 
 X 
 
 
 Chen 
 H 
 
 
 Wang 
 J 
 
 
 Wu 
 J 
 
 
 Zhao 
 J 
 
 
 Huang 
 H 
 
 
 Tian 
 W 
 
 
 Changes of brain gray matter structure in Parkinson’s disease patients with dementia 
 Neural Regeneration Research 
 2013 
 8 
 1276 
 1285 
 25206422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 EJ 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Uğurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Evaluation of slice accelerations using multiband echo planar imaging at 3 T 
 Neuroimage 
 2013 
 83 
 991 
 1001 
 23899722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yazgan 
 MY 
 
 
 Wexler 
 BE 
 
 
 Kinsbourne 
 M 
 
 
 Peterson 
 B 
 
 
 Leckman 
 JF 
 
 
 Functional significance of individual variations in callosal area 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1995 
 33 
 769 
 779 
 7675166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zheng 
 D 
 
 
 Purves 
 D 
 
 
 Effects of increased neural activity on brain growth 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
 1995 
 92 
 1802 
 1806 
 7892181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhou 
 J 
 
 
 Gennatas 
 ED 
 
 
 Kramer 
 JH 
 
 
 Miller 
 BL 
 
 
 Seeley 
 WW 
 
 
 Predicting Regional Neurodegeneration from the Healthy Brain Functional Connectome 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 73 
 1216 
 1227 
 22445348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zijdenbos 
 AP 
 
 
 Forghani 
 R 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Automatic “pipeline” analysis of 3-D MRI data for clinical trials: application to multiple sclerosis 
 IEEE Trans Med Imaging 
 2002 
 21 
 1280 
 1291 
 12585710 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 Schleicher 
 A 
 
 
 Langemann 
 C 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Morosan 
 P 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 Schormann 
 T 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Burgel 
 U 
 
 
 Steinmetz 
 H 
 
 
 Schlaug 
 G 
 
 
 Roland 
 PE 
 
 
 Quantitative analysis of sulci in the human cerebral cortex: development, regional heterogeneity, gender difference, asymmetry, intersubject variability and cortical architecture 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 1997 
 5 
 218 
 221 
 20408218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Seed regions for the analyses performed in this study (see  Table I  for list). All regions are expressed on the fiducial ICBM-152 symmetric template surface, after projection from volumetric representations. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Distributions of connectivity estimates (t- or z-valued statistical maps) produced by the four modalities, for the aLPFC and vmPFC seed regions as examplars. Distributions are shown for densities of 10% and 30% (δ = 0.1 and 0.3). The rightmost renderings show the cross-modal correspondence Ψ, which illustrates the degree to which thresholded distributions overlap across modalities, at these densities. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Seedwise cross-modal comparisons.  A.  Similarity, measured as the Jaccard Index Φ, between pairs of modalities, for four selected seed regions (blue lines). Dashed lines show Φ rand , i.e., similarity as expected by chance at a given density δ. The orange area between these lines represents the integrated difference between them, which is proportional to Bimodal Similarity, BS, shown as a bar chart in ( B ).  C.  Cross-modal correspondence (Ψ) plotted over densities. Dashed lines indicate Ψ rand , the correspondence expected by random chance. The orange area between these curves is proportional to the Correspondence Index, CI, show in the insets. The blue areas represent the proportion of disagreement (i.e., systematic differences) below that expected by chance. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Summary measures of the correspondence index CI, quantifying agreement across all modalities.  A.  Correspondence Ψ averaged across seeds, indicating the degree of agreement across all modalities, plotted across densities. The dashed line indicates Ψ rand , and the grey area represents standard deviation. The correspondence index CI, and its variance, are shown in the inset.  B.  CI for each seed, sorted from best to worst correspondence. The dashed red line indicates the average CI. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Summary measures (across all seed regions) of bimodal comparisons for each modality pair.  A . The Jaccard Index Φ, computed across the density range [0.05,0.8]. The orange shading represents the mean integral difference, across modalities, between empirically obtained connectivity estimates and values expected from random distributions of equal density (Φ rand ). The grey shaded area represents the standard deviation of this value.  B . Bimodal similarity, BS, computed as Φ normalized between Φ rand  and full agreement (Φ = 1). Bars show the mean and standard deviation of across all seed regions. Significant differences were found between the RS/MACM scores and all other bimodal comparisons, while no other significant differences were found (* indicates significance at p < 0.01, Bonferroni corrected; indicates no significance). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Symmetry of connectivity patterns.  A.  Normalized symmetry Θ norm , integrated across all densities. The distribution across seed regions is shown as boxplots, for each modality.  B.  Θ norm  shown as a line plot across all densities. Shaded areas represent standard deviation across seed regions.  C.  Scatterplot showing the relationship between Θ norm  and BS total ; the correlation is highly significant with r 2  = 0.50. AUC = area under the curve. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 3D surface plots showing the relationship of distance from seed ROI to density and  BS . Each plot represents a pair of modalities, as labeled, and colour/height shows  BS , averaged across seeds. Negative scores indicate that similarity is lower than that expected from random. Inset: Division of the cortical surface into distance octiles, which are used to generate the  BS  scores. Distances for the left aLPFC are shown, as an exemplar. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8 
 
 Specific agreement between structural and functional modalities.  Top left : the blue line shows the number of vertices (above that expected at random) for which the two functional modalities showed significant connectivity, but the two structural modalities did not; the red line shows the opposite relationship.  Top right : Specific agreement plotted on the average cortical surface for functional (blue) and structural (red) modalities, for PrC as an exemplar. The pattern was derived using a density δ=0.25, corresponding to the peak in the line plot.  Bottom : Proportion of seeds regions for which specific agreement was found for either function or structure, at δ=0.25, plotted on the average cortical surface. 
 
 
 
 
 Table I 
 
 Seed regions used in this study, obtained using various methodologies. 
 
 
 
 
 Region [hemisphere] 
 Size (vertices) 
 Name 
 Derived from 
 Study [ANIMA version] 
 Centroid (MNI-152) 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 M1 [L] 
 165 
 Left primary motor cortex 
 Task-fMRI 
 Roski et al. (2013) [n/a] 
 −34 
 −26 
 56 
 
 
 MFG [R] 
 162 
 Right middle frontal gyrus 
 ALE 
 Langer & Eickhoff (2013) [1] 
 44 
 40 
 20 
 
 
 MTG [R] 
 26 
 Right middle temporal gyrus 
 ALE 
 Bzdok et al. (2012)  [1] 
 54 
 −8 
 −16 
 
 
 aINS [L] 
 99 
 Left anterior insula 
 ALE 
 Kurth et al. (2010)  [1] 
 −34 
 14 
 8 
 
 
 aMCC [B] 
 123 
 Bilateral anterior middle cingulate cortex 
 MACM/Task- fMRI 
 Hoffstaedter et al. (2013)  [1] 
 −4 
 18 
 42 
 
 
 aLPFC [L] 
 146 
 Left anterior lateral prefrontal cortex 
 ALE 
 Rottschy et al. (2012)  [1] 
 −38 
 50 
 12 
 
 
 vmPFC [R] 
 51 
 Right ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
 MACM/RS-fMRI 
 Amft et al. (2015) [1] 
 −2 
 48 
 −8 
 
 
 PrC [B] 
 122 
 Bilateral precuneus 
 ALE 
 Schilbach et al. (2012)  [1] 
 −2 
 −52 
 26 
 
 
 V5 [L] 
 65 
 Left middle temporal visual area (MT) 
 Cytoarchitecture 
 Malikovic et al. (2007) [n/a] 
 −44 
 −72 
 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 For data retrieved from the ANIMA database ( http://anima.fz-juelich.de ), the corresponding version is also shown; otherwise “n/a” is indicated. 
 
 
 ALE = activation likelihood estimation; MACM = meta-analytic connectivity modelling; RS-fMRI = resting-state fMRI. Centroids are reported as millimeter coordinates in MNI-152 space. 
 
 
 
 
