
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 27592331 
 5089170 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.08.027 
 NIHMS816621 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Dough, Tough, Cough, Rough: A “Fast” fMRI Localizer of
Component Processes in Reading 
 
 
 
 
 Malins 
 Jeffrey G. 
 
 a 
 * 
 
 
 
 Gumkowski 
 Nina 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Buis 
 Bonnie 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Molfese 
 Peter 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 Jay G. 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 Stephen J. 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 Kenneth R. 
 
 a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
 
 
 
 Morris 
 Robin 
 
 e 
 
 
 
 Mencl 
 W. Einar 
 
 a 
 
 
 a Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, 06511 
 b Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT, 06269 
 c Department of Linguistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
06511 
 d Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06520 
 e Department of Psychology, Georgia State University,
Atlanta, GA, 30303 
 
 * Corresponding author. Jeffrey G. Malins. Haskins
Laboratories. 300 George Street Suite 900, New Haven, CT, 06511. Tel:
1-203-865-6163 x 237.  malins@haskins.yale.edu 
 
 
 16 
 9 
 2016 
 
 
 31 
 8 
 2016 
 
 
 10 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 10 
 2017 
 
 91 
 394 
 406 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 In the current study, we present a novel fMRI protocol in which words,
pseudowords, and other word-like stimuli are passively presented in a rapid,
sequential fashion. In this “fast” localizer paradigm, items are
presented in groups of four; within sets, words are related in orthographic,
phonological, and/or semantic properties. We tested this protocol with a group
of skilled adult readers (N=18). Analyses uncovered key regions of the reading
network that were sensitive to different component processes at the group level;
namely, left fusiform gyrus as well as the pars opercularis subregion of
inferior frontal gyrus were sensitive to lexicality; several regions including
left precentral gyrus and left supramarginal gyrus were sensitive to
spelling-sound consistency; the pars triangularis subregion of inferior frontal
gyrus was sensitive to semantic similarity. Additionally, in a number of key
brain regions, activation in response to semantically similar words was related
to individual differences in reading comprehension outside the scanner.
Importantly, these findings are in line with previous investigations of the
reading network, yet data were obtained using much less imaging time than
comparable paradigms currently available, especially relative to the number of
indices of component processes obtained. This feature, combined with the
relatively simple nature of the task, renders it appropriate for groups of
subjects with a wide range of reading abilities, including children with
impairments. 
 
 
 reading 
 component processes 
 fMRI 
 localizer 
 spelling-sound consistency 
 special populations 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 When a reader encounters a written word, a host of brain regions work
together to uncover its meaning. These regions comprise a network, or circuit, which
processes the different components of a given visual word form, including its visual
features (orthography), its associated spoken form (phonology), and its referent
(semantics). Each of these component processes has been linked to distributed
regions of cortex, including occipitotemporal, temporoparietal, and inferior frontal
regions ( Pugh et al., 1996 ;  Fiebach, Friederici, Müller, & von Cramon,
2002 ;  Simos et al., 2002 ).
Previous investigations have shown that the functional architecture of this circuit
is associated with reading skill, and differs in systematic ways between typical
readers and individuals with reading impairment ( Pugh et al., 2000 ;  Shaywitz et al.,
2002 ;  Hoeft et al., 2006 ;  Norton, Beach, & Gabrieli, 2015 ;  Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2009 ;  Richlan, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2011 ).
Furthermore, even within populations of skilled readers, individual differences in
the reading circuit are apparent ( Seghier et al.,
2004 ;  Seghier, Lee, Schofield, &
Price, 2008 ;  Jobard, Vigneau, Simon,
& Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2011 ;  Welcome
& Joanisse, 2012 ). 
 Because of the tight relationship between brain and behavior for the reading
network, a snapshot of the neurobiology of this circuit is highly desirable. First,
linking behavior with neurobiology allows us to gain a better understanding of the
functional anatomy of the brain. Second, snapshots can be taken at multiple time
points to gain insights into the mechanisms underlying longitudinal changes in
behavior. Finally, characterizing the neurobiology of the reading network can feed
back to the behavioral level. For example, identifying neural pathways involved in
reading allows for prediction of long-term reading outcomes ( Hoeft et al., 2011 ), or tailoring reading remediation programs
to individual reader characteristics ( Eden &
Moats, 2002 ). 
 In the current study, we report results from a novel functional imaging
paradigm involving rapid sequential presentation of words and other word-like
stimuli. We have elected to focus on single word reading for several reasons. First,
by characterizing the neurobiology of the reading network, this type of work helps
establish a multi-level link between neurobiological theories of reading and extant
computational models, which mostly concern single word reading ( Seidenberg, 2012 ). Second, we wished to develop
a tool that could be used to characterize individual differences within groups of
readers, and we were motivated by previous work showing that the effect of
psycholinguistic variables such as spelling-sound consistency, which is measured at
the single word level, varies systematically within groups of skilled adult readers
(e.g.,  Strain & Herdman, 1999 ). Finally,
we wished to develop a paradigm that could potentially be used as an assay for
clinical populations, and developmental dyslexia has long been associated with
deficits in decoding single words ( Stanovich,
1988 ;  Snowling, 2000 ). 
 We assert that this paradigm not only allows for reliable acquisition of a
snapshot of the regions associated with the component processes of single word
reading, as we demonstrate with a group of skilled adult readers; it also presents a
number of advantages over similar paradigms. Namely, the task is relatively simple
in nature, which renders it appropriate for use with varied populations of readers,
including children with impairments. Second, the administration time associated with
the task is brief relative to the number of indices of component processes obtained.
Because of this short duration, the task can be used in conjunction with other types
of experimental paradigms within the same scanning session. Consequently, we denote
the task as a “localizer” which permits an unbiased selection of
functional regions of interest (ROIs) associated with individual and/or group-level
effects related to component processes of reading which can then be further probed
in accompanying experiments ( Saxe, Brett, &
Kanwisher, 2006 ). These accompanying experiments could potentially query
how areas engaged in reading modulate according to other domains, such as memory,
attention, executive function, and numeracy. 
 
 1.1 An Overview of the Reading Circuit 
 Single word reading has been linked with both subcortical structures
( Pugh et al., 2013 ) as well as three
cortical systems in the brain: a ventral system centered in left
occipitotemporal areas, a dorsal system encompassing left temporoparietal areas,
and an anterior system centered in left inferior frontal gyrus (reviewed in
 Sandak et al., 2012 ). In the ventral
system, it has been argued that cortical areas process information in a
hierarchical fashion, responding to progressively larger fragments of words
( Vinckier et al., 2007 ). In
alphabetic languages, these fragments include single letters, groups of two
letters (bigrams), groups of three letters (trigrams), and so on. In the left
hemisphere, this hierarchical processing continues into inferior
occipitotemporal (OT)/fusiform gyrus, which has been associated with the
invariant properties of word forms abstracted away from surface variation in
font or case ( McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene,
2003 ). This region, often denoted as the visual word form area (VWFA;
see  Dehaene & Cohen, 2011  for a
review), has been argued to be pre-lexical and pre-semantic, although this view
is under debate (e.g.,  Price & Devlin,
2003 ;  2011 ). From the VWFA,
the ventral system extends into middle and inferior temporal gyrus ( Tagamets, Novick, Chalmers, & Friedman,
2000 ), both of which have been linked to semantic processing ( Fiebach et al., 2002 ;  Simos et al., 2002 ). In addition, recent evidence has shown
that the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) could also be an important semantic site
in this pathway ( Hoffman, Ralph, & Woollams,
2015 ). 
 The dorsal system includes the angular gyrus and the supramarginal gyrus
(SMG) in the inferior parietal lobule (IPL), as well as posterior superior
temporal gyrus (STG). These areas are thought to be involved in mapping
orthographic input to phonological and semantic properties of written words
( Xu et al., 2001 ). However, there
remains debate as to the precise contributions of subregions of this circuit to
cognitive operations across a number of domains, including language and number
processing ( Cabeza, Ciaramelli, &
Moscovitch, 2012 ). For example, using PET,  Démonet, Price, Wise, and Frackowiak (1994)  observed
that AG was recruited when subjects performed a word monitoring task, whereas
SMG was instead recruited when subjects performed a phoneme monitoring task.
These results have been taken to support the claim that SMG is specifically
involved in mapping between orthographic and phonological representations,
whereas the AG is instead part of the semantic network (e.g.,  Price, 2000 ;  Ferreira, Göbel, Hymers, & Ellis, 2015 ). 
 Finally, the anterior system – centered in left inferior frontal
gyrus – has been implicated in a number of processes including
phonological recoding and semantic integration ( Poldrack et al., 1999 ;  Zhu et al.,
2012 ;  Zhu et al., 2013 ). For
example, left IFG is sensitive to the consistency of the mapping between a
visual word and its phonological form ( Fiez,
Balota, Raichle, & Petersen, 1999 ;  Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves,
Desai, Humphries, Seidenberg, & Binder, 2010 ); that is, left IFG
is more highly engaged for inconsistent words that do not have a one to one
mapping between orthography and phonology. In addition, certain subregions
within left IFG are also sensitive to semantic factors such as imageability,
which can be defined as the ease with which a word evokes a mental image ( Frost et al., 2005 ;  Graves et al., 2010 ). Based on meta-analytic work, it has
been suggested that more anterior and ventral subregions of the inferior frontal
gyrus (e.g., the pars orbitalis subregion, often treated as synonymous with
Brodmann’s area 47) are more highly involved in semantic tasks, whereas
more posterior and superior subregions (e.g., near the border of BA 44 and 6)
are instead more highly involved in phonological tasks ( Bookheimer, 2002 ). 
 Importantly, the relative engagement of the brain regions within these
three systems has been linked to individual differences in reading skill ( Hoeft et al., 2006 ;  Pugh et al., 2013 ; see  Pugh
et al., 2010  for review). For example, meta-analytic work has shown
that adults with reading impairment show hypoactivation of left hemisphere
reading regions including superior temporal, middle temporal, and OT/fusiform
regions, as well as hyperactivation of regions such as the left precentral gyrus
and the right caudate ( Richlan et al.,
2011 ). 
 
 
 1.2 Localization of Regions Sensitive to Component Processes 
 The neurobiological systems outlined in the previous section have been
characterized by a number of different functional imaging paradigms with the aim
of isolating regions sensitive to the component processes of single word reading
(for comprehensive reviews see  Turkeltaub, Eden,
Jones, & Zeffiro, 2002 , and  Vigneau et al., 2006 ). In particular, these paradigms have used a
number of different types of manipulations to localize brain regions more
heavily involved in certain component process compared to others. Broadly, these
tasks can be distinguished along two key dimensions: the relative extent of
active metalinguistic processing required for subjects to perform the task, and
the amount of imaging time required to localize the reading network. As we
discuss below, both of these dimensions impact the appropriateness of a
particular task for different populations of readers. 
 
 1.2.1 Extent of Active Metalinguistic Processing 
 A classic design involving active metalinguistic processing is that
detailed in  Pugh et al. (1996 ), in
which subjects were asked to perform three different types of judgments
while in the scanner, each of which emphasized different properties of
stimulus pairs. Namely, a case judgment emphasized orthographic properties,
a rhyme judgment emphasized phonological properties, and a category judgment
emphasized semantic properties. In each trial, subjects were asked to make a
response only if the stimulus items in the pair shared a particular property
(i.e., the stimuli were matched in case, rhymed, or belonged to the same
category). This type of design has been adopted in more recent studies
investigating individual differences in skilled readers ( Seghier et al., 2004 ;  Welcome & Joanisse, 2012 ). In
addition, it has inspired similar designs such as the spelling and rhyming
tasks employed by  Bolger, Hornickel, Cone,
Burman, and Booth (2008)  and  Bolger, Minas, Burman, and Booth (2008) , in which children were
presented with pairs of words and were asked to judge whether rime bodies
within pairs either shared the same orthography or pronunciation (e.g., dime
vs. lime, mint vs. pint, jazz vs. has, staff vs. gain). 
 An alternative design is the adaptive learning paradigm developed by
 Sandak et al. (2004) . In this
task, subjects first learned novel semantic associations for a set of
pseudowords, and subsequently made judgments concerning either the
orthographic, phonological, or semantic properties associated with
individual items. In the scanner, subjects performed an overt naming task
which included both trained and untrained items; the authors observed
training-specific effects in a number of key reading-related regions which
were modulated based on the type of behavioral judgment subjects made
concerning these items during training. This paradigm has since been used by
 Zhao et al. (2014)  to investigate
reading of Chinese phonograms. 
 A third type of design is detailed in  Graves et al. (2010) . In this study, subjects were
asked to simply read aloud single words. Importantly, the authors included
dimensions such as frequency and spelling-sound consistency as covariates of
interest in the general linear model, and then identified regions whose
neural activity correlated with these dimensions. Using this approach, the
authors identified a number of clusters within brain regions such as left
IFG that showed sensitivity to one or more of these dimensions. 
 While these designs have certainly been highly successful, some have
argued that there are benefits to examining the neurobiology of the reading
system under more natural conditions, in which subjects are not required to
make an overt response (e.g.,  McDermott,
Petersen, Watson, and Ojemann, 2003 ). For example,  McDermott et al. (2003)  reported
results from a paradigm in which subjects were asked to either selectively
attend to sound relationships while silently reading rhyming words, or to
attend to meaning relationships while silently reading semantically related
words. In this way, the authors were able to segregate cortical regions
involved in phonological versus semantic processing in the absence of
potential confounding processes associated with metalinguistic processing
demands. This design was an adaptation of an earlier study that also
contrasted conditions in which subjects directed attention to meaning versus
phonological segmentation ( Price, Moore,
Humphreys, & Wise, 1997 ). 
 Critically, some designs are more appropriate than others for
localizing the reading network in special populations of readers, such as
children with reading disability (RD). It has been shown that RD is often
co-morbid with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which is
typically associated with difficulties in response inhibition ( Willcutt, Pennington, Olson, Chhabildas, &
Hulslander, 2005 ). As a result, it could be difficult for
children with RD to perform tasks such as  Pugh et al. (1996) , which requires subjects to withhold
responses if items within a stimulus pair do not share a particular property
(i.e., matching case, rhyming pronunciation, or belonging to the same
semantic category). By contrast, designs such as  Graves et al. (2010)  design represent an improvement;
however, even reading aloud single words while in the scanner could be
overly taxing for struggling readers, and methodologically it can be
challenging to collect and extract reaction times for vocal responses under
conditions of scanner noise. For similar reasons, the  Sandak et al. (2004)  task could be difficult for
struggling readers, who may have difficulty not only with reading aloud in
the scanner, but also with the rigorous training schedule prior to scanning.
Finally, the  McDermott et al. (2003) 
design has the advantage of being relatively passive compared to other
designs such as  Pugh et al. (1996) 
and  Bolger et al. (2008a) ; however,
even this task might be difficult for special populations to perform because
it involves switching the focus of selective attention between blocks of
trials. 
 
 
 1.2.2 Amount of Imaging Time 
 Imaging time is not only a precious commodity in terms of operating
costs and research productivity; it can be a highly constraining factor when
working with special populations of individuals. For this reason, obtaining
high quality functional imaging data in relatively little imaging time is
critical when investigating the reading network in different populations of
readers. As a result, the  Pugh et al.
(1996)  design could be relatively inappropriate for special
populations given that it takes about 90 minutes to administer (e.g.,  Welcome & Joanisse, 2012 ).
Similarly, the  Sandak et al. (2004) 
adaptive learning paradigm also requires 90 minutes of imaging time in
addition to a 2.5-hour training session, which again could be overly
demanding. The  Graves et al. (2010) 
study of the neural systems underlying reading aloud represents an
improvement, as subjects completed five runs each eight minutes in duration,
for a total of forty minutes. This is considerably less than even the  McDermott et al. (2003)  design, which
requires about sixty minutes of imaging time. Of the tasks so far discussed,
the  Bolger et al. (2008a)  paradigm
takes the least amount of time (four eight-minute runs for a total of 32
minutes). However, it only localizes regions associated with orthographic
and phonological consistency and importantly does not include any semantic
manipulations. In addition, even 32 minutes of performing tasks in the
scanner could be too time consuming for quality data acquisition, especially
for groups of children experiencing issues associated with attention
deficits and/or hyperactivity. 
 
 
 1.2.3 “Fast” Localizer Paradigm 
 In the current study, we developed a novel fMRI localizer in order
to overcome the limitations of previous designs. This protocol involves
rapid presentation of sets of four words that vary in their orthographic,
phonological, and semantic properties (cf.  Pinel et al., 2007 ), and builds upon previous work in the
priming literature investigating spelling-sound consistency (e.g.,
BRIBE-TRIBE versus COUCH-TOUCH;  Meyer,
Schvaneveldt, & Ruddy, 1974 ;  Shulman, Hornack, & Sanders, 1978 ;  Hanson & Fowler, 1987 ;  Pugh, Rexer, & Katz, 1994 ) as well as semantic
processing (e.g., BARN-SHED;  Rossell, Price,
& Nobre, 2003 ). Importantly, instead of having subjects
perform trial-wise responses, this protocol instead has subjects perform a
low-level recognition memory task at the end of each run. This recognition
memory task motivates attention to the stimuli but removes potential
confounds associated with active metalinguistic judgments and response
inhibition. Furthermore, compared to other tasks, this localizer requires
less administration time, especially relative to the number of indices of
component processes obtained. As we show in this report, we were able to
reliably localize the reading network in a group of skilled adult readers
using just twenty-one minutes of imaging time per subject. These 21 minutes
included presentation of two auditory conditions that we do not report here
for the sake of brevity; the print conditions themselves were thus presented
over the course of 16 minutes. Within this amount of time, we isolated
regions sensitive to lexicality, spelling-sound consistency, and semantic
similarity in accordance with previous studies. In addition, we identified
regions sensitive to semantic similarity that showed individual differences
related to subjects’ reading comprehension scores outside the
scanner. These findings not only underscore the utility of the paradigm but
also highlight its ability to contribute information of theoretical
importance. 
 
 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Subjects 
 Twenty-one adult native speakers of English participated in this study.
All subjects were consented in compliance with Yale University’s
Institutional Review Board for protection of human subjects. To assess each
subject’s reading skill, we administered a behavioral battery. This
included the sight word reading and phonemic decoding subtests of the Test of
Word Reading Efficiency (TOWRE;  Torgesen,
Wagner, & Rashotte, 1999 ), as well as a subsection of Form E of
the Nelson-Denny reading comprehension test ( Brown, Fishco, & Hanna, 1993 ) consisting of twenty-four multiple
choice questions. The TOWRE is a timed test in which subjects read lists of
familiar words or pronounceable pseudowords; it is often thought of as a measure
of reading fluency, and is typically associated with phonological skills (e.g.,
 Welcome & Joanisse, 2012 ). By
contrast, performance on the Nelson-Denny reading comprehension test is thought
to index the ability to process connected text and integrate meaning over
multiple sentences within a passage, although this view has been challenged by
some groups (e.g.,  Coleman, Lindstrom, Nelson,
Lindstrom, & Gregg, 2010 ). Due to study attrition, TOWRE scores
were not obtained from one subject and Nelson-Denny reading comprehension scores
were not obtained from three subjects. Data from one subject was excluded from
fMRI analyses due to below average reading scores (standard score for TOWRE
phonemic decoding efficiency < 80; Nelson-Denny reading comprehension
score of 50% correct), and data from two other subjects was excluded as a result
of excessive motion in the scanner (greater than 20% of images were above the
threshold of 3 mm point to point movement). The remaining subjects (N = 18; mean
age 24; 11 F) did not report a diagnosis of a learning disability, and all
self-identified as right-handed except one subject. Descriptive statistics
concerning these subjects are reported in  Table
1 . 
 
 
 2.2 Stimuli 
 We presented subjects with both printed and spoken English monosyllables
as well as non-linguistic controls. Print stimuli consisted of four word type
conditions as well as a pseudoword condition and a false font condition; example
stimulus sets are provided in  Table 2 .
The four word type conditions were as follows: words with shared orthography and
shared phonology (O + P + ), words with shared orthography but
different phonology (O + P − ), semantically related
words (SEM), and printed words unrelated in orthography, phonology, and
semantics (UNREL). These four conditions were balanced for length [F(3,380) =
1.65, p = .17, η p 2  = .01], frequency [F(3,380) =
2.31, p = .08, η p 2  = .02], logarithmic frequency
[F(3,380) = .30, p = .83, η p 2  = .002], and bigram
frequency [F(3,380) = .82, p = .48, η p 2  = .01].
Importantly, the O + P +  and
O + P −  conditions differed in spelling-sound type
consistency [t(190) = 22.92, p < .001] yet were matched for concreteness
[t(190) = .60, p = .55], while the SEM and UNREL conditions were matched in
spelling-sound type consistency [t(190) = − 1.45, p = .15] yet differed
in concreteness [t(190) = 4.20, p < .001]. Pseudowords (PSW) were
generated using the MCWord database ( Medler
& Binder, 2005 ), and were selected such that they matched the
printed word conditions in length [t(478) = −1.18, p = .24] and bigram
frequency [t(478) = .08, p = .93]. The false font condition (FF) consisted of
sequences of characters in Wingdings font, exactly matched in length to the
pseudoword condition. Audio conditions consisted of unrelated spoken words as
well as vocoded speech derived from the set of unrelated spoken words. These
audio conditions were included as part of an ongoing investigation in our group
concerning print-speech convergence; as indicated above, these conditions are
not discussed in this report for the sake of brevity. 
 
 
 2.3 Procedure 
 In each trial, subjects were presented with tetrads of stimuli in one of
the eight stimulus conditions. For the visual conditions, items within tetrads
were each present on the screen for 250 ms, separated by an ISI of 200 ms. For
the auditory conditions, items within tetrads were presented with an SOA of 800
ms; the mean duration of auditory items was 536 ms (SD 110.2 ms). A sample trial
sequence is illustrated in  Figure 1 . In
total, there were 24 tetrads (96 unique items) in each condition. Across the
entire experiment, subjects were presented with each item only once. For the
O + P −  condition, items with different
pronunciations were alternated within tetrads such that the first two items
within the tetrad did not rhyme with each other. 
 At the beginning of the session, subjects were instructed to simply
attend to the stimuli and told they would be given a short recognition memory
test at the end of each run. In this recognition memory test, subjects were
given six printed words, three of which were presented in the run, and three of
which were not. They were asked to indicate whether or not they remembered
viewing each word during the course of the run. Subjects were able to correctly
remember most items, as mean accuracy on this task was 70.8% (SD 10.5%).
Furthermore, accuracy on this task was not correlated with any of the three
psychometric tests administered outside the scanner (all p’s >
.05). 
 
 
 2.4 MRI Data Acquisition and Analysis 
 Imaging was performed using a 3T Siemens TIM-Trio scanner with a
12-channel head coil. Prior to functional imaging, sagittal localizers were
prescribed (matrix size = 180 × 192; voxel size = 1.333 × 1.333
× 4 mm; FoV = 240/256 mm; TR = 15 ms; TE = 6.86 ms; flip angle =
25°). T2*-weighted images were then collected in an axial-oblique
orientation parallel to the intercommissural line (32 slices; 4 mm slice
thickness; no gap) using single-shot echo planar imaging (matrix size = 64
× 64; voxel size = 3.4375 × 3.4375 × 4 mm; FoV = 220 mm; TR
= 2000 ms; TE = 30 ms; flip angle = 80°). To allow for stabilization of
the magnetic field, the first six volumes within each run were discarded.
Following the functional runs, anatomical scans were also acquired for each
subject in the same orientation as the functional volumes (MPRAGE; matrix size =
256 × 256; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm; FoV = 256 mm; TR =
2530 ms; TE = 2.77 ms; flip angle = 7°). 
 In each functional run, subjects were presented with 48 tetrads of items
(6 tetrads in each of the eight stimulus conditions) in an event-related
fashion. Across all trials in the experiment, the time between trial onsets was
jittered between 4 and 13 seconds. Subjects completed four runs each 316 seconds
(158 volumes) in length. This translated to approximately twenty-one minutes
imaging time. 
 Data were analyzed using AFNI ( Cox,
1996 ). Functional images were first corrected for slice acquisition
time, motion corrected using a six-parameter rigid-body transform, and
normalized to Talairach space using an affine transform which also warped the
data into 3 mm isotropic space. Last, all images were smoothed with a 6 mm
Gaussian kernel. 
 At the single subject level, data were submitted to a multiple
regression analysis with nuisance regressors representing temporal drift and the
six movement parameters. The resulting single subject maps were then subjected
to a groupwise repeated measures ANOVA to test for a main effect of stimulus
type across the six types of visual stimuli. The groupwise statistical map was
thresholded at a voxelwise threshold of p = .0001. To control for family-wise
error rates, Monte Carlo simulations were performed (3dClustSim; 10,000
iterations) using all brain voxels within the TT_N27 template brain, and using
the spherical autocorrelation function parameters concerning the error time
series. This was performed in response to the latest recommendations regarding
cluster correction in fMRI research ( Eklund,
Nichols, & Knutsson, 2016 ). The cluster threshold for a corrected
alpha level of p = .05 was 6 voxels. 
 Because subregions of IFG have been shown to be differentially sensitive
to different component processes of reading (e.g.,  Bookheimer, 2002 ), we divided the functionally defined
cluster of IFG/left precentral gyrus according to atlas-defined anatomical
subregions. Namely, this cluster was divided into three subregions, which
comprised 88% of the voxels in the larger cluster: IFG pars triangularis, IFG
pars opercularis, and left precentral gyrus. These anatomical regions were
defined using the Eickhoff-Zilles macro labels for the N27 brain in Talairach
space. 
 Next, for each cluster that showed a main effect of stimulus type, we
performed Bonferroni corrected pairwise t-tests to contrast beta values between
conditions of interest. To guard against inflation of type I error, we only
performed contrasts between conditions designed to specifically isolate regions
sensitive to the different component processes of reading. Namely, we performed
the following four contrasts: (1) UNREL > FF; (2) PSW > UNREL; (3)
O + P −  > O + P + ; (4)
SEM > UNREL. These contrasts respectively tested for effects of: word
reading, lexicality, spelling-sound consistency, and semantic similarity.
Bonferroni correction was applied by multiplying resulting significance levels
by a factor of four. 
 Last, to assess the sensitivity of the task and specific conditions to
individual differences in reading, we correlated each of the three items in the
behavioral battery (TOWRE sight word efficiency, TOWRE phonemic decoding
efficiency, and Nelson-Denny reading comprehension) with the difference in beta
weights between the conditions of interest for each of the following three
contrasts: (1) PSW > UNREL; (2) O + P − 
> O + P + ; (3) SEM > UNREL. Because we were
performing nine tests for each ROI (three tests by three contrasts), Bonferroni
correction was applied by multiplying all significance levels by a factor of
nine. These tests were confined to the clusters that showed a main effect of
condition. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Groupwise Activation Analysis 
 We first identified clusters that showed a main effect of stimulus type
across the six visual conditions (UNREL, O + P + ,
O + P − , SEM, PSW, and FF), and then followed up
on these by performing the following four Bonferroni corrected pairwise t-tests:
(1) UNREL > FF; (2) PSW > UNREL; (3)
O + P −  > O + P + ; (4)
SEM > UNREL. The results of this analysis are illustrated in  Figure 2  and detailed in  Table 3 ; furthermore,  Figure 3a ,  Figure 3b ,
and  Figure 3c  show beta values across
conditions for the key clusters shown in the whole brain map in  Figure 2 . Evoked response maps for each of
the six visual conditions are provided in  Supplementary Figures 1 
through  6 . 
 
 3.1.1 Regions Involved in Word Reading 
 As can be seen in  Figure 2 ,
numerous areas showed greater activation for unrelated visual words compared
to false font; these included key areas of the reading circuit such as the
visual word form area in the left OT/fusiform gyrus (VWFA;  Dehaene et al., 2002 ;  McCandliss et al., 2003 ), bilateral
superior temporal gyrus/middle temporal gyrus (STG/MTG), and bilateral
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Additionally, several areas showed the reverse
effect; most notably, large clusters in bilateral fusiform gyrus activated
more strongly for the false font compared to the unrelated visual words. 
 
 
 3.1.2 Regions Sensitive to Lexicality 
 As shown in  Figure 2 , three
regions showed greater activation for pseudowords compared to unrelated
words: the VWFA and the pars opercularis subregion of left and right IFG.
The reverse pattern held in two subcortical structures; namely, the left
putamen and the right caudate. Beta values for left IFG pars opercularis and
the VWFA are plotted in  Figure 3a  and
 Figure 3b  respectively. 
 
 
 3.1.3 Regions Sensitive to Spelling-Sound Consistency 
 As is apparent in  Figure 2 ,
several clusters in IFG were more strongly engaged for phonologically
inconsistent sets of words compared to consistent sets; these included
bilateral clusters centered in pars opercularis near the insula, a large
cluster of left precentral gyrus, and a cluster spanning bilateral
supplementary motor area (SMA). Importantly, this same pattern was also
observed in the left supramarginal gyrus (SMG). Beta values for left
precentral gyrus and left SMG are plotted in  Figure 3a  and  Figure 3c 
respectively. 
 
 
 3.1.4 Regions Sensitive to Semantic Similarity 
 The SEM condition showed significantly higher beta values than the
UNREL condition in the pars triangularis subregion of left IFG. Beta values
for this cluster are plotted in  Figure
3a . 
 
 
 
 3.2 Brain-Behavior Correlations 
 To test for individual differences in brain activation, we correlated
scores for each of the three items in the behavioral battery with the difference
in beta values for each of the following contrasts (1) PSW > UNREL; (2)
O + P −  > O + P + ; (3)
SEM > UNREL. As shown in  Figure 4 ,
one set of brain-behavior correlations was significant following Bonferroni
correction: namely, differences in beta weights between the SEM and UNREL
conditions were related to reading comprehension scores as measured using the
Nelson-Denny test in a number of key regions. These regions included left IFG
pars triangularis (r = −.70, p = .03), left IFG pars opercularis (r =
−.74, p = .01), left precentral gyrus (r = −.76, p = .01), and the
VWFA in the left fusiform gyrus (r = −.68, p = .05). The correlation was
negative, as individuals with lower comprehension scores recruited these areas
for semantically related words to a greater extent than they did for unrelated
visual words, whereas individuals with higher comprehension scores showed either
little difference in activation between these two conditions or the reverse
pattern. It should be noted that these individual differences can be mostly
attributed to variable activation for the semantic condition; activation for
unrelated words was more comparable across individuals. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Our aim was to develop a functional imaging paradigm that meets the
following criteria: (1) allows for reliable isolation of the cortical regions
involved in the component processes of reading at both the group and individual
levels; (2) involves a relatively simple task and relatively little imaging time
such that obtaining high quality data is feasible with different populations of
readers. To do this, we developed a novel fMRI localizer that involves rapid
sequential presentation of groups of four stimuli in either the auditory or visual
modality. Crucially, sets of visual stimuli differed in various parameters, which
allowed for identification of regions sensitive to the orthographic, phonological,
and semantic properties of written words. Presentation of the stimuli was relatively
passive; subjects attended to the items in order to perform a recognition memory
test at the end of each run, but importantly did not make trialwise responses or
metalinguistic judgments. The protocol involved only twenty-one minutes of imaging
time (16 for the print conditions), which is considerably briefer (by approximately
50-80%) than previously published paradigms (e.g.,  Pugh et al., 1996 ,  McDermott et al.,
2003 ;  Sandak et al., 2004 ;  Bolger et al., 2008a ;  Graves et al., 2010 ;  Welcome
& Joanisse, 2012 ). Moreover, when comparing paradigms that probe
equal numbers of component processes, the present paradigm is briefer by a mean
value of 45 minutes. 
 
 4.1 Groupwise Results 
 As shown in this report, within a relatively small amount of imaging
time, the fast localizer paradigm was able to successfully localize the
component processes of reading in a group of skilled adult readers. First, a
contrast between unrelated printed words and a false font of characters
mimicking the properties of alphabetic font identified key regions of the
reading circuit overall; second, a contrast between unrelated words and
pseudowords isolated regions sensitive to lexicality; third, a contrast between
phonologically consistent and inconsistent words isolated regions sensitive to
phonological properties of words; fourth, a contrast between semantically
related and unrelated words isolated a region sensitive to semantic
similarity. 
 As can be seen in  Figure 2 , this
task engaged key components of the reading circuit, including left
occipitotemporal (OT)/fusiform gyrus, temporoparietal regions, and inferior
frontal cortex. This circuit is highly established based on previous studies
( Pugh et al., 1996 ;  Fiebach et al., 2002 ;  Simos et al., 2002 ;  Sandak
et al., 2004 ). Isolation of this region of left OT/fusiform gyrus
– which some have labeled the visual word form area (VWFA) –
replicates earlier work that has localized this region, whether by contrasting
words and consonant strings ( Cohen et al.,
2002 ), words and scrambled words ( Szwed et al., 2011 ), or words and false font as in the current study
( Vinckier et al., 2007 ). 
 As shown in  Figure 3 , the VWFA
activated more strongly to pseudowords than to words. This sensitivity of the
VWFA to lexicality has been observed in a number of previous studies, including
recent work by  Bruno, Zumberge, Manis, Lu, and
Goldman (2008)  and  Woollams, Silani,
Okada, Patterson, and Price (2010) , as well as prior meta-analytic
work by  Mechelli et al. (2003) . For
example,  Kronbichler et al. (2004) 
manipulated the familiarity of printed items by presenting subjects with items
of differing levels of frequency, from highly frequent real words to
phonotactically legal pseudowords. The authors found that the VWFA decreased in
activation during a silent reading task as items became more familiar, with
pseudowords activating the VWFA to the greatest extent, and highly frequent real
words the least. This effect of familiarity on activity in the VWFA has also
been observed by  Sandak et al. (2004) ,
who reported attenuation of the response of the VWFA to pseudowords as a
function of training. Finally, in a more recent study using a silent reading
task, activation of the VWFA was again observed to be greater for pseudowords
compared to words, and furthermore was modulated by another important
psycholinguistic variable: orthographic neighborhood density ( Braun et al., 2015 ). 
 As  Dehaene and Cohen (2011)  point
out, many of these previous tasks entailed longer processing times and potential
for top-down processing, which could have exaggerated responses to pseudowords
in the VWFA. The “fast” localizer was designed with this claim in
mind, as one of our secondary aims was to develop a task that could explore the
functionality of the VWFA. Therefore, we opted for a task design that is rapid
in nature as well as relatively passive, consistent with recommendations by
 Dehaene and Cohen (2011)  regarding
paradigms for obtaining insights into the neural coding characteristics in the
VWFA. Given this emphasis on bottom-up processing, it is interesting that we
observed greater activation for pseudowords than words in the VWFA in the
current study. A caveat is that subjects were asked to attend to items to
perform the recognition memory test; it is possible we would have observed
reduced activation in the VWFA for pseudowords if the task were completely
passive. It is also important to note that the different word type conditions as
well as the pseudoword condition were matched in bigram frequency; this is
critical given the sensitivity of the VWFA to bigram differences ( Woollams et al., 2010 ). We would therefore
argue that the current pattern of results cannot be solely attributed to
potential confounds in bigram frequency (cf.  Diaz & McCarthy, 2007 ). 
 Turning to the phonological contrast, a number of clusters showed
sensitivity to the consistency of the mapping from orthography to phonology.
Most notably, activation was greater for inconsistent compared to consistent
words in bilateral IFG. This has been observed previously; however, prior
studies have used very different paradigms and manipulations, such as naming and
lexical decision ( Fiez, Balota, Raichle, &
Petersen, 1999 ;  Frost et al.,
2005 ;  Graves et al., 2010 ). In
the current study, we would argue that the increased engagement of bilateral IFG
likely reflects the processing cost associated with integrating the four items
differing in pronunciation. Because the words in the O + P + 
condition all shared the same pronunciation, traces in memory associated with
the phonology of these items remained partially active due to the very short lag
between words, and therefore required little additional activation to cross
threshold. In contrast, in the O + P −  condition,
readers had to inhibit incorrect pronunciations and activate correct ones; this
resulted in an increased processing cost, as indexed by a greater change in the
BOLD signal for these items compared to the O + P + 
condition. In addition, it is likely that subjects were engaged in rehearsal of
the items, as we observed greater activation for the
O + P −  condition compared to the
O + P +  condition in regions involved in sensorimotor
encoding of pronunciations such as the supplementary motor area ( Démonet et al., 1994 ). 
 Similarly, the left SMG also showed greater activation for
phonologically inconsistent compared to phonologically consistent sets of words.
This finding reinforces the claim that this region is involved in computing the
phonological form associated with a word during visual word recognition ( Stoeckel, Gough, Watkins, & Devlin,
2009 ). The left SMG has been previously associated with the
phonological store of verbal working memory ( Paulesu, Frith, & Frackowiak, 1993 ); greater activation in this
region for inconsistent sets of words could therefore have been a result of
subjects keeping track of the four words differing in pronunciation. Critically,
this region did not show an effect for the semantic condition in either the
groupwise analyses or the brain-behavior correlations, supporting work that has
shown activation in this region is driven to a greater extent by phonological as
opposed to semantic processes ( Démonet et
al., 1994 ;  Devlin, Matthews, &
Rushworth, 2003 ;  Mummery, Patterson,
Hodges, & Price, 1998 ). 
 For the semantic contrast, activation of the pars triangularis subregion
of IFG exhibited sensitivity to semantic similarity. This finding contrasts with
the pattern of activation in the pars opercularis subregion, which showed
greater activation for pseudowords compared to words, implicating greater
involvement of this subregion in sublexical phonology. This complements work
suggesting that more anterior and lateral subregions of IFG are involved in
semantic as opposed to phonological processing ( Poldrack et al., 1999 ;  Bookheimer,
2002 ). However, a caveat is that because the semantically related and
unrelated printed words differed in concreteness, we cannot dissociate
concreteness effects in this region from differences in processing words
overlapping in semantic features; nevertheless, it is likely these two
properties are related to a common multidimensional construct such as semantic
richness ( Yap, Tan, Pexman, & Hargreaves,
2011 ). 
 
 
 4.2 Brain-Behavior Correlations 
 As shown in  Figure 3 , the SEM
> UNREL contrast also showed individual differences. Namely, the
difference in beta values between the SEM and UNREL conditions correlated with
Nelson-Denny reading comprehension scores in a number of clusters including left
IFG pars triangularis, left IFG pars opercularis, left precentral gyrus, and the
VWFA. Importantly, these correlations were negative such that individuals with
poorer reading comprehension activated these areas more strongly for
semantically related words than unrelated words, whereas individuals with higher
scores showed little difference between these two conditions or the reverse
pattern. These negative correlations complement results from  Welcome and Joanisse (2012) , who also
observed a negative correlation between word-reading activation and Nelson-Denny
comprehension scores in left precentral gyrus. 
 A likely explanation of this effect is that individuals with relatively
lower comprehension scores could have been more reliant on top-down semantic
support to facilitate word recognition. There are two non-exclusive ways in
which this could have occurred. First, the words in the current study were all
highly imageable (e.g., FARM, BIKE, LIME), and it is possible that individuals
with poorer comprehension abilities could have been more prone to use mental
imagery to facilitate word reading ( Chan, Cole,
& Morris, 1990 ). Support for this view comes from studies such as
 Strain and Herdman (1999) , who showed
that poorer readers exhibited a greater benefit of imageability on word naming
compared to skilled readers, and  Pugh et al.
(2008) , who showed that in individuals with reading disability, the
reading network more closely resembled that of typical readers for highly
imageable compared to lowly imageable words. This effect could have stemmed in
particular from the high degree of concreteness for the semantically related
sets (e.g., FISH-BEEF-PORK-MEAT), which could have influenced the ease of mental
image generation for these items. In addition, because this task involved a
recognition memory component, the observed pattern of effects could also be
ascribed to individual differences in the strategic use of mental imagery to aid
in later retrieval. Although we cannot completely discount this possibility, we
argue this is likely not the sole explanation given that accuracy on the
recognition memory test did not correlate with reading comprehension scores. 
 A second possibility is that individuals with poorer comprehension
scores may have been more prone to make use of semantic similarity when reading
these sets of words. Similar to the findings described above which have shown a
relation between imageability effects and reading skill, previous studies have
shown that poor readers are aided by contextual information to a greater extent
than skilled readers; for example,  Nation and
Snowling (1998)  showed that children with reading impairments
exhibited a greater facilitative benefit of prior sentential context on single
word naming compared to their typically developing peers. Thus, greater reliance
on semantic information could be a compensatory strategy in these readers,
resulting in differences in semantic processing across a widely distributed set
of regions (e.g.,  Binder, Desai, Graves, &
Conant, 2009 ). In the current study, even though subjects were not
provided with sentential context, contextual information was provided in the
first few words in the set; individuals could therefore have differed in their
use of the initial words to predict upcoming items. This explanation could
account for the observed brain-behavior correlation in the left IFG in
particular, as this region has been shown to play a role in integration of
information with prior context as well as prediction of upcoming items ( Zhu et al., 2013 ). However, this type of
explanation must be interpreted with caution given that all subjects in the
current sample were skilled adult readers; therefore even individuals at the
lower end of the range of comprehension scores would not be considered
impaired. 
 
 
 4.3 Limitations 
 We should point out that although this task does not require an overt
response on each trial, subjects were still actively engaged in processing the
stimuli because they were asked to remember individual items in order to perform
the subsequent recognition memory test. In addition, it is likely that subjects
noted the spelling-sound consistency and semantic manipulations, because these
were highly salient. Therefore it is possible this task incurred a degree of
active metalinguistic processing even though subjects were not asked to perform
overt behavioral responses. Because we did not collect behavioral data on a
trialwise basis, we cannot draw firm conclusions regarding the precise meaning
of patterns of brain activity. Nevertheless, it is our view that the task is
relatively simple compared to alternative tasks such as naming, lexical
decision, and spelling/case/rhyme/category judgment, and that the practical
benefits of this simple task for working with special populations outweigh these
limitations in interpretative power. 
 
 
 
 5. Conclusions 
 Overall, the “fast” localizer paradigm enables acquisition of
a reliable snapshot of the cortical regions involved in the component processes of
reading. As we showed with a group of skilled adult readers, the localizer
successfully isolated areas sensitive to lexicality, including the VWFA, a number of
regions sensitive to spelling-sound consistency, including bilateral IFG and left
SMG, and a subregion of IFG sensitive to semantic similarity. Furthermore, the task
was sensitive to some individual differences in the processing of semantically
related words, which were related to reading comprehension scores outside the
scanner. 
 The advantages of the “fast” localizer over alternative
paradigms underscore its potential to be a powerful tool for investigating the
reading network in many different types of populations. Namely, the task is
relatively simple in nature and allows for easy comparison across groups of
subjects; furthermore, data is acquired in a brief amount of imaging time,
especially relative to the number of indices of component processes obtained.
Importantly, the administration time associated with the task is brief enough that
the task could feasibly be used as a localizer of the reading network within the
same scanning session as a second imaging study ( Saxe et al., 2006 ). Using the localizer in this fashion not only
increases the power to detect meaningful differences amongst subjects, but also
permits investigations which query how areas engaged in reading modulate according
to other domains, such as memory, attention, executive function, and numeracy. Given
recent interest in co-morbid learning disorders, such as reading and math disability
( Koepke & Miller, 2013 ), these types
of investigations could be particularly important. 
 For researchers interested in implementing the “fast”
localizer protocol, all programs and stimulus materials are available at the
following link:  http://haskins.yale.edu/datasharing/ 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments 
 Research reported in this publication was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute Of Child Health & Human Development of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Numbers P01HD070837 to Georgia State University and
P01HD001994 and R01HD065794 to Haskins Laboratories. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institutes of Health. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited
manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Yap 
 MJ 
 
 
 Hutchison 
 KA 
 
 
 Cortese 
 MJ 
 
 
 Kessler 
 B 
 
 
 Loftis 
 B 
 
 
 Treiman 
 R 
 
 
 The English lexicon project 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2007 
 39 
 3 
 445 
 459 
 17958156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis
of 120 functional neuroimaging studies 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 12 
 2767 
 2796 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Hornickel 
 J 
 
 
 Cone 
 NE 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Neural correlates of orthographic and phonological consistency
effects in children 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2008a 
 29 
 12 
 1416 
 1429 
 17957704 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bolger 
 DJ 
 
 
 Minas 
 J 
 
 
 Burman 
 DD 
 
 
 Booth 
 JR 
 
 
 Differential effects of orthographic and phonological consistency
in cortex for children with and without reading impairment 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2008 
 46 
 14 
 3210 
 3224 
 18725239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 S 
 
 
 Functional MRI of language: new approaches to understanding the
cortical organization of semantic processing 
 Annual Review of Neuroscience 
 2002 
 25 
 1 
 151 
 188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Braun 
 M 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 AM 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Hawelka 
 S 
 
 
 Hutzler 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Many neighbors are not silent. fMRI evidence for global lexical
activity in visual word recognition 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2015 
 9 
 25667571 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 JI 
 
 
 Fishco 
 VV 
 
 
 Hanna 
 GS 
 
 
 Nelson-Denny Reading Test 
 1993 
 Riverside 
 Chicago, IL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bruno 
 JL 
 
 
 Zumberge 
 A 
 
 
 Manis 
 FR 
 
 
 Lu 
 ZL 
 
 
 Goldman 
 JG 
 
 
 Sensitivity to orthographic familiarity in the occipito-temporal
region 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 39 
 4 
 1988 
 2001 
 18180168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 New 
 B 
 
 
 Moving beyond Kučera and Francis: A critical evaluation of
current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word
frequency measure for American English 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2009 
 41 
 4 
 977 
 990 
 19897807 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brysbaert 
 M 
 
 
 Warriner 
 AB 
 
 
 Kuperman 
 V 
 
 
 Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known English word
lemmas 
 Behavior Research Methods 
 2014 
 46 
 3 
 904 
 911 
 24142837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Cognitive contributions of the ventral parietal cortex: an
integrative theoretical account 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2012 
 16 
 6 
 338 
 352 
 22609315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chan 
 LK 
 
 
 Cole 
 PG 
 
 
 Morris 
 JN 
 
 
 Effects of instruction in the use of a visual-imagery strategy on
the reading-comprehension competence of disabled and average
readers 
 Learning Disability Quarterly 
 1990 
 13 
 1 
 2 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Lehéricy 
 S 
 
 
 Chochon 
 F 
 
 
 Lemer 
 C 
 
 
 Rivaud 
 S 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Language-specific tuning of visual cortex? Functional properties
of the Visual Word Form Area 
 Brain 
 2002 
 125 
 5 
 1054 
 1069 
 11960895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coleman 
 C 
 
 
 Lindstrom 
 J 
 
 
 Nelson 
 J 
 
 
 Lindstrom 
 W 
 
 
 Gregg 
 KN 
 
 
 Passageless comprehension on the Nelson-Denny Reading Test: Well
above chance for university students 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 2010 
 43 
 3 
 244 
 249 
 19933897 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 1996 
 29 
 3 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 The unique role of the visual word form area in
reading 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 6 
 254 
 262 
 21592844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Le Clec'H 
 G 
 
 
 Poline 
 JB 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 The visual word form area: a prelexical representation of visual
words in the fusiform gyrus 
 NeuroReport 
 2002 
 13 
 3 
 321 
 325 
 11930131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Démonet 
 JF 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Wise 
 R 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Differential activation of right and left posterior sylvian
regions by semantic and phonological tasks: a positron-emission tomography
study in normal human subjects 
 Neuroscience Letters 
 1994 
 182 
 1 
 25 
 28 
 7891880 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Devlin 
 J 
 
 
 Matthews 
 P 
 
 
 Rushworth 
 M 
 
 
 Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex: a
combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic
stimulation study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 1 
 71 
 84 
 12590844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diaz 
 MT 
 
 
 McCarthy 
 G 
 
 
 Unconscious word processing engages a distributed network of
brain regions 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 11 
 1768 
 1775 
 17958480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 Moats 
 L 
 
 
 The role of neuroscience in the remediation of students with
dyslexia 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2002 
 5 
 1080 
 1084 
 12403991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eklund 
 A 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Knutsson 
 H 
 
 
 Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for spatial extent have
inflated false-positive rates 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2016 
 113 
 28 
 7900 
 7905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiebach 
 C 
 
 
 Friederici 
 A 
 
 
 Müller 
 K 
 
 
 Cramon 
 DV 
 
 
 fMRI evidence for dual routes to the mental lexicon in visual
word recognition 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2002 
 14 
 1 
 11 
 23 
 11798383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Effects of lexicality, frequency, and spelling-to-sound
spelling-sound consistency on the functional anatomy of
reading 
 Neuron 
 1999 
 24 
 1 
 205 
 218 
 10677038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ferreira 
 RA 
 
 
 Göbel 
 SM 
 
 
 Hymers 
 M 
 
 
 Ellis 
 AW 
 
 
 The neural correlates of semantic richness: Evidence from an fMRI
study of word learning 
 Brain and Language 
 2015 
 143 
 69 
 80 
 25797097 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Moore 
 DL 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of the tradeoff
between semantics and phonology in reading aloud 
 NeuroReport 
 2005 
 16 
 6 
 621 
 624 
 15812320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Desai 
 R 
 
 
 Humphries 
 C 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 MS 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Neural systems for reading aloud: a multiparametric
approach 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 8 
 1799 
 1815 
 19920057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hanson 
 VL 
 
 
 Fowler 
 CA 
 
 
 Phonological coding in word reading: Evidence from hearing and
deaf readers 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1987 
 15 
 3 
 199 
 207 
 3600259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 Hernandez 
 A 
 
 
 McMillon 
 G 
 
 
 Taylor-Hill 
 H 
 
 
 Martindale 
 JL 
 
 
 Meyler 
 A 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Neural basis of dyslexia: a comparison between dyslexic and
nondyslexic children equated for reading ability 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2006 
 26 
 42 
 10700 
 10708 
 17050709 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoeft 
 F 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Black 
 JM 
 
 
 Gantman 
 A 
 
 
 Zakerani 
 N 
 
 
 Hulme 
 C 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Neural systems predicting long-term outcome in
dyslexia 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2011 
 108 
 1 
 361 
 366 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 P 
 
 
 Ralph 
 MAL 
 
 
 Woollams 
 AM 
 
 
 Triangulation of the neurocomputational architecture underpinning
reading aloud 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2015 
 112 
 28 
 E3719 
 E3728 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jobard 
 G 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Simon 
 G 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 The weight of skill: interindividual variability of reading
related brain activation patterns in fluent readers 
 Journal of Neurolinguistics 
 2011 
 24 
 1 
 113 
 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Koepke 
 KM 
 
 
 Miller 
 B 
 
 
 At the intersection of math and reading disabilities:
Introduction to the special issue 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 2013 
 46 
 6 
 483 
 489 
 24108688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Hutzler 
 F 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Mair 
 A 
 
 
 Staffen 
 W 
 
 
 Ladurner 
 G 
 
 
 The visual word form area and the frequency with which words are
encountered: evidence from a parametric fMRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 21 
 3 
 946 
 953 
 15006661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCandliss 
 BD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 The visual word form area: expertise for reading in the fusiform
gyrus 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2003 
 7 
 7 
 293 
 299 
 12860187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Watson 
 JM 
 
 
 Ojemann 
 JG 
 
 
 A procedure for identifying regions preferentially activated by
attention to semantic and phonological relations using functional magnetic
resonance imaging 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 3 
 293 
 303 
 12457755 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mechelli 
 A 
 
 
 Gorno-Tempini 
 M 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Neuroimaging studies of word and pseudoword reading:
consistencies, inconsistencies, and limitations 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2003 
 15 
 2 
 260 
 271 
 12676063 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medler 
 DA 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 MCWord: An on-line orthographic database of the English
language 
 2005 
 
 http://www.neuro.mcw.edu/mcword/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 DE 
 
 
 Schvaneveldt 
 RW 
 
 
 Ruddy 
 MG 
 
 
 Functions of graphemic and phonemic codes in visual
word-recognition 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1974 
 2 
 2 
 309 
 321 
 24214761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mummery 
 C 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Hodges 
 J 
 
 
 Price 
 C 
 
 
 Functional neuroanatomy of the semantic system: divisible by
what? 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1998 
 10 
 6 
 766 
 777 
 9831743 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nation 
 K 
 
 
 Snowling 
 MJ 
 
 
 Individual differences in contextual facilitation: Evidence from
dyslexia and poor reading comprehension 
 Child Development 
 1998 
 69 
 4 
 996 
 1011 
 9768483 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norton 
 ES 
 
 
 Beach 
 SD 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Neurobiology of dyslexia 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 2015 
 30 
 73 
 78 
 25290881 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paulesu 
 E 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RS 
 
 
 The neural correlates of the verbal component of working
memory 
 Nature 
 1993 
 362 
 342 
 345 
 8455719 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pinel 
 P 
 
 
 Thirion 
 B 
 
 
 Meriaux 
 S 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Serres 
 J 
 
 
 Le Bihan 
 D 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Fast reproducible identification and large-scale databasing of
individual functional cognitive networks 
 BMC Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 1 
 91 
 17973998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Functional specialization for semantic and phonological
processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 1999 
 10 
 1 
 15 
 35 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 The anatomy of language: contributions from functional
neuroimaging 
 Journal of Anatomy 
 2000 
 197 
 3 
 335 
 359 
 11117622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 The myth of the visual word form area 
 NeuroImage 
 2003 
 19 
 3 
 473 
 481 
 12880781 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 The interactive account of ventral occipitotemporal contributions
to reading 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 6 
 246 
 253 
 21549634 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Moore 
 CJ 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GW 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJS 
 
 
 Segregating semantic from phonological processes during
reading 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1997 
 9 
 6 
 727 
 733 
 23964595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Moore 
 D 
 
 
 Della Porta 
 G 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cornelissen 
 PL 
 
 
 Hansen 
 PC 
 
 
 Kringelbach 
 ML 
 
 
 Salmelin 
 R 
 
 
 The neural basis of reading 
 Mapping the word reading circuitry in skilled and disabled
readers 
 2010 
 281 
 305 
 Oxford University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Effects of stimulus difficulty and repetition on printed word
identification: An fMRI comparison of nonimpaired and reading-disabled
adolescent cohorts 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2008 
 20 
 7 
 1146 
 1160 
 18284344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Preston 
 JL 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Austin 
 AC 
 
 
 Sibley 
 D 
 
 
 Molfese 
 P 
 
 
 The relationship between phonological and auditory processing and
brain organization in beginning readers 
 Brain and Language 
 2013 
 125 
 2 
 173 
 183 
 22572517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Jenner 
 AR 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lee 
 JR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability
(developmental dyslexia) 
 Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews 
 2000 
 6 
 3 
 207 
 213 
 10982498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Rexer 
 K 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Evidence of flexible coding in visual word
recognition 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 
 1994 
 20 
 4 
 807 
 8083636 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Constable 
 RT 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Cerebral organization of component processes in
reading 
 Brain 
 1996 
 119 
 4 
 1221 
 1238 
 8813285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Functional abnormalities in the dyslexic brain: A quantitative
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009 
 30 
 10 
 3299 
 3308 
 19288465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Richlan 
 F 
 
 
 Kronbichler 
 M 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 H 
 
 
 Meta-analyzing brain dysfunctions in dyslexic children and
adults 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 56 
 3 
 1735 
 1742 
 21338695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossell 
 SL 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Nobre 
 AC 
 
 
 The anatomy and time course of semantic priming investigated by
fMRI and ERPs 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2003 
 41 
 5 
 550 
 564 
 12638581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Landi 
 N 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 
 
 Joanisse 
 M 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Spivey 
 M 
 
 
 How does the brain read words 
 The Cambridge Handbook of Psycholinguistics 
 2012 
 218 
 235 
 Cambridge University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sandak 
 R 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Katz 
 L 
 
 
 Moore 
 DL 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 The neurobiology of adaptive learning in reading: a contrast of
different training conditions 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2004 
 4 
 1 
 67 
 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saxe 
 R 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 Divide and conquer: a defense of functional
localizers 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 30 
 4 
 1088 
 1096 
 16635578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Lazeyras 
 F 
 
 
 Pegna 
 AJ 
 
 
 Annoni 
 JM 
 
 
 Zimine 
 I 
 
 
 Mayer 
 E 
 
 
 Khateb 
 A 
 
 
 Variability of fMRI activation during a phonological and semantic
language task in healthy subjects 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2004 
 23 
 3 
 140 
 155 
 15449358 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 Lee 
 HL 
 
 
 Schofield 
 T 
 
 
 Ellis 
 CL 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Inter-subject variability in the use of two different neuronal
networks for reading aloud familiar words 
 NeuroImage 
 2008 
 42 
 3 
 1226 
 1236 
 18639469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 M 
 
 
 
 
 Joanisse 
 M 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Spivey 
 M 
 
 
 Computational models of reading: Connectionist and dual-route
approaches 
 The Cambridge Handbook of Psycholinguistics 
 2012 
 186 
 203 
 Cambridge University Press 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 BA 
 
 
 Shaywitz 
 SE 
 
 
 Pugh 
 KR 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Fulbright 
 RK 
 
 
 Skudlarski 
 P 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 Disruption of posterior brain systems for reading in children
with developmental dyslexia 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 2002 
 52 
 2 
 101 
 110 
 12114001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 HG 
 
 
 Hornak 
 R 
 
 
 Sanders 
 E 
 
 
 The effects of graphemic, phonetic, and semantic relationships on
access to lexical structures 
 Memory & Cognition 
 1978 
 6 
 2 
 115 
 123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simos 
 PG 
 
 
 Breier 
 JI 
 
 
 Fletcher 
 JM 
 
 
 Foorman 
 BR 
 
 
 Castillo 
 EM 
 
 
 Papanicolaou 
 AC 
 
 
 Brain mechanisms for reading words and pseudowords: An integrated
approach 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2002 
 12 
 3 
 297 
 305 
 11839603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snowling 
 MJ 
 
 
 Dyslexia 
 2000 
 Blackwell Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stanovich 
 KE 
 
 
 Explaining the differences between the dyslexic and the
garden-variety poor reader: The phonological-core variable-difference
model 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities 
 1988 
 21 
 10 
 590 
 604 
 2465364 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stoeckel 
 C 
 
 
 Gough 
 PM 
 
 
 Watkins 
 KE 
 
 
 Devlin 
 JT 
 
 
 Supramarginal gyrus involvement in visual word
recognition 
 Cortex 
 2009 
 45 
 9 
 1091 
 1096 
 19232583 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strain 
 E 
 
 
 Herdman 
 CM 
 
 
 Imageability effects in word naming: an individual differences
analysis 
 Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 1999 
 53 
 4 
 347 
 10646206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szwed 
 M 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 Eger 
 E 
 
 
 Valabrègue 
 R 
 
 
 Amadon 
 A 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Specialization for written words over objects in the visual
cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 56 
 1 
 330 
 344 
 21296170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tagamets 
 M 
 
 
 Novick 
 J 
 
 
 Chalmers 
 M 
 
 
 Friedman 
 R 
 
 
 A parametric approach to orthographic processing in the brain: an
fMRI study 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2000 
 12 
 2 
 281 
 297 
 10771412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torgesen 
 JK 
 
 
 Wagner 
 RK 
 
 
 Rashotte 
 CA 
 
 
 Test of word reading efficiency 
 1999 
 Pro-ed 
 Austin, TX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turkeltaub 
 PE 
 
 
 Eden 
 GF 
 
 
 Jones 
 KM 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 Meta-analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of single-word
reading: method and validation 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 16 
 3 
 765 
 780 
 12169260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vigneau 
 M 
 
 
 Beaucousin 
 V 
 
 
 Herve 
 PY 
 
 
 Duffau 
 H 
 
 
 Crivello 
 F 
 
 
 Houde 
 O 
 
 
 Tzourio-Mazoyer 
 N 
 
 
 Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: phonology,
semantics, and sentence processing 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 30 
 4 
 1414 
 1432 
 16413796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vinckier 
 F 
 
 
 Dehaene 
 S 
 
 
 Jobert 
 A 
 
 
 Dubus 
 JP 
 
 
 Sigman 
 M 
 
 
 Cohen 
 L 
 
 
 Hierarchical coding of letter strings in the ventral stream:
dissecting the inner organization of the visual word-form
system 
 Neuron 
 2007 
 55 
 1 
 143 
 156 
 17610823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Welcome 
 SE 
 
 
 Joanisse 
 MF 
 
 
 Individual differences in skilled adult readers reveal
dissociable patterns of neural activity associated with component processes
of reading 
 Brain and Language 
 2012 
 120 
 3 
 360 
 371 
 22281240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Willcutt 
 EG 
 
 
 Pennington 
 BF 
 
 
 Olson 
 RK 
 
 
 Chhabildas 
 N 
 
 
 Hulslander 
 J 
 
 
 Neuropsychological analyses of comorbidity between reading
disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: In search of the
common deficit 
 Developmental Neuropsychology 
 2005 
 27 
 1 
 35 
 78 
 15737942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woollams 
 AM 
 
 
 Silani 
 G 
 
 
 Okada 
 K 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 Word or word-like? Dissociating orthographic typicality from
lexicality in the left occipito-temporal cortex 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2010 
 23 
 4 
 992 
 1002 
 20429854 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 B 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 Gaillard 
 WD 
 
 
 Ishii 
 K 
 
 
 Vega-Bermudez 
 F 
 
 
 Pietrini 
 P 
 
 
 Theodore 
 W 
 
 
 Conjoint and extended neural networks for the computation of
speech codes: the neural basis of selective impairment in reading words and
pseudowords 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2001 
 11 
 3 
 267 
 277 
 11230098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yap 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tan 
 SE 
 
 
 Pexman 
 PM 
 
 
 Hargreaves 
 IS 
 
 
 Is more always better? Effects of semantic richness on lexical
decision, speeded pronunciation, and semantic classification 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 2011 
 18 
 4 
 742 
 750 
 21494916 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhao 
 J 
 
 
 Wang 
 X 
 
 
 Frost 
 SJ 
 
 
 Sun 
 W 
 
 
 Fang 
 SY 
 
 
 Mencl 
 WE 
 
 
 Rueckl 
 JG 
 
 
 Neural division of labor in reading is constrained by culture: A
training study of reading Chinese characters 
 Cortex 
 2014 
 53 
 90 
 106 
 24607883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ziegler 
 JC 
 
 
 Stone 
 GO 
 
 
 Jacobs 
 AM 
 
 
 What is the pronunciation for -ough and the spelling for /u/? A
database for computing feedforward and feedback consistency in
English 
 Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 
 1997 
 29 
 4 
 600 
 618 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 Z 
 
 
 Feng 
 G 
 
 
 Zhang 
 JX 
 
 
 Li 
 G 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Wang 
 S 
 
 
 The role of the left prefrontal cortex in sentence-level semantic
integration 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 76 
 325 
 331 
 23507386 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 Z 
 
 
 Hagoort 
 P 
 
 
 Zhang 
 JX 
 
 
 Feng 
 G 
 
 
 Chen 
 HC 
 
 
 Bastiaansen 
 M 
 
 
 Wang 
 S 
 
 
 The anterior left inferior frontal gyrus contributes to semantic
unification 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 60 
 4 
 2230 
 2237 
 22387168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 1 
 
 A sample trial sequence illustrating key features of the “fast”
localizer design. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 2 
 
 Clusters that showed a main effect of stimulus type across the six visual
conditions. Colors correspond to the results of Bonferroni corrected post-hoc
pairwise t-tests between conditions of interest. Note that some clusters showed
significant differences between conditions for more than one critical contrast;
please refer to  Table 3  for details.
Numerals below each slice indicate Talairach co-ordinates in the axial plane.
For the sake of simplicity, only clusters larger than 25 voxels in size are
shown. 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 3 
 
 Beta values across conditions for several key reading-related regions that showed
a main effect of stimulus type across the six visual conditions. Namely, beta
values across conditions are plotted for (A) left IFG pars triangularis, left
IFG pars opercularis, left precentral gyrus; (B) left fusiform gyrus (VWFA); (C)
left SMG. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Asterisks
represent the significance level of Bonferroni corrected post-hoc t-tests as
follows: *** p < .001; ** p < .01; * p < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 4 
 
 Correlations between Nelson-Denny reading comprehension scores and the difference
in beta values between the semantically related and unrelated conditions in
regions of interest defined from the ANOVA testing for the main effect of
stimulus type. The shading in each plot represents the 95% confidence interval
for the line of best fit. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral performance on psychometric tests of reading and language for the
group of subjects included in the MRI sample ( N  = 18; 11 F) 
 
 
 
 
 Subtest 
 Measure 
 Mean (SD) 
 Range 
 
 
 
 
 TOWRE Sight Word Efficiency 
 Raw score out of 104  Scaled
score 
 95.2 (8.5)  100.3 (12.0) 
 73-104  80-113 
 
 
 TOWRE Phonemic Decoding
 Efficiency 
 Raw score out of 63  Scaled
score 
 56.8 (6.5)  105.8 (13.3) 
 38-63  81-120 
 
 
 Nelson-Denny Reading
 Comprehension 
 Percent correct 
 88.6 (8.7) 
 70.8-100 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Sample stimulus sets in each of the six visual conditions 
 
 
 
 
 Condition 
 Abbreviation 
 Sample Stimulus Set 
 Length 
 Freq 1 
 Log  Freq 1 
 Bigram  Freq 2 
 Type  Cons 3 
 Concrete-  ness 4 
 
 
 
 
 Unrelated 
 UNREL 
 CLAY 
 LAWN 
 FLEA 
 VASE 
 4.33  (.07) 
 100.7  (32.9) 
 3.18  (.07) 
 18951  (1231) 
 .926  (.017) 
 4.12  (.08) 
 
 
 Same Orthography;  Shared
Phonology 
 O + P + 
 BEST 
 NEST 
 PEST 
 VEST 
 4.19  (.05) 
 120.1  (30.3) 
 3.11  (.07) 
 18213  (816) 
 .996  (.002) 
 3.86  (.10) 
 
 
 Same Orthography;  Different
Phonology 
 O + P − 
 DOUGH 
 TOUGH 
 COUGH 
 ROUGH 
 4.38  (.07) 
 205.0  (59.5) 
 3.13  (.09) 
 20141  (1150) 
 .460  (.023) 
 3.77  (.11) 
 
 
 Semantically  Related 
 SEM 
 FISH 
 BEEF 
 PORK 
 MEAT 
 4.24  (.08) 
 71.4  (13.5) 
 3.19  (.06) 
 20447  (1333) 
 .888  (.020) 
 4.56  (.06) 
 
 
 Pseudowords 
 PSW 
 JALL 
 PULE 
 TALM 
 WIBS 
 4.36  (.06) 
  –  
  –  
 19321  (1290) 
  –  
  –  
 
 
 False Font 
 FF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.36  (.06) 
  –  
  –  
  –  
  –  
  –  
 
 
 
 
 Note:  Values in parentheses represent standard error of the
mean. Freq = Frequency; Type Cons = Type Consistency 
 
 1 
 Frequency estimates are based on the SUBTLEX frequency norms
(Brysbaert & New, 2009), and were obtained using the English Lexicon
Project (Balota et al., 2007). 
 
 
 2 
 Bigram frequency was quantified using the MCWord database (Medler
& Binder, 2005). 
 
 
 3 
 Type consistency was calculated using feedforward consistency
measures in Ziegler, Stone, & Jacobs (1997). 
 
 
 4 
 Concreteness measures were obtained from Brysbaert, Warriner, &
Kuperman (2014). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Clusters showing a main effect of stimulus type ( F  = 5.90;
voxelwise  p  = .0001; cluster corrected at  p  =
.05) 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 
 Talairach Coordinates of
 Peak 
 
 Significant post hoc
 t -tests (Bonferroni corrected) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L/R 
 Area 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Extent (voxels) 1 
 FF >  UNREL 
 UNREL  > FF 
 PSW >  UNREL 
 UNREL  > PSW 
 O + P − 
>  O + P + 
 SEM >  UNREL 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Supramarginal gyrus 
 −50 
 −38 
 42 
 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Precentral gyrus 
 −47 
 −2 
 21 
 179 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 L/R 
 Supplementary motor area 
 −2 
 −2 
 57 
 296 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 IFG/Insula 
 −32 
 23 
 9 
 90 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 IFG/Insula 
 35 
 23 
 9 
 40 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 IFG –  pars
triangularis 
 −44 
 14 
 21 
 41 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 L 
 IFG –  pars
opercularis 
 −47 
 11 
 6 
 159 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 IFG –  pars
opercularis 
 47 
 11 
 27 
 26 
 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Left OT/fusiform gyrus 
 −47 
 −44 
 −16 
 44 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 STG/MTG 
 −62 
 −32 
 6 
 136 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 STG/MTG 
 50 
 −29 
 3 
 65 
 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Anterior STG 
 −56 
 −11 
 −1 
 8 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 IFG –  pars
triangularis 
 −50 
 29 
 6 
 13 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Postcentral gyrus 
 −59 
 −20 
 24 
 23 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Precentral gyrus 
 56 
 −5 
 39 
 15 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Cerebellum 
 20 
 −59 
 −19 
 26 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Cerebellum 
 23 
 −62 
 −46 
 20 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Cerebellum 
 14 
 −71 
 −40 
 9 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Putamen 
 −17 
 5 
 12 
 12 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Caudate 
 11 
 8 
 6 
 14 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Fusiform gyrus 
 −32 
 −62 
 −13 
 292 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Fusiform gyrus 
 29 
 −62 
 −13 
 646 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L 
 Middle occipital gyrus 
 −35 
 −83 
 9 
 132 
 
 *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 Precuneus 
 26 
 −71 
 42 
 14 
 
 ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** 
 p  < .001 
 
 
 ** 
 p  < .01 
 
 
 * 
 p  < .05 
 
 
 1 
 Voxels are 3 × 3 × 3 mm, or 27 mm 3 , in
size. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We present a novel fMRI protocol for localizing the reading network 
 
 
 This protocol takes less imaging time than comparable paradigms currently
available 
 
 
 The “fast” localizer is suitable for populations varying in age
and skill 
 
 
 We demonstrate the utility of the paradigm with a group of skilled adult
readers 
 
 
 
 
