
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 27697593 
 5354939 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.09.023 
 NIHMS846459 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 What’s the Gist? The influence of schemas on the neural correlates underlying true and false memories 
 
 
 
 
 Webb 
 Christina E. 
 
 
 
 
 Turney 
 Indira C. 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 Nancy A. 
 
 
 The Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
 
 
 Corresponding author: Nancy A. Dennis, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, 450 Moore Bldg. University Park, PA 16802, (office) 814.865.1712, (fax) 814.863.7002,  nad12@psu.edu 
 
 
 9 
 2 
 2017 
 
 
 30 
 9 
 2016 
 
 
 12 
 2016 
 
 
 01 
 12 
 2017 
 
 93 
 Pt A 
 61 
 75 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 The current study used a novel scene paradigm to investigate the role of encoding schemas on memory. Specifically, the study examined the influence of a strong encoding schema on retrieval of both schematic and non-schematic information, as well as false memories for information associated with the schema. Additionally, the separate roles of recollection and familiarity in both veridical and false memory retrieval were examined. The study identified several novel results. First, while many common neural regions mediated both schematic and non-schematic retrieval success, schematic recollection exhibited greater activation in visual cortex and hippocampus, regions commonly shown to mediate detailed retrieval. More effortful cognitive control regions in the prefrontal and parietal cortices, on the other hand, supported non-schematic recollection, while lateral temporal cortices supported familiarity-based retrieval of non-schematic items. Second, both true and false recollection, as well as familiarity, were mediated by activity in left middle temporal gyrus, a region associated with semantic processing and retrieval of schematic gist. Moreover, activity in this region was greater for both false recollection and false familiarity, suggesting a greater reliance on lateral temporal cortices for retrieval of illusory memories, irrespective of memory strength. Consistent with previous false memory studies, visual cortex showed increased activity for true compared to false recollection, suggesting that visual cortices are critical for distinguishing between previously viewed targets and related lures at retrieval. Additionally, the absence of common visual activity between true and false retrieval suggests that, unlike previous studies utilizing visual stimuli, when false memories are predicated on schematic gist and not perceptual overlap, there is little reliance on visual processes during false memory retrieval. Finally, the medial temporal lobe exhibited an interesting dissociation, showing greater activity for true compared to false recollection, as well as for false compared to true familiarity. These results provided an indication as to how different types of items are retrieved when studied within a highly schematic context. Results both replicate and extend previous true and false memory findings, supporting the Fuzzy Trace Theory. 
 
 
 schema 
 false memory 
 fMRI 
 recollection 
 familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Schemas are useful memory tools that allow information to be categorized according to a common concept or theme. In fact, schematic gist or the fundamental content about a scene can be extracted in less than 100 ms ( Loftus & Mackworth, 1978 ;  Potter, 1976 ;  Torralba, Oliva, Castelhano, & Henderson, 2006 ). With respect to memory, schematic gist has been shown to guide attention during scene processing and to facilitate memory for schema-consistent information versus schema-unrelated information ( Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ;  Hess & Slaughter, 1990 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ). Despite this processing benefit, similar research has shown that schemas also contribute to false memories as individuals incorrectly identify new, but related, information as ‘old’. This research has found high rates of false alarms for lures that include schema-consistent information ( Lampinen, Copeland, & Neuschatz, 2001 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ;  Neuschatz, Lampinen, Preston, Hawkins, & Toglia, 2002 ;  Pezdek, Whetstone, Reynolds, Askari, & Dougherty, 1989 ), suggesting that schemas may also have a negative influence on verbatim memory. While behavioral and neuroimaging studies have investigated the influence of both semantic and perceptual gist on accurate and illusory memories (for review see  Dennis, Bowman, & Turney, 2015 ; for meta-analysis see  Kurkela & Dennis, 2016 ), it is unclear the extent to which highly schematic scenes elicit similar gist and how this gist supports schema memory, distinct from non-schema memory, nor is it clear the role that schemas play in supporting false distinct from true schematic memory. In addition, different memory processes, such as recollection and familiarity, have been shown to distinctly influence memory retrieval (see  Yonelinas, 2002  for review). Thus, an understanding of schema’s influence on memory should also take into account both recollection and familiarity. To investigate these questions, the current study aimed to: 1) identify the neural correlates of successful memory retrieval of both schematic and non-schematic items when studied within a highly schematic context, 2) investigate differences in retrieval processes between veridical and illusory memory stemming from schematic encoding, and 3) within each type of retrieval, examine the separate roles of recollection and familiarity. To do this, we utilized a novel scene paradigm extended from work from  Brewer and Treyens (1981)  and  Miller and Gazzaniga (1998)  in which memory was tested for targets and lures that are conceptually related or unrelated to a schematic scene. 
 Previous behavioral research has noted the benefits of schemas in facilitating both scene and object recognition. For example,  Oliva and Torralba (2001)  suggested that the global meaning (i.e., gist) of a scene can be extracted even in the absence of object shape or identity. It has also been shown that memory performance is influenced by the conceptual gist of a scene, leading to schema based expectations ( Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979 ;  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ;  Hannigan & Reinitz, 2003 ;  Lampinen et al., 2001 ;  Lampinen, Faries, Neuschatz, & Toglia, 2000 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ;  Neuschatz et al., 2002 ;  Pezdek et al., 1989 ). For example, in one of the original studies investigating the influence of scene gist on memory,  Brewer and Treyens (1981)  examined participants’ memory for items within a schematic context (a graduate student office). Specifically, encoding items included those that were consistent with the schema (e.g., typewriter; hereafter referred to as  schematic  items), as well as items that would be unusual to find in that context (e.g., picnic basket; hereafter referred to as  schema-inconsistent  items) and items that were not specific to the schema, yet were not out of place or unusual (e.g., rug; hereafter referred to as  non-schematic  items). Researchers found that participants remembered more schematic items than schema-inconsistent or non-schematic items. Moreover, schema expectancy also contributed to false memories, wherein participants falsely remembered more non-presented schematic objects (e.g., books) than schema-inconsistent or non-schematic objects. Later studies have replicated and extended these initial findings, showing that the rate of false alarms is near equal to the hit rate for schematic objects ( Lampinen et al., 2001 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ;  Pezdek et al., 1989 ). 
 While much of the previous research has compared schematic retrieval to retrieval of schema-inconsistent information (e.g., octopus on a farm;  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ; Loftus & Mackworth, 1978b;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ; Palmer, 1975), it is typically unrealistic to encounter anomalies such as these in everyday life. Rather, one is likely to encounter non-schematic items embedded within schematic scenes, such as a rug in the kitchen or a flowerpot on a farm. Neuroimaging research examining such comparisons is less common in the literature. Those that have find that retrieval of strongly-related (i.e., schematic) objects compared to weakly-related (i.e., non-schematic) objects is supported by activity in parahippocampal and retrosplenial complex ( Bar & Aminoff, 2003 ;  Bar, Aminoff, & Schacter, 2008 ), reflecting processing and evaluation of associations. In addition, results from encoding suggest a role of the medial PFC in reflecting the strength of relatedness between encoded items ( van Kesteren et al., 2013 ); however results have been mixed at retrieval (e.g.,  van Buuren et al., 2014 ;  van Kesteren, Rijpkema, Ruiter, & Fernandez, 2010 ). With respect to schematic representations, prior work with semantic dementia and language processing has suggested that this strength in semantic relatedness, and in turn semantic and conceptual gist, is associated with activity in lateral temporal cortices, specifically the middle and superior temporal gyri ( Noppeney et al., 2007 ;  Price, 2000 ; see  Saumier & Chertkow, 2002  for review;  Simons et al., 2005 ;  Wise & Price, 2006 ). Thus, in line with this past work, we expect that retrieval of schematic (compared to non-schematic) true memories should be reliant on associative processing in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) and retrieval of conceptual gist, mediated by the lateral temporal cortices. Additionally, because the role of mPFC in mediating schematic compared to non-schematic retrieval is less clear, any identified results will help further ascertain the function of this region at retrieval. 
 Compared to schematic true memory, successful memory for non-schematic items, which are only loosely associated with the schema, may not be afforded this same schematic processing advantage, as suggested by reduced retrieval rates observed in prior studies (see  Alba & Hasher, 1983  for review; e.g.,  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ). Previous research has suggested that reduced memory for non-schematic items reflects both a deficiency in schema support and reduced attention to non-schematic items during encoding ( Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ;  Loftus & Mackworth, 1978 ;  Owens, Bower, & Black, 1979 ; but see  Pezdek et al., 1989  in relation to attention for schema-inconsistent items). As a result of reduced attention and weaker encoding, non-schematic retrieval is likely to be associated with more effortful retrieval and monitoring, mediated by activity in the anterior cingulate and parietal cortices ( Cabeza, Ciaramelli, Olson, & Moscovitch, 2008 ;  Ciaramelli, Grady, & Moscovitch, 2008 ;  Fleck, Daselaar, Dobbins, & Cabeza, 2006 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2004 ). Furthermore, due to the small number of studies that have compared schematic to non-schematic memory, it was unclear whether the foregoing predictions would be observed in both recollection- and familiarity-based retrieval, or whether memory strength would have differential influences on the neural differences between trial types. Thus, it is important to explore both commonalities and differences in neural recruitment during successful retrieval of schematic and non-schematic items within the context of both recollection and familiarity. 
 As noted above, while schema processing and schematic gist may serve as useful mechanisms for supporting true memories, they have also been shown to lead to high rates of false memories for schematically-related lures ( Aminoff, Schacter, & Bar, 2008 ;  Intraub, Gottesman, Willey, & Zuk, 1996 ;  Lampinen et al., 2001 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ;  Neuschatz et al., 2002 ;  Roediger & Mcdermott, 1995a ). Though examined behaviorally using scenes (e.g.,  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ;  Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998 ), it is unclear what specific cognitive and neural mechanisms support the retrieval of schematic false memories. Previous studies examining the neural basis of false retrieval have focused on either semantic false memories or perceptual false memories. Such studies have found substantial overlap in the neural mechanism supporting both true and false memories, including activity throughout the core retrieval network, including bilateral frontal and parietal regions (see  Dennis et al., 2015 ;  Kurkela & Dennis, 2016  for reviews), bilateral caudate and insula (e.g.,  Cabeza, Rao, Wagner, Mayer, & Schacter, 2001 ;  Garoff-Eaton, Slotnick, & Schacter, 2006 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ), lateral temporal cortex (e.g.,  von Zerssen, Mecklinger, Opitz, & von Cramon, 2001 ), occipital cortex ( Cabeza et al., 2001 ;  Dennis, Bowman, & Peterson, 2014 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Schacter et al., 1996 ;  Stark, Okado, & Loftus, 2010 ) and hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) ( Dennis, Bowman, & Vandekar, 2012 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Iidaka, Harada, Kawaguchi, & Sadato, 2012 ;  Schacter, Buckner, Koutstaal, Dale, & Rosen, 1997 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ;  Stark et al., 2010 ;  von Zerssen et al., 2001 ). While much of this activation has been attributed to engagement of similar reconstructive processes ( Cabeza et al., 2001 ;  Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Gutchess & Schacter, 2012 ;  Kahn, Davachi, & Wagner, 2004 ;  Schacter et al., 1997 ;  Schacter et al., 1996 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ;  von Zerssen et al., 2001 ), as well as retrieval-related evaluation and monitoring processes ( Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Stark et al., 2010 ), basic stimulus-driven processes are also believed to account for the large amount of common neural activity. 
 For example, in perceptual relatedness paradigms, targets and lures share similar perceptual attributes, such as shape, color and/or size. This, in turn, is believed to result in similar perceptual processing in late visual cortices (BA 19 & 37) between targets and related lures (e.g.,  Atkins & Reuter-Lorenz, 2011 ), reflecting the conscious experience of memory, which is independent of true “oldness” ( Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ). It is also thought to be indicative of successful retrieval of the general properties of originally studied items (e.g., shape, color;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ) or those involving the semantic label or general category (e.g., fruit, bird) to which the item belongs. However, what is unique about the scene paradigm is that, unlike other visual false memory studies, the critical lures are not items perceptually related to that which was presented previously, but rather conceptually related to encoding items. For example, ‘tractor’ is schematically related to ‘farm’ and objects within a farm scene such as ‘barn’ and ‘pig’, but shares little perceptual similarity with these objects. 
 Therefore, it follows that schematic false memories, like those in the scene paradigm, arise not from activity in visual processing regions associated with perceptual overlap between lures and encoding information ( Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Goldmann et al., 2003 ;  Gutchess & Schacter, 2012 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ), but from a shared conceptual or semantic gist between the encoding schema and the lures. In line with the influence of such semantic processing on memory retrieval, previous studies have highlighted the role of the lateral temporal cortices in mediating both true (as noted above) and illusory memories. Specifically, engagement of left lateral temporal cortex has been associated with semantic processing and retrieval of semantic gist across both true and false memory studies ( Cabeza et al., 2001 ;  Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Dennis, Kim, & Cabeza, 2008b; 
 Garoff-Eaton, Kensinger, & Schacter, 2007 ;  Gutchess & Schacter, 2012 ;  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b; 
 Kubota et al., 2006 ). With respect to schematic true and false memory, given the schematic salience invoked in the scene paradigm, we hypothesize that both types of memory will be highly reliant on the retrieval of schematic gist. Importantly, given that schematic gist, as operationalized in the current scene paradigm, is inherently built on the semantic associations between items that are congruent with the presented schema at encoding (e.g., ‘barn’ and ‘pig’ with respect to ‘farm’), we hypothesize that retrieval of both schematic targets and lures will be mediated by activity in bilateral temporal cortices, reflecting gist processing. 
 As noted above, MTL has also been shown to be a critical region, not just in supporting true, but also false memories ( Dennis et al., 2014 ;  Dennis et al., 2008b; 
 Dennis, Kim, & Cabeza, 2007b; 
 Duarte, Graham, & Henson, 2010 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2007 ;  Norman & Schacter, 1997 ). However, the exact role of the MTL with respect to false memories remains unclear. One issue that may be contributing to this confusion is the fact that different MTL subregions have been shown to contribute differentially to recollection and familiarity in veridical memories (e.g.,  Daselaar, Fleck, & Cabeza, 2006 ; see  Yonelinas, 2002  for review), and thus, may also do so with respect to false memories. That is, while a wide breadth of behavioral research has shown that, like true memories, false memories can be retrieved in terms of both (phantom) recollection and familiarity ( Brainerd, Wright, Reyna, & Mojardin, 2001 ;  Lampinen et al., 2001 ;  Mather, Henkel, & Johnson, 1997 ; see also  McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, & Balota, 2009 ) neuroimaging studies have just begun to investigate this dichotomy ( Abe et al., 2013 ;  Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Duarte et al., 2010 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2007 ;  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b; 
 Stark et al., 2010 ). For example,  Kim and Cabeza (2007b)  compared high-confidence true recognition with high-confidence false recognition and found that true memory elicited increased activation in bilateral posterior hippocampus and PHG, indicating that high-confidence true recognition is mediated by recollection-related processes, whereas phantom recollection is not. Alternatively, recent work from our lab ( Dennis et al., 2012 ) has shown that, compared to familiarity, both true and false recollection exhibited activity in the anterior hippocampus and PHG; yet true recollection showed greater hippocampal activity indicative of greater recovery of sensory details associated with past events. 
 Studies that have identified differences in familiarity-based true and false memories have told a slightly different story with respect to MTL activity. Specifically, recent work has suggested that false familiarity elicits greater activation in PHG due to a reliance on source retrieval in light of weak encoding of the item ( Abe et al., 2013 ;  Karanian & Slotnick, 2014 ; see also  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b ). Given the role of the PHG in source retrieval ( Diana, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007 ;  Eichenbaum, Sauvage, Fortin, Komorowski, & Lipton, 2012 ;  Ranganath, 2010 ;  Yonelinas, Hopfinger, Buonocore, Kroll, & Baynes, 2001 ), it has been posited that PHG activity reflects effortful contextual processing associated with attempts to relate the lure with an encoding context ( Karanian & Slotnick, 2014 ). The schematic encoding component of the current design allows for the examination of this theory of MTL activity and false memories. While a reliance on schematic gist of past presentations can easily lead to phantom recollection of schematic lures, it is also likely to result in high rates of familiarity-based false memories, as the strong schematic gist guides scene reinstatement and retrieval processes. To the extent that the encoding scenes elicit schematic contextual support during retrieval, we hypothesize that the hippocampus will show greater activation for true compared to false recollection and false familiarity will exhibit a greater reliance on the PHG than true familiarity. 
 To recap, the current study aims to expand upon previous false memory studies by investigating the influence of a schematic framework on memory retrieval utilizing a scene paradigm within the context of fMRI. To this end, we will extend the research on veridical memories to include an investigation of the neural basis of common and distinct mechanisms supporting schematic and non-schematic memories within the context of both recollection and familiarity. We will also extend the research on false memories to include an examination of the neural basis of visual false memories beyond previous work focusing on the role of perceptual relatedness. In addition to the foregoing investigation into veridical memories, we also aim to investigate both common and unique factors underlying true and false memories within the context of a schematic framework across both recollection and familiarity. 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1. Participants 
 Twenty-five right-handed native English speakers from the Penn State University community completed this experiment. Participants were screened for history of neurological disorders and psychiatric illness, alcoholism, drug abuse, and/or learning disabilities. One participant was excluded from the analysis due to head motion in excess of 4 mm. Two additional participants were also excluded for poor behavioral performance (greater than 50% miss rate for schematic targets), leaving data from 22 participants reported in all analyses [13 females; mean age = 22.91 years (SD = 3.01)]. All participants provided written informed consent and received financial compensation for their participation. All experimental procedures were approved by The Pennsylvania State University’s Institutional Review Board for the ethical treatment of human participants. 
 
 
 2.2. Stimuli 
 Stimuli consisted of 26 schematic scenes (e.g., Bathroom, Farm), comprised of objects commonly associated with each schema (schematic targets: e.g., Farm: pig, barn; Bathroom: toilet, tub) as well as items unrelated to the schema (non-schematic targets: e.g., Farm: bush; flower pot; Bathroom: vase; spray bottle) (see  Figure 1 ). Lures also consisted of both items commonly associated with each schema (schematic lures: e.g., Farm: rooster, tractor; Bathroom: sink, plunger), as well as unrelated lures (e.g., purse, hammer). All backgrounds and images were obtained from an Internet image search. All items included in testing were normed for their association with each scene in a multi-step process. Specifically, all schematic scenes, along with their related schematic items, were verbally identified by both a group of individuals in the lab as well as an independent group of subject pool participants (N = 20) in order to verify that each scene represented the intended schema. Furthermore, schematic items were identified as being related to the schema via a simple yes/no identification procedure. Items that were deemed as not related to the schema (i.e., that did not reach 100% consensus) were replaced with an appropriate alternative. 
 Once the schematic targets and lures were finalized, non-schematic targets were then inserted in each scene. Non-schematic targets were defined as those that did not contribute to the schema of either the scene they were inserted into or any other scene in the study, yet still fit appropriately into the scene (i.e., such that at retrieval they did not stand out as schematic or schema-inconsistent to any given scene). Due to the difficulty of determining these non-schematic items, we transitioned to a rating scale. Specifically, non-schematic items were rated on an ordinal scale (1-unrelated to 4- related) by a unique group of subject pool participants (N = 19) to ensure that non-schematic items were not schematically related to the scene in which they appeared, or any other scene. This rating process also included a random subsample of the schematic items, so that participants were not biased in their ratings of non-schematic items. As a first step in creating a division with respect to schema relatedness, only non-schematic items that met a rating of below 2.5 across all scenes were included as non-schematic targets. Items that failed to meet this criterion were replaced with appropriate alternatives. With respect to final relatedness ratings, while the subsample of schematic items had a mean relatedness rating of 3.70 (SD = 0.41; mode = 3.89), non-schematic items had a mean rating of 1.48 (SD = 0.32; mode = 1.14). This difference was statistically significant (t(269) = 38.24; p < .001). To further investigate this issue, we examined the average ratings corresponding to each recollection and familiarity hit within both schematic and non-schematic items. Similar to the overall schema-relatedness ratings mentioned above, significant differences in relatedness were identified between schematic & non-schematic recollection, as well as familiarity, hits. A list of all items and scenes can be found in Appendix A. Scenes were presented focally and equated for resolution. Twenty-six scenes were presented during encoding in the same order for all participants. Three hundred individual items were presented at retrieval, including (a) 104 related targets (4 from each scene); (b) 62 unrelated targets (2–3 from each scene); (c) 104 related lures (4 associated with each scene); and (d) 30 unrelated lures. 
 
 
 2.3. Task and Procedure 
 Encoding took place outside of the scanner while retrieval occurred in the scanner with approximately 30 minutes separating the two memory phases. Encoding was intentional; participants were asked to look at each scene and try to remember as much as they could for a later memory task. The 26 encoding scenes were presented for 10 s each across 2 runs, with 13 scenes presented in run one and the remaining 13 scenes presented in run two. During retrieval, all images (items from the scenes and new items) were presented in the center of the screen with three response options (Remember/Know/New) displayed below each image. Images were projected onto a screen that participants viewed through a mirror attached to the head coil. Behavioral responses were recorded with the participant’s right hand on a 4-button response box. Images were displayed by COGENT in MATLAB (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) and were displayed at a screen resolution of 1024 (H) × 768 (V) at 75 Hz. At the viewing distance of 143 cm, the display area was 20° (H) × 16° (V). Scanner noise was reduced with headphones, and cushioning was used in the head coil to minimize head motion. 
 During retrieval, participants completed 6 runs each approximately 7 minutes in length. Each image was displayed for 3s while participants made memory responses using the ‘Remember/Know/New’ paradigm. The images were pseudorandomly sorted, ensuring that no more than 3 images from any one trial type appeared in a row and no 2 images associated with a given scene appeared in a row. In accord with typical Remember/Know/New task instructions, participants were told to respond ‘Remember’ if they could recollect specific details about the object such as its shape, color, placement in the scene or their thoughts or feelings during its initial presentation. Participants were told to respond ‘Know’ if the picture looked familiar, but they could not recollect any specific details of its prior presentation. They were told to respond ‘New’ if they believed the picture was not presented during the encoding session. 
 
 
 2.4. Image acquisition 
 Structural and functional images were acquired using a Siemens 3T scanner equipped with a 12-channel head coil. A T1-weighted sagittal localizer was acquired to locate the anterior (AC) and posterior (PC) commissures. Images were then prescribed parallel to the AC–PC plane. An MPRAGE was acquired with a 1650 ms TR, 2.03 ms TE, 256 mm field of view (FOV), 256 2  matrix, 160 axial slices, and 1.0 mm slice thickness for each participant. Echo-planar functional images were acquired using a descending acquisition, 2500 ms TR, 25 ms TE, 240 mm FOV, a 80 2  matrix, 90° flip angle, 42 axial slices with 3.0 mm slice thickness resulting in 3.0 mm isotropic voxels. 
 
 
 2.5. Image processing 
 Pre-processing of all functional images was carried out in SPM8 (Wellcome Institute of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK.  www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk ), using MATLAB (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The functional time series were first corrected for differences in slice timing acquisition. EPI images were then realigned to the first image using a 6-parameter rigid body affine transformation. Next, the slice time corrected functional images were spatially normalized to the standard MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) EPI template implemented in SPM8. To do this, the raw T1 MPRAGE images were co-registered to the mean realigned functional image, and then this co-registered T1MPRAGE image was segmented and registered to the MNI template. Lastly, the parameters from this registration process were applied to the slice time corrected and realigned functional images (3 mm isotropic voxels) to normalize them to the MNI template, with coordinates later converted into Talairach space ( Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ) for reporting. As a final preprocessing step, all of the normalized functional images were smoothed using a 6mm full-width-half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel. 
 
 
 2.6. fMRI analyses 
 At the first level, trial-related activity was modeled using the general linear model (GLM) with a stick function corresponding to trial onset convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function. A second-level random effects GLM was created treating subjects as a random effect. One sample t-tests were conducted to investigate contrasts of interest. The current analyses focused on 8 trial types of interest: 1) Schematic Recollection Hits, which were defined as ‘Remember’ responses to related targets; 2) Schematic Familiarity Hits, which were defined as ‘Know’ responses to related targets; 3) Schematic Misses, which were defined as ‘New’ responses to related targets; 4) Schematic Recollection False Alarms (FA), which were defined as ‘Remember’ responses to related lures; 5) Schematic Familiarity False Alarms, which were defined as ‘Know’ responses to related lures; 6) Schematic Correct Rejections (CR), which were defined as ‘New’ responses to related lures; 7) Non-schematic Recollection Hits, which were defined as ‘Remember’ responses to unrelated targets; 8) Non-schematic Familiarity Hits, which were defined as ‘Know’ responses to unrelated targets; and 9) Non-schematic Misses, which were defined as ‘New’ responses to unrelated targets. All other trial types, along with no response trials, were coded with their own regressors (as were movement parameters) and treated as regressors of no interest. 
 The first goal of the paper was to elucidate the neural mechanisms supporting memory for schematic and non-schematic items within both recollection and familiarity. To examine neural regions that were common to both schematic and non-schematic retrieval success we conducted a conjunction of schematic recollection hits > misses and non-schematic recollection hits > misses. The same analysis was subsequently conducted using familiarity hits. We then directly compared schematic recollection hits with non-schematic recollection hits, as well as schematic familiarity hits with non-schematic familiarity hits using whole-brain maps to identify regions where successful retrieval processes differed between the two trial types. Unfortunately, a majority of participants did not make enough non-schematic false alarms within recollection or familiarity (<10 trials) to allow for the investigation of non-schematic false memories. We therefore focused our false memory analyses on only schematic items. 
 Second, we aimed to elucidate the neural mechanisms supporting schematic false memories. In order to identify neural correlates supporting false recollection, we compared schematic recollection false alarms to schematic correct rejections. Next, a conjunction analysis of true and false recollection (Hit > Miss ∩ FA > CR) activity was constructed in SPM in order to identify neural activity that was common to both memory processes. In order to identify neural resources that were differentially recruited for each type of recollection response, we directly compared activity supporting recollected hits and recollected false alarms. To examine true and false familiarity, a similar conjunction analysis was conducted using schematic familiarity hits and schematic familiarity false alarms (in comparison to misses and correct rejections). We then again directly compared activity, this time supporting familiarity hits and familiarity false alarms. 
 In order to identify significant results in our contrasts of interest, we employed Monte Carlo simulations, implemented by 3dClustSim in AFNI version 16.0 ( Cox & Hyde, 1997 ) to determine activation that was corrected for multiple comparisons at  p  < 0.05. The input to this simulation was the search space [grey matter mask using the Wake Forest University aal pickatlas ( Lancaster et al., 2000 ;  Maldjian, Laurienti, Kraft, & Burdette, 2003 )], across-subject average intrinsic smoothness in mm obtained from the residual time-series (11.15), and the uncorrected  p  threshold ( p  < 0.005). The results revealed a voxel extent of 66 required to correct for multiple comparisons at  p  < 0.05 at the whole brain level. An additional simulation was run to determine a correction specific to our a priori ROIs of interest, including the superior/middle temporal gyri (STG/MTG) and the MTL (bilateral hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus). All ROIs were defined by using anatomical masks of each region (bilaterally) within the aal pickatlas toolbox in SPM8. 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral Results 
 A 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA was conducted across all memory responses (combining recollection and familiarity) to examine the effects of stimulus type (target, lure) and relatedness (schematic, non-schematic) on proportion of ‘old’ responses (see  Table 1  for means). This analysis revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type [ F (1, 21) = 155.08,  p  < .001], with participants making more ‘old’ responses to targets than to lures. There was also a significant main effect of relatedness, such that participants made more ‘old’ responses to schematic items than non-schematic items [ F (1, 21) = 82.74,  p  < .001], as well as a significant stimulus type by relatedness interaction [ F (1, 21) = 24.35,  p  < .001]. Follow up t-tests indicated that participants made more hits than false alarms for both schematic [ t (21) = 6.49,  p  < .001] and non-schematic [ t (21) = 13.11,  p  < .001] items. Participants also made more hits and false alarms to schematic targets than non-schematic targets [ t (21) = 5.58,  p  < .001;  t (21) = 9.8,  p  < .001; respectively]. 
 A similar 2 × 2 ANOVA on recollection responses revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type [ F (1, 21) = 92.39,  p  < .001] and relatedness [ F (1, 21) = 120.9,  p  < .001]. Follow up t-tests indicated that participants made more recollection hits than recollection false alarms for both schematic and non-schematic items [ t (21) = 8.45,  p  < .001;  t (21) = 9.3,  p  < .001; respectively] and participants made significantly more schematic hits and schematic false alarms than non-schematic hits and false alarms [Hit:  t (21) = 11.69,  p  < .001; FA:  t (21) = 7.64,  p  < .001]. Finally, a 2 × 2 ANOVA on adjusted familiarity rates was conducted. Adjusted familiarity hits were calculated as pKnow Hits/(1 – pRemember Hits) and adjusted familiarity FA were calculated as pKnow FA/(1 – pRemember FA). This calculations takes into account the fact the recollection and familiarity are not mutually exclusive processes ( Duarte et al., 2010 ;  Duarte, Ranganath, Trujillo, & Knight, 2006 ;  Yonelinas, 2002 ;  Yonelinas & Jacoby, 1995 ). This ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type [ F (1, 21) = 47.9,  p  < .001] and relatedness [ F (1, 21) = 60.6,  p  < .001], as well as a significant interaction [ F (1, 21) = 26.9,  p  < .001]. Follow up t-tests showed that adjusted familiarity hit rates were higher than adjusted familiarity false alarm rates in both schematic and non-schematic conditions [ t (21) = 2.38,  p  < .05;  t (21) = 8.14,  p  < .001; respectively], though much more so in the non-schematic condition. Results also indicated that participants made more adjusted familiarity hits and false alarms for schematic compared to non-schematic targets and lures [ t (21) = 2.38,  p  < .05;  t (21) = 9.43,  p  < .001 respectively]. A breakdown of the behavioral results is shown in  Table 1 . 
 
 
 3.2. Imaging Results 
 
 3.2.1. Schematic and Non-Schematic Retrieval Success 
 With respect to true memories, a conjunction of schematic and non-schematic recollection success (Recollection Hit v Miss) revealed activation in regions within bilateral fronto-parietal cortices, bilateral middle temporal cortices, and left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). A parallel conjunction examining familiarity success revealed activity in a more limited set of regions, including left middle and inferior frontal gyrus, left superior parietal cortex and left middle temporal gyrus (see  Table 2 ;  Figure 2A ). 
 The effect of schema on target recollection revealed greater activation in bilateral occipital cortex and left hippocampus for schematic target recollection, while non-schematic target recollection was supported by dorsal ACC and left supramarginal gyrus 1 . In regards to familiarity, no significant activity was observed for schematic greater than non-schematic target familiarity. The reverse contrast revealed activation only in bilateral middle temporal gyri (see  Table 3 ;  Figure 2B ). 
 
 
 3.2.2. True and False Schematic Memory Retrieval Activity 
 A conjunction analysis between schematic true and false recollection revealed activation in the left middle frontal gyrus (MFG), left MTG, and bilateral inferior parietal lobe. Conjunction analyses between schematic true and false familiarity revealed activation in the left MFG and the left MTG (see  Table 4 ;  Figure 3A ). 
 Direct comparisons between schematic true and false recollection revealed greater activation in bilateral hippocampus, right MTG, and left occipital gyrus for true recollection, while false recollection was supported by greater activity in bilateral STG. No region showed greater activation for true greater than false familiarity; however false familiarity revealed greater activity in bilateral MTG/STG and left hippocampus, extending into PHG (see  Table 5 ;  Figure 3B ). 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 Using a novel scene paradigm, the current study investigated the effect of schematic encoding on memory for schematic and non-schematic information, as well as schematic encoding on schematic false memories. The behavioral analyses showed that when a strong schematic context was present at encoding, memory for schematic items was better than for non-schematic items. While successful retrieval of both types of items was shown to rely on similar neural processes, differences between schematic and non-schematic retrieval revealed that schematic target recollection relied on the hippocampus and visual cortices, with no region showing greater activation for schematic target familiarity. Conversely, non-schematic target recollection was supported by regions in the prefrontal and parietal cortices, whereas non-schematic target familiarity was supported by greater activity in the lateral temporal cortices. While schematic encoding was shown to be beneficial to successful memory, it also significantly increased false memories for schematically-related lures. Neurally, schematic true and false recollection, as well as true and false familiarity, showed overlapping activation, suggesting that both types of memory processes recruit similar neural mechanisms regardless of the process supporting the memory decision. In particular, activity in left MFG and lateral temporal cortices was identified across all four memory responses, highlighting the ubiquitous role of these regions in the retrieval of schematic memories. Additionally, analyses identified several brain regions that distinguished between true and false retrieval. Specifically, visual cortex showed increased activity for true recollection, whereas bilateral MTG and STG showed increased activity for false recollection and familiarity. Interestingly, the MTL showed increased activity for true compared to false recollection, but showed the opposite pattern for familiarity. Each finding is discussed in detail below. 
 
 4.1. Common Activity Across Schematic and Non-schematic Retrieval Success 
 In line with previous studies that have found that schematic items are often better remembered than non-schematic items (see  Alba & Hasher, 1983  for review; e.g.,  Brewer & Treyens, 1981 ), results showed that schematic targets were remembered more often than non-schematic targets. This difference is reflective of the influence that the encoding schema has in supporting identification of and memory for information that is directly supportive of the schema. Despite this, successful retrieval of both schematic and non-schematic targets was shown to rely on similar neural correlates across both recollection and familiarity. Specifically, retrieval success of both types of targets was mediated by activity in bilateral prefrontal and parietal cortices, including left IFG, regions consistently shown to support episodic recognition processes ( Rugg & Vilberg, 2013 ;  Spaniol et al., 2009 ). 
 Activation was also identified in lateral temporal cortices, which have been shown to support semantic processing and retrieval of verbal and semantic gist information ( Saumier & Chertkow, 2002 ;  Wise & Price, 2006 ). Moreover, we found a similar activation profile in lateral temporal cortices for both schematic  and  non-schematic retrieval success across recollection and familiarity. While initially counter-intuitive, results suggest that the schematic context instantiated during encoding is a strong mediator of all retrieval processes, regardless of relatedness (schematic/non-schematic), memory strength (recollection/familiarity), and, as will be discussed later, veracity (true/false). Specifically, results suggest that once items are encoded in a highly schematic context, memory for both schematic and non-schematic items from that context is equally reliant on semantic gist processes. Importantly, this finding extends previous work by indicating that retrieval of items studied within a highly schematic context utilizes the schema for accurate retrieval support, even when these items are not directly supportive of the schema. 
 
 
 4.2. Differences in Schematic and Non-schematic Target Retrieval 
 Behavioral analyses found that schematic targets were better remembered than non-schematic targets. Furthermore, as predicted, schematic target recollection elicited greater activity in the hippocampus and visual cortex. The MTL, and specifically the hippocampus, has been consistently implicated in recollection success and in the retrieval of item-specific details, as well as source information ( Diana et al., 2007 ;  Eldridge, Knowlton, Furmanski, Bookheimer, & Engel, 2000 ;  Yonelinas, Otten, Shaw, & Rugg, 2005 ). Results support the notion that schematic compared to non-schematic hits are associated with the retrieval of greater encoding details, potentially due to enhanced encoding processes associated with identification and processing of the studied schema. In line with previous work, results suggest that schematic target recollection is reliant on greater contextual processing supported by the MTL ( Bar & Aminoff, 2003 ;  Bar et al., 2008 ). 
 Schematic target recollection was also supported by increased activity in late visual cortices (BA 19/37), compared with non-schematic target recollection. With respect to memory retrieval, activity in early visual cortex has been interpreted as reflecting recapitulation of item representations that were present at encoding, while activity in late visual cortex has been interpreted as reflecting memory for general object identity and the conscious experience of identifying the item as ‘old’ ( Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ,  2006 ;  Stark et al., 2010 ;  Vaidya, Zhao, Desmond, & Gabrieli, 2002 ;  Wheeler, Petersen, & Buckner, 2000 ). To this end, results suggest that while lower level sensory reactivation of targets was consistent across schematic and non-schematic retrieval success (as evidenced by overlap in activity in early visual cortex), non-schematic target retrieval relied on conscious retrieval of the item and/or its context within the schema to support recollection. Interestingly, the foregoing differences were only observed for recollection and not familiarity responses, suggesting that neural differences in enhanced schema-related item accuracy may be supported by different mechanisms for familiarity. 
 Because non-schematic targets were not inherently tied to the encoding schema, it was predicted that participants would not be able to take full advantage of the encoding schema at retrieval, making these items more difficult to remember. This was reflected in both behavior and the neural results. Specifically, poorer recollection memory for non-schematic compared to schematic items was associated with increased activity within the ACC and left supramarginal gyrus. Previous memory research has implicated the ACC in supporting effortful cognitive control and conflict monitoring processes ( Carter et al., 1998 ;  Fleck et al., 2006 ), while the parietal cortex has been interpreted as mediating identification of old, or previously encountered, information. Additionally, the supramarginal gyrus, has been attributed to increases in attentional mechanisms, specifically within the context of recollection ( Cabeza et al., 2008 ;  Ciaramelli, Grady, Levine, Ween, & Moscovitch, 2010 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2004 ), and may also direct a search for retrieval of general information that shares properties with a variety of contexts and is therefore more difficult to retrieve, as in the case of non-schematic items. Together, these results highlight the more difficult nature, and thus the increased cognitive effort, needed to retrieve non-schematic items when presented within a highly schematic context at encoding. 
 With respect to familiarity-based retrieval, no regions showed greater activation for schematic than non-schematic familiarity hits. Interestingly, non-schematic items relied on the lateral temporal cortices to a greater degree than did schematic retrieval. While counter-intuitive, we theorize that it may be the case that when presented with a weaker retrieval trace, retrieval of non-schematic items includes search and retrieval of the associated schema in which the items were presented in order to support item retrieval (see  Tse et al., 2007 ;  van Kesteren, Ruiter, Fernández, & Henson, 2012 ). Future work is needed to examine this possibility with respect to non-schematic retrieval following schema-based encoding. 
 It should be noted that a handful of previous studies have identified a role for medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in supporting schema processing and schema memory retrieval (e.g.,  van Kesteren et al., 2013 ;  van Kesteren, Rijpkema, et al., 2010 ). In the current study, however, we did not find evidence of mPFC in mediating retrieval of schematic compared to non-schematic memories (for a similar finding see,  van Buuren et al., 2014 ). While  van Kesteren, et al. (2013)  also included analogous non-schematic items to those used in the current paradigm (identified as schema intermediate items in their study), the observed linear schema-congruency effect in mPFC does not appear to be due to differences in schematic and non-schematic retrieval, but instead appears to be due to a marked deactivation in mPFC associated with schema-incongruent retrieval. This may provide insight into the lack of mPFC observed in the current paradigm and may suggest that mPFC findings observed in other schema-based memory studies is either related to encoding-retrieval differences or is due to comparisons with schema-inconsistent memories. It is also possible that the mPFC plays a greater role in facilitation of knowledge integration at encoding and/or consolidation stages ( Tse et al., 2011 ;  van Kesteren, Rijpkema, Ruiter, Morris, & Fernandez, 2014; 
 van Kesteren et al., 2013 ;  van Kesteren, Fernandez, Norris, & Hermans, 2010 ) as opposed to retrieval. To continue to clarify these issues, it is important that more studies be conducted to examine schema-relatedness on a continuous scale, as well as identifying neural differences between schema memory encoding and retrieval. 
 
 
 4.3. Common activity for true and false memory 
 In addition to its advantages to memory retrieval, schematic encoding has also been shown to have detrimental effects on memory, particularly with respect to an increased rate of false memories. Accordingly, while the schematic hit rate was greater than that of schematic false alarms, participants made significantly more schematic false alarms than non-schematic false alarms. In line with our predictions, the conjunction analysis of schematic true and false recollection (as well as that of familiarity) showed common retrieval activity in left MFG and left MTG (see  Figure 3A ). As noted above, common activity in left MFG and left MTG highlights the influence of the encoding schema on memory retrieval, as both regions have been shown to be critical to semantic processing ( Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009 ;  Kircher, Brammer, Tous Andreu, Williams, & McGuire, 2001 ;  Noppeney & Price, 2002 ;  Price, 2000 ;  Wise & Price, 2006 ) and the retrieval of semantic gist ( Buckner, 1996 ;  Gabrieli, Poldrack, & Desmond, 1998 ;  Noppeney et al., 2007 ;  Price, 2000 ;  Simons et al., 2005 ;  Wise & Price, 2006 ). Additionally, within the context of false memory studies, the MTG has been shown to mediate retrieval of false memories based on semantic or conceptual similarity between lures and targets ( Cabeza et al., 2001 ;  Dennis et al., 2008b; 
 Garoff-Eaton et al., 2007 ;  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b; 
 Kubota et al., 2006 ). Given that in the scene paradigm schematic gist is inherently built on the semantic associations between items that are congruent with the encoding schema, results suggest that recruitment of semantic processing regions underscores retrieval of the schema and the evaluation and integration of the congruent item (target or lure) to that schema. Moreover, the fact that left MFG and left MTG were identified in both the recollection and familiarity conjunction, speaks to the ubiquitous influence of semantic processing and schematic gist to schematic memory retrieval, in the current paradigm. 
 Interestingly, the results failed to show common activity in visual cortex, a region that has been identified in several previous false memory studies that have employed visual stimuli ( Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Gutchess & Schacter, 2012 ;  Kurkela & Dennis, 2016 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ). As noted in the Introduction, while the scene paradigm is indeed visual by nature, is constitutes a relatively different paradigm than the perceptual relatedness paradigms used to date. A ‘visual DRM’ if you will, the scene paradigm examines memory for targets and lures that were related to a given schema (e.g., ‘toilet’ and ‘sink’ with respect to ‘Bathroom’) and are associated by means of common conceptual or schematic gist amongst the items. However, the items themselves share little perceptual similarity. Our current results suggest that, in the absence of perceptual overlap between targets and lures, there exists no overlapping processes within visual cortex that support recollection or familiarity of both true and false memories. This finding thus extends results from previous visual false memory studies and deepens our understanding of what processes may be common to false memories across a wide range of paradigms, as well as what processes underlie false retrieval with respect to the specific paradigm used. 
 
 
 4.4. Differential activation between schematic true and false memory 
 In addition to common activation, we sought to elucidate neural activity that differentially supported schematic true and false memories. Important differences between true and false schematic memory were identified in visual cortex, lateral temporal cortices, and MTL, with each discussed in turn below. Despite the lack of common visual activation, recollection results showed that true compared to false recollection showed increased activity across both early and late visual cortex (BA 18 & 19). As noted above, early visual activity has been attributed to the recapitulation of a sensory signature reflecting the retrieval of sensory details of the encoding event (c.f., the sensory reactivation hypothesis;  Buckner & Wheeler, 2001 ;  Rugg & Wilding, 2000 ), while late visual activity has been attributed to the retrieval of item identity ( Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ;  Vaidya et al., 2002 ;  Wheeler & Buckner, 2003 ;  Wheeler et al., 2000 ). To this end, the results suggest that, compared to false recollection, true recollection is mediated by reactivation and reinstatement of perceptual details associated with the original encoding episode, as well as object labeling and general properties of the originally studied item ( Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Slotnick & Schacter, 2004 ). Furthermore, given the fact that visual cortex activity failed to differentiate true and false familiarity, results suggest that familiarity responses may not retain the same perceptual details that are present for recollection 2 . Combined with the fact that no other region distinguished true from false familiarity, the results further suggest that, unlike recollection, subjective differences between familiarity decisions are less distinctive and are largely reliant on similar cognitive and neural processes. 
 Most interestingly, both recollection and familiarity false memories exhibited greater activity in bilateral lateral temporal cortices compared to true memories. Specifically, schematic false compared to true recollection exhibited increased activation in bilateral STG and schematic false compared to true familiarity exhibited increased activation in both bilateral MTG and STG (see  Figure 3B ). Thus, results are consistent with our prediction that, given the salient schematic relationship between lures and the studied scenes, false memories would be largely reliant on retrieval of the schematic gist ( Deese, 1959 ;  Roediger & McDermott, 1995b ). Additionally, combined with the absence of visual processes supporting false retrieval, results further suggest that false memories for visual stimuli that are schematically, but not overtly perceptually related to information presented at encoding are mediated by the retrieval of schematic gist, regardless of memory strength. As such, the current results are consistent with the Fuzzy Trace Theory ( Deese, 1959 ;  Reyna & Brainerd, 1995 ;  Roediger & McDermott, 1995b ), which posits that gist traces support false memories, particularly in the absence of verbatim traces that offset the familiarity of the lure item. 
 As noted, prior false memory studies have disagreed about the role of the MTL in mediating false memories (see  Dennis et al., 2015  for review). That is, some studies find the MTL to be active for both true and false retrieval ( Cabeza et al., 2001 ;  Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006 ;  Kahn et al., 2004 ;  Schacter et al., 1997 ;  Schacter et al., 1996 ;  Stark et al., 2010 ), whereas others have found MTL activity only for retrieval of true, but not false, memories ( Dennis et al., 2008b ;  Giovanello, Kensinger, Wong, & Schacter, 2009 ;  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b; 
 Paz-Alonso, Ghetti, Donohue, Goodman, & Bunge, 2008 ). In our earlier work ( Dennis et al., 2012 ) we posited that this discrepancy might be due, in part, to inconsistencies in testing procedures and the tendency of past studies to collapse across recollection- and familiarity-related responses. Supporting this theory, as well as our predictions, the current findings showed the MTL elicited different patterns of activity when comparing true and false memories across recollection and familiarity. Specifically, bilateral anterior hippocampus showed greater activity for schematic true compared to false recollection, while schematic false compared to true familiarity exhibited greater activity in a more posterior region of left hippocampus/PHG (see  Figure 3B ). 
 Regarding recollection, the current results support our earlier work, as well as that of others, who have separated out recollection processes with respect to true and false memories, identifying greater activity for true recollection in the hippocampus proper ( Abe et al., 2013 ;  Dennis et al., 2012 ;  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b ). Similar to the interpretation of greater MTL activity for schematic compared to non-schematic recollection above, current results suggest that true recollection is accompanied by greater recovery of item-specific episodic details from encoding, as well as the binding of multiple memory traces that is unique to recollection ( Diana et al., 2007 ;  Yonelinas et al., 2005 ). 
 While familiarity is generally defined as the absence of vivid retrieval for item-specific details, the current results showed false familiarity to be mediated by activity in left hippocampus/PHG. The current MTL results are consistent with recent false memory work that has broken down false recollection from that of familiarity, showing greater PHG activity for false compared to true familiarity ( Abe et al., 2013 ;  Karanian & Slotnick, 2014 ; see also  Kim & Cabeza, 2007b ). Despite the apparent dichotomy, a parsimonious explanation has been offered by  Karanian and Slotnick (2014) . Specifically, they suggest that within the context of false familiarity, PHG activity reflects a greater reliance on source processing in the face of a weak memory trace. That is, when only a weak retrieval trace is available, (such as only a low level of gist), false familiarity is supported by retrieval of the encoding source or surrounding details. For example, in the current study, participants may be recollecting the contextual event (i.e., gist of the scene), but are still lacking details of the item itself and are thus indicating a familiarity response. Interestingly, non-schematic familiarity also exhibited significantly greater recruitment of this region compared to schematic familiarity, and showed no difference with respect to schematic false familiarity. This result further supports the aforementioned conclusion that, when faced with a relatively weak item trace, enhanced retrieval of the encoding context may underlie a familiarity response for a given item. Further research should continue to build upon these theories of MTL involvement in true and false retrieval, specifically with respect to the separate contributions of recollection and familiarity processing. 
 
 
 4.5. Conclusions 
 Schemas have been shown to be both beneficial to memory, supporting encoding and retrieval success, but also detrimental when novel information is highly related to the schema. The current study sought to investigate the influence that a schematic framework at encoding has on both veridical and false memories across different levels of memory strength. In doing so, the study built on recent work that has highlighted the need to examine the separate contributions of recollection and familiarity in the context of false memories ( Abe et al., 2013 ;  Dennis et al., 2012 ). Furthermore, the use of the scene paradigm allowed us to investigate the neural basis of false memory for pictorial items that have a conceptual, rather than a perceptual, relationship with encoded items. The study identified several novel results. In terms of memory success, while we identified a wealth of common regions supporting both schematic and non-schematic memory success, schematic recollection was supported by detailed retrieval mediated by the hippocampus and visual cortex. The more difficult non-schematic recollection, however, relied on regions supporting more effortful retrieval monitoring and evaluation strategies. With respect to false memories, common retrieval activity across veridical and illusory memory was found in lateral temporal regions that support semantic processing and retrieval of schematic gist. Moreover, activity in this region was greater for both false recollection and false familiarity suggesting that retrieval schematic information from encoding was a critical factor in mediating illusory memories, irrespective of memory strength. Importantly, the absence of common visual activity, suggests that, unlike previous studies utilizing visual stimuli, when false memories are predicated on schematic gist and not perceptual overlap, there is little reliance on visual processes during false memory retrieval. Furthermore, as visual activity was greater for true recollection, results suggest that visual cortices are critical for distinguishing true and false memories. Finally, the dissociation identified within the MTL suggests that memory strength is a critical factor to understanding the role of this region in supporting true and false memories. This study builds on past fMRI false memory research, clarifying and expanding our knowledge of the neural mechanisms supporting memory. 
 
 
 
 
 The authors wish to thank Courtney Allen for help with stimulus development, Kristina Peterson for assistance in data collection, and Caitlin Bowman, John Huhn, and Kyle Kurkela for comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. We also wish to thank the Penn State Social, Life, & Engineering Sciences Imaging Center (SLEIC), 3T MRI Facility. This work was supported by a National Science Foundation grant (BCS1025709) awarded to NAD. CEW was partially supported by National Institute on Aging Grant T32 (AG049676) awarded to The Pennsylvania State University and ICT was supported by a Graduate Research Fellowship from the National Science Foundation (DGE1255832). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or National Institute on Aging. 
 
 
 
 1 
 It should be noted that the contrast of non-schematic recollection success (Hit v Miss) did reveal posterior parahippocampal gyrus at the corrected threshold, indicating that non-schematic targets utilized MTL for successful recollection. 
 
 
 2 
 This result should be interpreted with caution as true compared to false familiarity did show greater activation in late visual cortex (BA 19), though the cluster (51 voxels) fell shy of the corrected threshold (66 voxels). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abe 
 N 
 
 
 Fujii 
 T 
 
 
 Suzuki 
 M 
 
 
 Ueno 
 A 
 
 
 Shigemune 
 Y 
 
 
 Mugikura 
 S 
 
 
 Mori 
 E 
 
 
 2013 
 Encoding- and retrieval-related brain activity underlying false recognition 
 Neurosci Res 
 76 
 4 
 240 
 250 
 23726799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alba 
 JW 
 
 
 Hasher 
 L 
 
 
 1983 
 Is Memory Schematic? 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 93 
 2 
 203 
 231 
 10.1037/0033-2909.93.2.203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aminoff 
 E 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 The cortical underpinnings of context-based memory distortion 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 12 
 2226 
 2237 
 18457503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Atkins 
 AS 
 
 
 Reuter-Lorenz 
 PA 
 
 
 2011 
 Neural mechanisms of semantic interference and false recognition in short-term memory 
 Neuroimage 
 56 
 3 
 1726 
 1734 
 21349335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 Aminoff 
 E 
 
 
 2003 
 Cortical analysis of visual context 
 Neuron 
 38 
 2 
 347 
 358 
 12718867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 Aminoff 
 E 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2008 
 Scenes unseen: the parahippocampal cortex intrinsically subserves contextual associations, not scenes or places per se 
 J Neurosci 
 28 
 34 
 8539 
 8544 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0987-08.2008 
 18716212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 2009 
 Where is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 12 
 2767 
 2796 
 10.1093/cercor/bhp055 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bower 
 GH 
 
 
 Black 
 JB 
 
 
 Turner 
 TJ 
 
 
 1979 
 Scripts in Memory for Text 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 11 
 2 
 177 
 220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brainerd 
 CJ 
 
 
 Wright 
 R 
 
 
 Reyna 
 VF 
 
 
 Mojardin 
 AH 
 
 
 2001 
 Conjoint recognition and phantom recollection 
 Journal of Experimental Psycholgy: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 27 
 2 
 307 
 327 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 WF 
 
 
 Treyens 
 JC 
 
 
 1981 
 Role of schemata in memory for places 
 Cognitive Psychology 
 13 
 207 
 230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 1996 
 Beyond HERA: Contributions of specific prefrontal brain areas to long-term memory retrieval 
 Psychon Bull Rev 
 3 
 2 
 149 
 158 
 10.3758/Bf03212413 
 24213862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 2001 
 The cognitive neuroscience of remembering 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2 
 9 
 624 
 634 
 11533730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Olson 
 IR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 The parietal cortex and episodic memory: an attentional account 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 9 
 8 
 613 
 625 
 18641668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Mayer 
 AR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2001 
 Can medial temporal lobe regions distinguish true from false? An event-related functional MRI study of veridical and illusory recognition memory 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 98 
 8 
 4805 
 4810 
 11287664 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Noll 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 1998 
 Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection, and the online monitoring of performance 
 Science 
 280 
 5364 
 747 
 749 
 9563953 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Grady 
 C 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 Ween 
 J 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 Top-down and bottom-up attention to memory are dissociated in posterior parietal cortex: neuroimagingand and neuropsychological evidence 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 14 
 4943 
 4956 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1209-09.2010 
 20371815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ciaramelli 
 E 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 Top-down and bottom-up attention to memory: a hypothesis (AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in memory retrieval 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 7 
 1828 
 1851 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.03.022 
 18471837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 Hyde 
 JS 
 
 
 1997 
 Software tools for analysis and visualization of fMRI data 
 Nmr in Biomedicine 
 10 
 4–5 
 171 
 178 
 doi: Doi 10.1002/(Sici)1099-1492(199706/08)10:4/5<171::Aid-Nbm453>3.0.Co;2-L 
 9430344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Fleck 
 MS 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 RE 
 
 
 2006 
 Triple Dissociation in the Medial Temporal Lobes: Recollection, Familiarity, and Novelty 
 J Neurophysiol 
 96 
 1902 
 1911 
 16738210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deese 
 J 
 
 
 1959 
 On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 58 
 1 
 17 
 22 
 13664879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Bowman 
 CR 
 
 
 Peterson 
 KP 
 
 
 2014 
 Age-related differences in the neural correlates mediating false recollection 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 35 
 395 
 407 
 24094578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Bowman 
 CR 
 
 
 Turney 
 IC 
 
 
 2015 
 Functional Neuroimaging of False Memories 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Barense 
 M 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 The Wiley Handbook on the Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory 
 Chichester, UK 
 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Bowman 
 CR 
 
 
 Vandekar 
 SN 
 
 
 2012 
 True and phantom recollection: an fMRI investigation of similar and distinct neural correlates and connectivity 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 3 
 2982 
 2993 
 22001165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Kim 
 H 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2008b 
 Age-related differences in brain activity during true and false memory retrieval 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 8 
 1390 
 1402 
 18303982 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 Kim 
 HK 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2007b 
 Effects of aging on the neural correlates of true and false memory formation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 3157 
 3166 
 17716696 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diana 
 RA 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: a three-component model 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 9 
 379 
 386 
 17707683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 2010 
 Age-related changes in neural activity associated with familiarity, recollection and false recognition 
 Neurobiology of Aging 
 31 
 10 
 1814 
 1830 
 19004526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Trujillo 
 C 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 2006 
 Intact recollection memory in high-performing older adults: ERP and behavioral evidence 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 18 
 1 
 33 
 47 
 10.1162/089892906775249988 
 16417681 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Sauvage 
 M 
 
 
 Fortin 
 N 
 
 
 Komorowski 
 R 
 
 
 Lipton 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Towards a functional organization of episodic memory in the medial temporal lobe 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 36 
 7 
 1597 
 1608 
 21810443 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eldridge 
 LL 
 
 
 Knowlton 
 BJ 
 
 
 Furmanski 
 CS 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Engel 
 SA 
 
 
 2000 
 Remembering episodes: a selective role for the hippocampus during retrieval 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 11 
 1149 
 1152 
 11036273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fleck 
 MS 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Dobbins 
 IG 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Role of Prefrontal and Anterior Cingulate Regions in Decision-Making Processes Shared by Memory and Nonmemory Tasks 
 Cereb Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 1998 
 The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and memory 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 95 
 3 
 906 
 913 
 9448258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garoff-Eaton 
 RJ 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2007 
 The neural correlates of conceptual and perceptual false recognition 
 Learn Mem 
 14 
 10 
 684 
 692 
 17911372 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Garoff-Eaton 
 RJ 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2006 
 Not all false memories are created equal: the neural basis of false recognition 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 11 
 1645 
 1652 
 16400158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giovanello 
 KS 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 Wong 
 AT 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2009 
 Age-related neural changes during memory conjunction errors 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 22 
 7 
 1348 
 1361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Goldmann 
 RE 
 
 
 Sullivan 
 AL 
 
 
 Droller 
 DB 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Curran 
 T 
 
 
 Holcomb 
 PJ 
 
 
 Budson 
 AE 
 
 
 2003 
 Late frontal brain potentials distinguish true and false recognition 
 Neuroreport 
 14 
 13 
 1717 
 1720 
 14512844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gutchess 
 AH 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2012 
 The neural correlates of gist-based true and false recognition 
 Neuroimage 
 59 
 4 
 3418 
 3426 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.078 
 22155331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannigan 
 SL 
 
 
 Reinitz 
 MT 
 
 
 2003 
 Migration of objects and inferences across episodes 
 Mem Cognit 
 31 
 3 
 434 
 444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hess 
 TM 
 
 
 Slaughter 
 SJ 
 
 
 1990 
 Semantic knowledge influences on memory for scene information in young and older adults 
 Dev Psychol 
 26 
 5 
 855 
 865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iidaka 
 T 
 
 
 Harada 
 T 
 
 
 Kawaguchi 
 J 
 
 
 Sadato 
 N 
 
 
 2012 
 Neuroanatomical substrates involved in true and false memories for face 
 Neuroimage 
 62 
 1 
 167 
 176 
 22575420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Intraub 
 H 
 
 
 Gottesman 
 CV 
 
 
 Willey 
 EV 
 
 
 Zuk 
 IJ 
 
 
 1996 
 Boundary extension for briefly glimpsed photographs: Do common perceptual processes result in unexpected memory distortions? 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 35 
 2 
 118 
 134 
 10.1006/jmla.1996.0007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional-neuroanatomic correlates of recollection: implications for models of recognition memory 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 17 
 4172 
 4180 
 15115812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karanian 
 JM 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2014 
 False memory for context activates the parahippocampal cortex 
 Cogn Neurosci 
 5 
 3–4 
 186 
 192 
 25012141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 HK 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2007b 
 Trusting our memories: Dissociating the neural correlates of confidence in veridical and illusory memories 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 27 
 12190 
 12197 
 17989285 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kircher 
 TT 
 
 
 Brammer 
 M 
 
 
 Tous Andreu 
 N 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 McGuire 
 PK 
 
 
 2001 
 Engagement of right temporal cortex during processing of linguistic context 
 Neuropsychologia 
 39 
 8 
 798 
 809 
 11369403 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kubota 
 Y 
 
 
 Toichi 
 M 
 
 
 Shimizu 
 M 
 
 
 Mason 
 RA 
 
 
 Findling 
 RL 
 
 
 Yamamoto 
 K 
 
 
 Calabrese 
 JR 
 
 
 2006 
 Prefrontal hemodynamic activity predicts false memory–a near-infrared spectroscopy study 
 Neuroimage 
 31 
 4 
 1783 
 1789 
 16545964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kurkela 
 KA 
 
 
 Dennis 
 NA 
 
 
 2016 
 Event-related fMRI studies of false memory: An Activation Likelihood Estimation meta-analysis 
 Neuropsychologia 
 81 
 149 
 167 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.12.006 
 26683385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lampinen 
 JM 
 
 
 Copeland 
 SM 
 
 
 Neuschatz 
 JS 
 
 
 2001 
 Recollections of things schematic: room schemas revisited 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 
 27 
 5 
 1211 
 1222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lampinen 
 JM 
 
 
 Faries 
 JM 
 
 
 Neuschatz 
 JS 
 
 
 Toglia 
 MP 
 
 
 2000 
 Recollections of things schematic: The influence of scripts on recollective experience 
 Applied Cognitive Psychology 
 14 
 6 
 543 
 554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lancaster 
 JL 
 
 
 Woldorff 
 MG 
 
 
 Parsons 
 LM 
 
 
 Liotti 
 M 
 
 
 Freitas 
 CS 
 
 
 Rainey 
 L 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 2000 
 Automated Talairach atlas labels for functional brain mapping 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 10 
 3 
 120 
 131 
 10912591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Loftus 
 GR 
 
 
 Mackworth 
 NH 
 
 
 1978 
 Cognitive Determinants of Fixation Location during Picture Viewing 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception and Performance 
 4 
 4 
 565 
 572 
 722248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maldjian 
 JA 
 
 
 Laurienti 
 PJ 
 
 
 Kraft 
 RA 
 
 
 Burdette 
 JH 
 
 
 2003 
 An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 3 
 1233 
 1239 
 12880848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mather 
 M 
 
 
 Henkel 
 LA 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 1997 
 Evaluating characteristics of false memories: remember/know judgments and memory characteristics questionnaire compared 
 Mem Cognit 
 25 
 6 
 826 
 837 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McCabe 
 DP 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 3rd 
 
 
 McDaniel 
 MA 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 2009 
 Aging reduces veridical remembering but increases false remembering: neuropsychological test correlates of remember-know judgments 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 11 
 2164 
 2173 
 19100756 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 MB 
 
 
 Gazzaniga 
 MS 
 
 
 1998 
 Creating false memories for visual scenes 
 Neuropsychologia 
 36 
 6 
 513 
 520 
 9705061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neuschatz 
 JS 
 
 
 Lampinen 
 JM 
 
 
 Preston 
 EL 
 
 
 Hawkins 
 ER 
 
 
 Toglia 
 MP 
 
 
 2002 
 The effect of memory schemata on memory and the phenomenological experience of naturalistic situations 
 Applied Cognitive Psychology 
 16 
 6 
 687 
 708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 Tyler 
 LK 
 
 
 Moss 
 H 
 
 
 Stamatakis 
 EA 
 
 
 Bright 
 P 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Temporal lobe lesions and semantic impairment: a comparison of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and semantic dementia 
 Brain 
 130 
 Pt 4 
 1138 
 1147 
 17251241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noppeney 
 U 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2002 
 A PET study of stimulus- and task-induced semantic processing 
 Neuroimage 
 15 
 4 
 927 
 935 
 10.1006/nimg.2001.1015 
 11906233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 1997 
 False recognition in younger and older adults: exploring the characteristics of illusory memories 
 Mem Cognit 
 25 
 6 
 838 
 848 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oliva 
 A 
 
 
 Torralba 
 A 
 
 
 2001 
 Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope 
 International Journal of Computer Vision 
 42 
 3 
 145 
 175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Owens 
 J 
 
 
 Bower 
 GH 
 
 
 Black 
 JB 
 
 
 1979 
 The “soap opera” effect in story recall 
 Mem Cognit 
 7 
 3 
 185 
 191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paz-Alonso 
 PM 
 
 
 Ghetti 
 S 
 
 
 Donohue 
 SE 
 
 
 Goodman 
 GS 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 2008 
 Neurodevelopmental correlates of true and false recognition 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 9 
 2208 
 2216 
 18203693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pezdek 
 K 
 
 
 Whetstone 
 T 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 K 
 
 
 Askari 
 N 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 T 
 
 
 1989 
 Memory for Real-World Scenes – the Role of Consistency with Schema Expectation 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 
 15 
 4 
 587 
 595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Potter 
 MC 
 
 
 1976 
 Short-term conceptual memory for pictures 
 J Exp Psychol Hum Learn 
 2 
 5 
 509 
 522 
 1003124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2000 
 The anatomy of language: contributions from functional neuroimaging 
 J Anat 
 197 
 Pt 3 
 335 
 359 
 11117622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2010 
 Binding Items and Contexts: The Cognitive Neuroscience of Episodic Memory 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 19 
 3 
 131 
 137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reyna 
 VF 
 
 
 Brainerd 
 CJ 
 
 
 1995 
 Fuzzy-Trace Theory – an Interim Synthesis 
 Learning and Individual Differences 
 7 
 1 
 1 
 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 3rd 
 
 
 Mcdermott 
 KB 
 
 
 1995a 
 Creating False Memories – Remembering Words Not Presented in Lists 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 
 21 
 4 
 803 
 814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 3rd 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 1995b 
 Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented in lists 
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 
 21 
 8033 
 8814 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 2013 
 Brain networks underlying episodic memory retrieval 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 23 
 2 
 255 
 260 
 10.1016/j.conb.2012.11.005 
 23206590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Wilding 
 EL 
 
 
 2000 
 Retrieval processing and episodic memory 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 4 
 3 
 108 
 115 
 10689345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saumier 
 D 
 
 
 Chertkow 
 H 
 
 
 2002 
 Semantic memory 
 Current neurology and neuroscience reports 
 2 
 6 
 516 
 522 
 12359106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 1997 
 Late onset of anterior prefrontal activity during true and false recognition: an event-related fMRI study 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 4 
 259 
 269 
 9417969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Reiman 
 E 
 
 
 Curran 
 T 
 
 
 Yun 
 LS 
 
 
 Bandy 
 D 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 3rd 
 
 
 1996 
 Neuroanatomical correlates of veridical and illusory recognition memory: evidence from positron emission tomography 
 Neuron 
 17 
 2 
 267 
 274 
 8780650 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Lee 
 AC 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Budson 
 AE 
 
 
 2005 
 Failing to get the gist: reduced false recognition of semantic associates in semantic dementia 
 Neuropsychology 
 19 
 3 
 353 
 361 
 15910121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2004 
 A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false memories 
 Nat Neurosci 
 7 
 6 
 664 
 672 
 15156146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2006 
 The nature of memory related activity in early visual areas 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 14 
 2874 
 2886 
 16901520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spaniol 
 J 
 
 
 Davidson 
 PS 
 
 
 Kim 
 AS 
 
 
 Han 
 H 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 2009 
 Event-related fMRI studies of episodic encoding and retrieval: meta-analyses using activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 8–9 
 1765 
 1779 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.028 
 19428409 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stark 
 CE 
 
 
 Okado 
 Y 
 
 
 Loftus 
 EF 
 
 
 2010 
 Imaging the reconstruction of true and false memories using sensory reactivation and the misinformation paradigms 
 Learn Mem 
 17 
 10 
 485 
 488 
 20861170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 Stuttgart, Germany 
 Thieme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torralba 
 A 
 
 
 Oliva 
 A 
 
 
 Castelhano 
 MS 
 
 
 Henderson 
 JM 
 
 
 2006 
 Contextual guidance of eye movements and attention in real-world scenes: The role of global features in object search 
 Psychological Review 
 113 
 4 
 766 
 786 
 17014302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tse 
 D 
 
 
 Langston 
 RF 
 
 
 Kakeyama 
 M 
 
 
 Bethus 
 I 
 
 
 Spooner 
 PA 
 
 
 Wood 
 ER 
 
 
 Morris 
 RG 
 
 
 2007 
 Schemas and memory consolidation 
 Science 
 316 
 5821 
 76 
 82 
 17412951 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tse 
 D 
 
 
 Takeuchi 
 T 
 
 
 Kakeyama 
 M 
 
 
 Kajii 
 Y 
 
 
 Okuno 
 H 
 
 
 Tohyama 
 C 
 
 
 Morris 
 RG 
 
 
 2011 
 Schema-dependent gene activation and memory encoding in neocortex 
 Science 
 333 
 6044 
 891 
 895 
 10.1126/science.1205274 
 21737703 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vaidya 
 CJ 
 
 
 Zhao 
 M 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 2002 
 Evidence for cortical encoding specificity in episodic memory: memory-induced re-activation of picture processing areas 
 Neuropsychologia 
 40 
 12 
 2136 
 2143 
 12208009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Buuren 
 M 
 
 
 Kroes 
 MC 
 
 
 Wagner 
 IC 
 
 
 Genzel 
 L 
 
 
 Morris 
 RG 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2014 
 Initial investigation of the effects of an experimentally learned schema on spatial associative memory in humans 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 50 
 16662 
 16670 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2365-14.2014 
 25505319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MT 
 
 
 Rijpkema 
 M 
 
 
 Ruiter 
 DJ 
 
 
 Morris 
 RG 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2014 
 Building on prior knowledge: schema-dependent encoding processes relate to academic performance 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 26 
 10 
 2250 
 2261 
 10.1162/jocn_a_00630 
 24702454 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MTR 
 
 
 Beul 
 SF 
 
 
 Takashima 
 A 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Ruiter 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 2013 
 Differential roles for medial prefrontal and medial temporal cortices in schema-dependent encoding: from congruent to incongruent 
 Neuropsychologia 
 51 
 12 
 2352 
 2359 
 23770537 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MTR 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 Norris 
 DG 
 
 
 Hermans 
 EJ 
 
 
 2010 
 Persistent schema-dependent hippocampal-neocortical connectivity during memory encoding and postencoding rest in humans 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 107 
 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MTR 
 
 
 Rijpkema 
 M 
 
 
 Ruiter 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fernandez 
 G 
 
 
 2010 
 Retrieval of associative information congruent with prior knowledge is related to increased medial prefrontal activity and connectivity 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 30 
 47 
 15888 
 15894 
 21106827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MTR 
 
 
 Ruiter 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 2012 
 How schema and novelty augment memory formation 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 35 
 4 
 211 
 219 
 22398180 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 von Zerssen 
 GC 
 
 
 Mecklinger 
 A 
 
 
 Opitz 
 B 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 2001 
 Conscious recollection and illusory recognition: an event-related fMRI study 
 The European Journal of Neuroscience 
 13 
 11 
 2148 
 2156 
 11422456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional dissociation among components of remembering: control, perceived oldness, and content 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 23 
 9 
 3869 
 3880 
 12736357 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2004 
 Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 4 
 1337 
 1349 
 15050559 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 ME 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Memory’s echo: vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 97 
 20 
 11125 
 11129 
 11005879 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 RJS 
 
 
 Price 
 CJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional imaging of language 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Kingstone 
 A 
 
 
 Handbook of functional neuroimaging of cognition 
 2nd 
 191 
 228 
 Cambridge, MA 
 MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 2002 
 The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 years of research 
 Memory and Language 
 46 
 441 
 517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Kroll 
 NE 
 
 
 Baynes 
 K 
 
 
 2001 
 Hippocampal, parahippocampal and occipital-temporal contributions to associative and item recognition memory: an fMRI study 
 Neuroreport 
 12 
 2 
 359 
 363 
 11209950 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Jacoby 
 LL 
 
 
 1995 
 The relation between remembering and knowing as bases for recognition: Effects of size congruency 
 Journal of Memory and Language 
 34 
 5 
 622 
 643 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Shaw 
 KN 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2005 
 Separating the brain regions involved in recollection and familiarity in recognition memory 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 25 
 11 
 3002 
 3008 
 15772360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Task Design. During encoding, participants viewed schematic scenes (e.g., Bathroom, Farm). During retrieval, participants made ‘Remember’, ‘Know’, or ‘New’ responses to both schematically-related targets (e.g., toilet, pig) and schematically-related lures (e.g., sink, tractor), as well as non-schematic targets and lures. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Schematic and Non-schematic Memory. A) Regions showing common activity for schematic and non-schematic recollection- and familiarity-based retrieval success B) Regions showing differential activity for schematic and non-schematic recollection and familiarity. Y-axes represent beta estimates. REC = Recollection; FAM = Familiarity; S = Schematic; NS = Non-schematic; SMG = Supramarginal Gyrus; ACC = Anterior Cingulate Cortex; MTG = Middle Temporal Gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 True and False Memory. A) Regions showing common activity for true and false recollection and familiarity B) Regions showing differential activity for true and false recollection and familiarity. Y-axis represents beta estimates. REC = Recollection; FAM = Familiarity; S = Schematic; NS = Non-schematic; FA = False Alarm; CR = Correct Rejection; STG = Superior Temporal Gyrus; MTG = Middle Temporal Gyrus; PHG = Parahippocampal Gyrus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schematic 
 Non-Schematic 
 
 
 
 
 
 Collapsed Response Rates 
 
 
 
 
 
  Hit 
 .69 (.02) 
 .54 (.03) 
 
 
  FA 
 .54 (.03) 
 .24 (.04) 
 
 
  d′ 
 .42 (.06) 
 .92 (.08) 
 
 
 
 Recollection Response Rates 
 
 
 
 
 
  Hit 
 .44 (.03) 
 .25 (.02) 
 
 
  FA 
 .22 (.02) 
 .07 (.02) 
 
 
 
 Familiarity Response Rates 
 
 
 
 
 
  Hit / Adjusted Hit 
 .25 (.02) / .45 (.03) 
 .30 (.04) / .39 (.04) 
 
 
  FA / Adjusted FA 
 .32 (.02) / .41 (.03) 
 .18 (.03) / .20 (.04) 
 
 
 
 
 
 The table reports the means and standard errors of the proportion of Collapsed (Recollection/‘Remember’ and Familiarity/‘Know’) response rates and for schematic and non-schematic targets (Hits) and lures (False Alarms; FA), as well as d′ values. Both raw and adjusted familiarity responses are reported. Adjusted familiarity hits are calculated as pKnow Hits/(1 – pRemember Hits) and adjusted familiarity FA are calculated as pKnow FA/(1 – pRemember FA). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Common Schematic and Non-schematic Retrieval Success Activity 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 H 
 Coordinates (T&T) 
 
 t 
 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 10/11 
 L 
 −39 
 51 
 −7 
 5.34 
 5076 
 
 
 
 46/9 
 L 
 −48 
 29 
 22 
 5.37 
 7749 
 
 
 
 9 
 R 
 42 
 12 
 33 
 5.03 
 4320 
 
 
 Caudate 
 – 
 R 
 9 
 11 
 3 
 5.1 
 2619 
 
 
 
 – 
 L 
 −9 
 11 
 0 
 5.23 
 4401 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 21 
 L 
 −59 
 −36 
 −7 
 5.01 
 11718 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 59 
 −36 
 −7 
 4.55 
 6264 
 
 
 Inferior/Superior Parietal Lobe 
 40/7 
 L 
 −33 
 −51 
 45 
 6.78 
 29646 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 36 
 −60 
 48 
 6.02 
 14391 
 
 
 
 
 
 Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 46/9 
 L 
 −45 
 35 
 21 
 4.18 
 3375 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 L 
 −45 
 46 
 4 
 4.38 
 3213 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 21 
 L 
 −50 
 −36 
 3 
 4.13 
 1998 
 
 
 Superior Parietal Lobe 
 7 
 L 
 −30 
 −51 
 45 
 4.09 
 3105 
 
 
 
 
 
 Commonly activated regions for schematic and non-schematic recollection and familiarity retrieval success. 
 
 
 BA = Brodmann’s Area; H = Hemisphere; L = Left; M = Medial; R = Right; t = statistical t-value; T&T = Talairach and Tournoux coordinates. 
 
 
 Italics represent a priori ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Schema Differences in Target Retrieval 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 H 
 Coordinates (T&T) 
 
 t 
 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schematic > Non-schematic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 
 - 
 L 
 −27 
 −13 
 −9 
 4.28 
 648 
 
 
 Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 19 
 L 
 −48 
 −76 
 8 
 5.85 
 3807 
 
 
 
 19/37 
 R 
 50 
 −71 
 4 
 5.75 
 6669 
 
 
   Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No suprathreshold clusters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Non-schematic > Schematic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anterior Cingulate 
 32 
 L 
 −6 
 30 
 27 
 3.75 
 2457 
 
 
 Supramarginal Gyrus 
 40 
 L 
 −42 
 −49 
 37 
 4.51 
 1971 
 
 
   Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 21 
 L 
 −56 
 −16 
 −19 
 4.88 
 1296 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 56 
 −19 
 −13 
 3.93 
 945 
 
 
 
 
 
 Areas exhibiting differential activation for schematic and non-schematic recollection and familiarity. BA = Brodmann’s Area; 
 
 
 H = Hemisphere; L = Left; M = Medial; R = Right; t = statistical t-value; T&T = Talairach and Tournoux coordinates. 
 
 
 Italics represent a priori ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Common True and False Memory Activity 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 H 
 Coordinates (T&T) 
 
 t 
 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 10/46 
 L 
 −42 
 45 
 −4 
 4.57 
 2997 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 21 
 L 
 −59 
 −33 
 −5 
 4.17 
 2241 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Lobe 
 7/40 
 L 
 −33 
 −57 
 42 
 4.67 
 4428 
 
 
 Inferior Parietal Lobe/Superior Occipital Gyrus 
 19/39 
 R 
 39 
 −72 
 35 
 5.22 
 2079 
 
 
 
 
 
 Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 10 
 L 
 −45 
 51 
 −2 
 4.38 
 3294 
 
 
 
 Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 
 21 
 L 
 −50 
 −33 
 0 
 4.26 
 972 
 
 
 
 
 
 Commonly activated regions for true and false recollection and true and false familiarity. BA = Brodmann’s Area; 
 
 
 H = Hemisphere; L = Left; M = Medial; R = Right; t = statistical t-value; T&T = Talairach and Tournoux coordinates. 
 
 
 Italics represent a priori ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Schematic True and False Memory Differences 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA 
 H 
 Coordinates (T&T) 
 
 t 
 
 mm 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 True > False 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Hippocampus 
 – 
 R 
 24 
 −2 
 −17 
 4.06 
 1296 
 
 
 
 – 
 L 
 −33 
 −11 
 −16 
 4.15 
 1296 
 
 
   Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 21 
 R 
 59 
 −28 
 −8 
 5.84 
 11151 
 
 
   Middle/Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 21/22 
 R 
 59 
 −48 
 1 
 3.60 
 729 
 
 
  Inferior/Middle Occipital Gyrus 
 18/19 
 L 
 −27 
 −79 
 5 
 4.34 
 7479 
 
 
  Cerebellum 
 – 
 L 
 −15 
 −61 
 −29 
 3.77 
 1971 
 
 
    Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  No suprathreshold voxels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 False > True 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 41/42 
 R 
 45 
 −29 
 16 
 4.66 
 1188 
 
 
 
 41/42 
 L 
 −48 
 −32 
 19 
 4.25 
 1269 
 
 
    Familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Hippocampus/PHG 
 – 
 L 
 −33 
 −28 
 −10 
 4.2 
 1593 
 
 
   Middle/Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 21/20/22 
 R 
 59 
 −19 
 −8 
 5.22 
 5454 
 
 
 
 21/20/22 
 L 
 −59 
 −39 
 −7 
 4.94 
 7911 
 
 
   Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 20 
 R 
 48 
 4 
 −27 
 3.82 
 675 
 
 
 
 
 
 Areas exhibiting differential activation for true and false recollection and familiarity. BA = Brodmann’s Area; 
 
 
 H = Hemisphere; L = Left; M = Medial; R = Right; t = statistical t-value; T&T = Talairach and Tournoux coordinates. 
 
 
 Italics represent a priori ROIs. 
 
 
 
 
