
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0375566 
 1119 
 Biol Psychol 
 Biol Psychol 
 
 Biological psychology 
 
 0301-0511 
 1873-6246 
 
 
 27876651 
 5737904 
 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2016.11.004 
 NIHMS834490 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Ventral Striatum Functional Connectivity during Rewards and Losses and Symptomatology in Depressed Patients 
 
 
 
 
 Quevedo 
 Karina 
 
 Ph.D. 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 
 Ng 
 Rowena 
 
 M.A. 
 2 
 
 
 
 Scott 
 Hannah 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Kodavaganti 
 Srivastava 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Smyda 
 Garry 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Diwadkar 
 Vaibhav 
 
 Ph.D. 
 4 
 
 
 
 Phillips 
 Mary 
 
 M.D. 
 5 
 
 
 
 1 University of Minnesota, Department of Psychiatry, MN 
 
 2 University of Minnesota, Institute of Child Development, MN 
 
 3 University of Pittsburgh, School of Public Health, PA 
 
 4 Wayne State University, School of Medicine, MI 
 
 5 University of Pittsburgh, Department of Psychiatry, PA 
 
 * Corresponding author 
 
 Karina Quevedo, Ph.D.,  queve001@umn.edu , Assistant Professor. Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Room F260, University of Minnesota. Department of Psychiatry 2450 Riverside Avenue, Mpls, MN 55454, Ph: 612-273-9761 Fax: 612-273-9779 
 Rowena Ng,  rowenang@umn.edu , University of Minnesota, Institute of Child Development, 51 East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455, Ph: 612-548-4009 
 Srivastava Kodavaganti,  srk37@pitt.edu , University of Pittsburgh, School of Public Health, 281 Heather Drive, Pittsburgh, PA,15209, Ph: 41-352-8931 
 Hannah Scott:  hlscott@umn.edu , University of Minnesota. Department of Psychiatry, 2450 Riverside Avenue, Mpls, MN 55454, Ph: 612-626-62952, Fax: 612-273-9779 
 Garry Smyda,  gwsmyda@gmail.com , University of Pittsburgh, School of Public Health, 210 Frank Ct. Irwin PA, 15642, Ph:724-331-0283 
 Vaibhav A. Diwadkar, Ph.D.,  vdiwadka@med.wayne.edu , Associate Professor, Dept. of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University School of Medicine Suite 5B, Tolan Park Medical Building, 3901 Chrysler Service Drive, Detroit, MI 48201, U.S.A., Ph: 313.577.0164, Fax: 313.577.5900 
 Mary Phillips M.D.,  phillipsml@upmc.edu , Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, Tel: (+1) 412 383 8206, Fax: (+1) 412 383 8336 
 
 
 
 16 
 12 
 2016 
 
 
 19 
 11 
 2016 
 
 
 2 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 2 
 2018 
 
 123 
 62 
 73 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 
 BACKGROUND 
 The ventral striatum (VS) and striatal network supports goal motivated behavior. Identifying how depressed patients differ in their striatal network during the processing of emotionally salient events is a step towards uncovering biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment. 
 
 
 METHODS 
 38 depressed and 30 healthy adults completed a task that examined brain activation to the anticipation and receipt of monetary rewards and losses. Data were collected using a 3T Siemens Trio scanner. Functional connectivity differences were examined with seeds in the Left or Right VS. FC estimates were regressed on specific symptoms. 
 
 
 RESULTS 
 Depressed patients displayed higher functional connectivity between the VS and midline cortical areas during loss versus reward trials. Anhedonia and depressed mood were associated to fairly similar striatal circuits but suicidality was associated to a unique VS-midline structures coupling, while depression severity was linked to higher VS to caudate and precuneus connectivity during loss versus reward trials. 
 
 
 CONCLUSIONS 
 Depression is characterized by excessive VS coupling to cognitive control and associative networks during losses versus rewards. High VS to midline cortical structures coupling may index suicidality. 
 
 
 
 Imaging 
 Imaging 
 Depression 
 Adults 
 Functional Connectivity 
 Ventral Striatum 
 Reward Circuitry 
 Corticostriatal Network 
 Anhedonia 
 Suicidality 
 Depressed Mood 
 
 
 
 
 Background 
 Preferential processing of negative versus positive events, such as monetary losses and rewards, is a hallmark of depressive states. Theories of depression have posited that vulnerable and depressed individuals exhibit a cognitive triad comprised by rigid negative attributions regarding the self, one’s environment, and one’s future ( Beck, 1972 ;  Beck, Brown, Steer, Eidelson, & Riskind, 1987 ), including persistent cognitive elaboration regarding flaws, failures and negative events, i.e. rumination ( Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000 ;  Papageorgiou & Wells, 2003 ). These negative cognitive styles interact with stressful life events and uniquely contribute to clinical depression ( Gotlib, Lewinsohn, Seeley, Rohde, & et al., 1993 ;  Hankin, Abramson, Miller, & Haeffel, 2004 ), and are linked to increased depression severity (i.e., number of episodes), chronicity, and severity of individual episodes. However, some research also implicates neglect of positive information in the maintenance and onset of depression ( Gotlib, 1981 ;  Gotlib & Krasnoperova, 1998 ;  Gotlib, Krasnoperova, Yue, & Joormann, 2004 ;  Gotlib, et al., 1993 ;  Papageorgiou & Wells, 2003 ;  Papay & Hedl, 1978 ). Overall, these biases are notoriously difficult to change and they remain even after acute depressive symptoms elapse ( Bouhuys, Geerts, & Gordijn, 1999 ;  Dozois, 2007 ;  Gotlib & Joormann, 2010 ). Critically, despite the wealth of psychological research regarding the presence of preferential processing of negative versus positive events in depression, the neurobiology and functional connection between neural areas underlying these cognitive biases is largely unknown. 
 
 The striatal network and processing of losses and rewards in depression 
 Aberrant reward processing and responses, commonly shown by patients with depression has drawn interest in the role of the striatal circuitry in neurobiological models of depression. The ventral striatum (VS) is dedicated to encoding and saliency of natural losses and rewards ( Graybiel, 2005 ;  O’Doherty, 2004 ;  Zink, Pagnoni, Martin-Skurski, Chappelow, & Berns, 2004 ). To date, a number of fMRI studies have found reduced blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) activity in the VS and other basal ganglia structures among depressed patients during processing of rewards ( Delgado, 2007 ;  Kelley, 2004 ;  O’Doherty, Buchanan, Seymour, & Dolan, 2006 ) and abnormal recruitment of these substrates during the processing of positive and negative events ( Canli et al., 2004 ;  Epstein et al., 2006 ;  Fitzgerald, Laird, Maller, & Daskalakis, 2008 ;  Hamilton et al., 2012 ), highlighting its possible role in the negative affective biases associated with depression. 
 The striatal circuitry, including the VS, involves connections with multiple regions, and each path has some distinct involvement in behavioral responses regarding rewards and losses. The VS receives input from dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the ventral tegmental area, where it also sends DA projections to indirectly reach the PFC, amygdala and hippocampus ( Volman et al., 2013 ). Subsequently, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC: BA11, 10 and 32), the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the amygdala and hippocampus send excitatory glutamatergic projections to the VS ( Haber & Knutson, 2010 ). Research indicates that the VS likely encodes both rewards and losses via the activity of GABAergic neurons into the VTA and the later direct DA projections to PFC and to mid-temporal areas such as the amygdala and the hippocampus ( Carlezon & Thomas, 2009 ;  Volman, et al., 2013 ). VS activation is in turn modulated by excitatory projections from both mid-temporal and prefrontal cortical structures. Given that the PFC is the central brain region for associative thinking, goal setting and planning ( MacLeod & Salaminiou, 2001 ), and that mid-temporal structures such as amygdala and hippocampus support emotion processing and memory ( J. E. LeDoux, 1993 ;  Phan, Wager, Taylor, & Liberzon, 2002 ), both are hypothesized to have distinct yet valuable contribution to the reward deficits and facilitated loss processing observed in depressed individuals. 
 Distinctions between striatal to PFC versus striatal to mid-temporal pathways are important, as they are believed to support different psychological processes. Whereas associative thinking and flexible, planned goal-oriented behavior with regards to losses and rewards are associated to PFC activation and its connections to the VS ( O’Doherty, 2004 ), the biased affective processing (enhance emotional memory, vigilance and saliency) of negative versus positive outcomes may be associated to abnormal connectivity between the VS and mid-temporal areas, which are known to function abnormally among depressed patients ( Drevets, 2000 ;  Drevets, Price, & Furey, 2008 ). These two potential pathways of striatal connectivity may in turn be linked to different manifestations of biased cognition and emotion in depression. 
 As noted, research suggests that rumination and self-attributions for negative versus positive events is involved in the emergence and persistence of depression. While there is little information about the neurobiology of these processes, there are some suggestions that they involve the striatal to PFC network. For example, individual differences in depressive traits and rumination correlate with activity of the striatum after positive events (e.g., situations that elicit gratification), but are associated with activity in the PFC after negative ones (i.e., events that evoke regret), during a gambling task ( Eryilmaz, Van De Ville, Schwartz, & Vuilleumier, 2014 ). Furthermore, self-attributions and rumination in depressed patients have been found to be supported by altered function in structures, such as the posterior cingulate, precuneus and extended portions of the PFC ( Lemogne et al., 2009 ;  Schiller, Minkel, Smoski, & Dichter, 2013 ). It is thus possible that the functional connectivity between the VS and the PFC may underlie biased self-attributions and heightened rumination for negative vs. positive events. 
 With regards to preferential emotional memory and vigilance for negative versus positive stimuli, a review of the literature indicates that major depressive disorder show attentional biases  toward  negative emotional cues (e.g. sad faces) and  away  from positive emotional cues such as happy faces ( Leppanen, 2006 ). Some literature also show that depressed patients encode and remember negative stimuli more efficiently than positive ones, and have more difficulty forgetting them ( Hamilton & Gotlib, 2008 ;  Joormann, 2005 ;  Joormann, Hertel, LeMoult, & Gotlib, 2009 ). This suggest possible altered connectivity between striatal areas and limbic structures within the mid-temporal lobe (i.e. hippocampus, amygdala), as the latter are involved in the encoding and remembrance of emotionally charged autobiographical events ( LeDoux, 1993 ;  Phan, Wager, Taylor, & Liberzon, 2002 ). For example, in a task where participants had to identify if the emotional expression (happy, sad, neutral) of a face matched that of another face shown two trials earlier, depressed adults struggled to disengage from sad faces but rapidly disengaged from happy ones based on reaction times ( Levens & Gotlib, 2010 ). By contrast, patients without depression showed more difficulties disengaging from positive facial affect compared to neutral or negative expressions ( Levens & Gotlib, 2010 ). In a similar vein, individuals with depression are less behaviorally driven by positive events (e.g., rewards) compared to those without depression ( Levens & Gotlib, 2010 ). Notably, processing of faces among depressed patients is associated to hyperactivation to negative facial expressions but hypoactivity to positive facial expressions, particularly in the amygdala, insula, parahippocampal gyrus, fusiform and areas of the striatum ( Stuhrmann, Suslow, & Dannlowski, 2011 ). It is thus possible that the functional connectivity between the VS and mid-temporal lobe areas may underlie enhanced emotional memory and vigilance for negative versus positive events. 
 Determining the specific circuits within the striatal network (e.g., VS – PFC vs. VS – mid-temporal structures) that underpin cognitive and affective biases in reward processing of depressed patients may be important for guiding treatment strategies. For example, if the abnormal processing of negative versus positive events is supported primarily by VS – PFC connectivity, cognitive reframing of negative events and voluntary training of associative thinking toward positively valenced events may be an effective treatment strategy to modify biases in depression. By contrast, if VS to amygdala and hippocampus connectivity underlies such biases, emotionally charged strategies (e.g., behavioral activation or savoring of positively charged events) may be a key intervention method to change such biases ( Cuijpers, van Straten, & Warmerdam, 2007 ;  Sturmey, 2009 ). Consequently, the first research question addressed by this study is to determine which of the proposed circuits (VS – PFC vs. VS – mid-temporal connectivity) underlie processing biases toward negative versus positive events in depressed versus healthy adults. 
 Given accumulated psychological research regarding biased cognitive processing for negative vs. positive events ( Beck, 2008 ;  Disner, Beevers, Haigh, & Beck, 2011 ;  Gotlib & Joormann, 2010 ;  Joormann, 2009 ), our first hypothesis was that adult depressed patients would show greater VS – PFC connectivity during the processing of losses versus rewards compared to healthy controls, reflecting greater goal-based attention, planning, and associative thinking regarding losses. We also expected that connectivity between VS to mid-temporal structures (specifically amygdala and hippocampus) would underlie the preferential processing of negative versus positive events in depressed versus healthy adult patients. 
 
 
 The striatal network and key depressive symptoms 
 Depressive syndromes are comprised by number of key symptoms used to determine the presence of the diagnosis. Prominently, a depression diagnosis involves presence of two key symptoms: anhedonia (loss of interest in pleasurable activity) or depressed mood (sadness and irritability). Additionally, suicidal ideation leading to suicide attempts is one of the most serious outcomes of severe and treatment resistant depression ( K Lönnqvist, 2000 ;  Nock et al., 2008 ). Notably, the presence and saliency of certain depressive symptoms have been differentially associated with clinical outcomes, including treatment resistant depression and risk of suicide attempts. For example, high anhedonia in particular is strongly linked to suicidality and poor response to treatment ( Downar et al., 2014 ;  Spijker, de Graaf, Ten Have, Nolen, & Speckens, 2010 ;  Winer et al., 2014 ). Similarly, depressed mood, including feelings of guilt and unworthiness, has been linked to suicide attempts ( Nrugham, Larsson, & Sund, 2008 ;  Oquendo et al., 2004 ) and completion ( McGirr et al., 2007 ). As such, additional research on the circuitry underlying key symptoms of depression is paramount in clinical considerations of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. 
 Investigations have implicated certain aspects of the striatal network in specific depressive symptoms such as suicidality, anhedonia, and depressed mood ( Der-Avakian & Markou, 2012 ;  Drevets, et al., 2008 ;  Marchand et al., 2012 ;  Schlaepfer et al., 2008 ). However, suicidality could be supported by different circuits within the striatal network than those contributing to altered emotionality including high depressive mood and anhedonia, as suggested by recent research ( Marchand, et al., 2012 ). Recent clinical research found hypoactivity in brain circuits mediating reward, which in turn appears to be associated with proclivity for suicide ( Elman, Borsook, & Volkow, 2013 ). Suicidality might stem from the disruption of PFC to VS connectivity, which enables executive function, associative thinking, cognitive control and goal-directed behaviors ( Marchand et al., 2012 ). Indeed, a recent investigation found that the striatal to anterior PFC circuit is linked to depression severity, suicidal ideation, and history of self harm ( Marchand, et al., 2012 ). Moreover, a recent review suggests that the PFC to striatum circuitry, particularly the circuits bridging frontal lobe, ACC, and striatum, is involved in the neurobiology of suicide in depressed patients uniquely rather than in other psychiatric disorders ( Zhang, Chen, Jia, & Gong, 2014 ). These authors further contend that among those with depression and suicide behaviors, the neural mechanisms for suicide behaviors may be distinct from depressed symptoms. By contrast, depressed mood and anhedonia might be more associated with disrupted mid-temporal to VS circuitry, as these structures have been associated with altered emotions and affective experiences ( LeDoux, 2003 ). Specifically, the hippocampus and amygdala support cognitive and affective biases in depression, as shown by recent evidence indicating depressed relative to healthy adults yield longer and more intense amygdalar activation in response to negative stimuli ( Fales et al., 2008 ;  Siegle, Steinhauer, Thase, Stenger, & Carter, 2002 ) which in turn is related to self-reported rumination ( Siegle, et al., 2002 ). However, other evidence suggests that that top-down contributions (i.e., input from PFC to the striatum) may also underlie to these symptoms. For example, high subgenual ACC in depressed patients and increased PFC activity during rewarding stimuli has been linked to higher anhedonia ( Harvey, Pruessner, Czechowska, & Lepage, 2007 ;  Mies et al., 2013 ). Notably, during a task that required depressed patients to reduce positive emotions,  lower  levels of PFC activity were linked later to greater improvements in anhedonia ( Light et al., 2011 ). 
 Currently, due to the paucity of symptom-specific investigations within depression, the striatal circuits that support these characteristics remain an enigma. Particularly, it is unclear whether symptoms are due to abnormal saliency of negative vs. positive stimuli (e.g. losing money vs. earning money) driven by mid-temporal limbic structures, or to negatively biased goal-directed behavior and executive function supported by inputs from the PFC (top-down contributions to the VS), or both. It should also be noted that much of the cited evidence stems from BOLD activity associations with symptoms rather than  functional connectivity  estimates, raising the importance of research that addresses this gap in the scientific literature. Towards this end, as our second and exploratory research aim, we propose to explore how estimates of the coupling between striatal, mid-temporal or/and PFC areas during processing of negative versus positive events might be associated with the two key self-reported symptoms of depression (anhedonia and depressed mood), as well as with suicidality and severity of depression. 
 
 
 Summary of goals and hypotheses 
 We aimed to first better identify the striatal circuitry involved in the abnormal processing of losses versus rewards in depression, and second, to determine how such striatal circuitry (or circuits involved in receipt of monetary losses versus rewards) might be associated with core depression symptoms (anhedonia, depressed mood, and suicidality). As noted, our hypotheses were: first, higher VS coupling with structures within the PFC (e.g. ACC, BA 9, 10) would distinguish depressed versus healthy adults during receipt of monetary losses versus rewards, given past psychological research involving manifestations of associative thinking such as rumination and self-attributions during negative versus positive emotional stimuli. Second we also expected VS-mid-temporal connectivity given psychological findings regarding enhanced encoding and emotional memory for negative versus positive stimuli such as faces. Our second and exploratory goal was to test whether key diagnostic symptoms (anhedonia, depressed mood, suicidality) and depression severity would be a with specific circuits of aberrant connectivity during receipt of monetary losses versus rewards; but given the absence of prior research regarding these functional correlates, no hypotheses were posited. 
 
 
 
 Methods and Materials 
 
 Participants 
 Recruitment took place at the Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, and through advertisements. Subjects were evaluated with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-Research-Version (SCID-P) ( First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1995 ) and scanned in an MRI. Participants completed the Structured Clinical Interview for Mood Spectrum (SCI-MOODS) which yields continuous scale measures of mood symptoms such as depressed mood, anhedonia, and suicide thoughts ( Rothwell & Stock, 1982 ), and the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) to measure severity of illness ( Ho et al., 2014 ). Anhedonia items included endorsement of lack of interest across a number of areas of behavior such as friends, romantic relationships and previously enjoyed activities as well as loss of fun and pleasure. Depressed mood included endorsement of sadness, irritability, crying and feelings of despair. It contained also some items that overlapped with anhedonia. In the scanner, subjects completed a task paradigm ( Figure 1 ) developed by  Delgado and colleagues (2000) . Participants reflected the demographics of Pittsburgh and the surrounding area ( Table 1 ). 
 All participants were right-handed and native English speaking. Exclusion criteria included a history of head injury, systemic medical illness, cognitive impairment [score <24 Mini-Mental State Examination ( Folstein, Folstein, & McHugh, 1975 )], premorbid IQ estimate [<85-National Adult Reading Test ( Blair & Spreen, 1989 )], and Axis-II borderline personality disorder. Depressed participants were symptomatic at the time of the scanning. Control participants had no previous personal or family history of psychiatric illness. Depressed participants were free from substance abuse disorders for a minimum of seven-months prior to study participation and were in remission from alcohol/substance abuse or dependence for an average of 7.9 years prior to study participation. 
 
 
 Data Acquisition 
 Neuroimaging data were collected using a 3 Tesla Siemens TIM Trio MRI scanner (Erlangen, Germany) at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Structural three-dimensional axial MPRAGE images were acquired in the same session [echo time (TE) = 3.29 msec; repetition time (TR) = 2200 msec; flip angle = 9°; field of view (FOV) = 256 × 192 mm; slice thickness = 1 mm; matrix = 256 × 256; 192 continuous slices]. Mean blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) images were then acquired using a gradient echo EPI sequence with 39 axial slices (3.1 mm thick; TR/TE = 2000/28 msec; FOV = 205 × 205 mm; matrix 64 × 64; flip angle = 90°, 8 min). 
 
 
 Experiment 
 The fMRI paradigm ( Figure 1 ) was an adaptation of a card guessing paradigm designed by  Delgado et al. (2000)  to test striatal response to feedback associated with monetary reward. Each trial consisted of an anticipation period and an outcome period followed by a win, loss, or no-change in money amount feedback. Participants were led to believe that their performance would determine the amount of money to be received after the scan. Trials were presented in pseudorandom order and had predetermined outcomes. Using a button response, participants guessed whether the value of a card (possible value of 1–9) would be greater or less than 5. During each 16 sec trial, participants had 4 sec to guess the card value (guess) followed by a visual presentation of the trial type (high likelihood of a win - indicated by an upward arrow, or loss - indicated by a downward arrow) for 6 sec (anticipation). After the anticipation, the actual card value was shown (500 msec) followed by the feedback (a green upward arrow for win, a red downward arrow for loss, or a yellow circle for neutral; 500 msec) and a crosshair presented for 9 sec allowed time to process the results (outcome; 6 sec) and provide baseline (3 sec). 
 Guessing incorrectly resulted in a loss of $0.50, guessing correctly lead to a win of $1.00, and neutral outcomes resulted in no change in earnings regardless of guess. During anticipation the subjects believed the visual cue displayed indicated their likelihood of winning (anticipation win; 12 trials) or losing money (anticipation loss; 12 trials) based on their guess. For example, if they guessed the card value to be less than 5  and  the anticipation showed high likelihood of winning, they expected the “actual” card number to be less than 5 when revealed and to win $1.00. Four possible outcomes are classified as: “Win” (anticipated win + outcome win; 6 trials); “Loss” (anticipated loss + outcome loss; 6 trials); “Disappointment” (anticipated win + outcome neutral; 6 trials); or “Relief” (anticipated loss + outcome neutral; 6 trials). Baseline between trials (3 sec) presented no task related efforts. 
 
 
 Data Analysis 
 Data were preprocessed and analyzed with Statistical Parametric Mapping software, Version-8 (SPM8: http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm ). Data for each participant were realigned to the first volume in the time series to correct for head motion. Realigned images were then coregistered with the subject’s anatomical image, segmented, normalized to a standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template, and spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8mm full-width at half-maximum (FWE). A first-level fixed-effect model was constructed for each participant producing a statistical image for 4 contrasts reflecting each possible anticipation: “Anticipation Win”, “Anticipation Loss” and outcomes condition relative to baseline: “Win”, “Loss, “Disappointment”, and “Relief”. Loss and Disappointment were considered negative outcomes and Win and Relief were considered positive outcomes. 
 
 
 Not Significant BOLD Activation Differences 
 First level activation maps were submitted to 2nd level flexible random effects GLM analyses comparing depressed and healthy controls in BOLD activity, but no significant effects of group or group by condition (2 anticipations or 4 outcomes) interactions were found in both whole brain and region of interest analyses. However, there were effects of task conditions (for both anticipation and outcomes) across both depressed and control participants. 
 
 
 Region-of-Interest (ROI) Seed Definitions 
 The seed regions for connectivity analyses were 8 mm spheres placed in the left (−9, 9, −8) or right (9, 9, −8) VS. The coordinates for the seed regions were selected based on prior studies with this task as well as meta-analyses of the VS anatomy ( Di Martino et al., 2008 ;  Mooij, Smeets, & de Wit, 2011 ). 
 
 
 Functional Connectivity (FC) Analyses 
 Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) was employed to explain activity changes in a target region in terms of the interaction between a psychological condition (i.e. conditions of the task) and activity in the seed area ( Cisler, Bush, & Steele, 2014 ); for example, to explain how brain activity in a target region changes during the processing of an expected monetary loss (Loss) versus been spared a monetary loss (Relief). Specifically, we tested task-dependent contributions of the VS activity and functional coupling with brain regions that responded differentially between groups to outcomes in the task ( Friston et al., 1997 ). The PPI physiological variable was computed by extracting the signal time course in left or right VS ROI’s (Effects of Interest,  p  < 0.01) for each individual participant and convolving it with the six contrasts of interest (see  Table 2 ), resulting in PPI activation maps for each participant. The six contrasts of interests employed ( Table 2 ) reflected the contrasts for the four outcomes (Win, Loss, Disappointment, Relief). 
 The first level PPI activation maps for the 6 contrasts were then submitted to a 2 nd  level flexible random effects GLM with between group effects, 2 Group (Depressed vs. Controls) by within group effects represented by the 6 Contrasts (“Loss vs. Win”, “Loss vs. Relief”, “Disappointment vs. Win”, “Loss vs. Disappointment”, “Relief vs. Win”, “Disappointment vs. Relief”). 
 To clarify a significant omnibus group effect, follow-up separate 2nd level flexible random effects GLM analyses were conducted to investigate diagnostic group and VS differences in FC for each contrast, e.g. 2 Group (Depressed vs. Controls) by 1 within group effect contrast “Loss vs. Win”. The resulting significant brain activity would show neural areas with high or low neural activity coupled with the VS. PPI analyses were also conducted by contrasting the anticipation phases (anticipation win versus anticipation loss; see  Figure 1 ) but no significant differences in FC were found between diagnostic groups for the anticipation condition. 
 FC estimates during positive versus negative outcomes were compared between depressed and controls. The areas of differential FC with the VS for controls versus depressed were the same as listed in  Table 2  but significant in the opposite direction (i.e., control more than depressed). They are not presented for parsimonious reporting. Significant clusters or/and coordinates for which peak BOLD signal was statistically significant (p<0.05) are reported. Additionally, to correct for multiple comparisons, we calculated the whole-brain, voxel-wise and cluster extent thresholds via Monte Carlo simulations using the program 3dClustSim in AFNI with estimates of the smoothness of the noise from the groups analyses of 13.8323 18.6951 17.0676 in AFNI v_16.3.08. For the 2 groups by 6 contrasts GLM, given a voxel-wise threshold of p < 0.01 FWE corrected, a cluster-extent threshold of k = 183 was used as the cut off for all significant results. This joint magnitude-extent threshold was used in tables and figures, which show significant results. 
 
 
 Depression Symptoms and Functional Connectivity (FC) of the VS 
 To determine which striatal circuits supported key symptoms of depression, FC estimates centered in coordinates of activity for the main effect of group were extracted. See  Table 2  for the areas listed as significantly different between the groups across all contrasts. These extractions were 8 mm spheres of activity (p<0.05), which resulted in 6 independent variables corresponding to the 6 clusters listed in  Table 2  for the main effect of group. These variables then were used as predictors in regressions. Note that these FC estimates were averaged across the 6 contrasts as this main effect of group was for averaged activity across contrasts. 
 First, the FC estimates for left and right VS coupled with each of the following clusters: 1. Right Middle and Superior Frontal Gyrus, 2. Left Caudate, and 3. Right Precuneus, yielded by the main effect of group ( Table 2 ) and entered in order of cluster size, were used in a hierarchical stepwise forward regression. Specifically these 3 clusters each had 2 FC estimates, one with the left and one with the right VS for a total of 6 variables entered in the regressions. These analyses were conducted with the whole sample to predict each symptom separately: anhedonia, depressive mood and suicidality reported via the SCI-MOODS, and depression severity measured by the HAM-D. These 4 regression models took place for the whole sample of both depressed and control participants (N= 68). Age, gender, IQ, and level of education were included in regressions conducted with the whole sample. However, illness factors had not enough variance to be included for the control participants so they were not predictors in these regressions. Results are reported in  Table 3 . Supplementary analyses were conducted just for the depressed participants to examine illness related variables. See  Table 3.2 and online supplementary  analyses and results. For all regression models, indexes of collinearity were within acceptable values. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Corticostriatal Functional Connectivity in Depressed versus Healthy Adults 
 Table 2  and  Figure 2  shows a main effect of group yielded by the 2 (group) by 6 (contrasts) GLM, which showed that compared to controls, depressed patients had large neural areas and significant peaks of BOLD signal coupled to the left and right VS during all negative versus all positive outcomes. These areas of increased coupling with the VS were primarily right midline cortical structures including the precuneus, and areas within the PFC (i.e., ACC and BA10). Increased VS to left caudate and mid-cingulate coupling for negative versus positive outcomes were also present in depressed relative to control participants. 
 When follow up analyses examined group differences for each of the 6 contrasts, they showed that the group effects observed in midline cortical structures were often bilateral and mostly due to the Loss versus Relief, Loss versus Win and Disappointment versus Win contrasts ( Table 2 ,  Figure 3 , Panels A, B and C). During these contrasts, depressed patients showed high bilateral VS coupling with the anterior and mid cingulate cortices (BA24 and 32) which extended into PFC areas including superior and mid frontal gyri, BA9 and 10 ( Figure 3 , Panels A, B and C). Additionally, within positive outcomes such as relief or win ( Figure 3 , Panel E), depressed patients showed VS coupling with the bilateral caudate and left insula to Relief versus Win. This activity extended to a significant cluster that included the mid-cingulate, though the peaks of functional connectivity were at the caudate and insula. This suggests that the effects of group observed for the caudate, were due to higher connectivity between the VS and the caudate for depressed participants during Relief versus Win outcomes. Within negative outcomes such as disappointment or loss ( Figure 3 , Panel D) depressed showed greater VS coupling with high right insula activity and with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA47) during Loss versus Disappointment. While the main group effects in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) were not statistically significant, it is suggestive of greater connectivity between this area and the VS during negative outcomes. Note also, that regions of the DLPFC are also more active for the Loss versus Win contrast ( Figure 3 , Panel B), suggesting that depressed participants engage the VS to DLPFC circuitry predominantly for loss outcomes. Finally, controls showed low VS coupling with the same areas during loss versus reward outcomes (See  Figure 3  bar graphs). There were no effects due to hemisphere of VS seed or seed hemisphere by group interactions and the disappointment versus relief outcomes yielded no significant clusters. Illness factors (duration, number of depressive episodes) were not linked to FC estimates, and one of the contrasts (disappointment versus relief) yielded short of significant effects and is thus not reported. 
 
 
 Corticostriatal circuits of depression symptoms 
 Anhedonia was associated to higher connectivity within striatal structure, specifically with left VS to left caudate as well as to mid-cingulate for loss versus rewarding outcomes ( Table 3 ). This suggests that 15% of the variance in anhedonia may be due to connections within the striatum itself (i.e. VS- left caudate coupling) as well as with the mid-cingulate in the whole sample. However, in addition to left VS- left caudate-mid cingulate coupling, 25% of the depressed mood variance was predicted by a left VS- right precuneus coupling for losses versus rewards. Suicidality however, was predicted by a different circuitry. Specifically, 31% of the suicidality variance in the whole sample was associated to higher left VS to the right mid and superior PFC functional coupling, including the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), as well as right VS coupling with the right precuneus. Finally, 29% of the variance in depression severity in the whole sample was associated to left VS to right precuneus and left caudate and mid-cingulate connectivity.  Supplemental online figures 4.1–4.4  depict scatterplots that show associations between estimates of functional connectivity in the x axis (coupled with the VS during negative versus positive events) and symptoms in the y axis. A supplemental online table also shows that the connectivity of the left VS with the largest cluster that differed between depressed and controls (middle & superior frontal gyrus, ACC, BA8 that also predicted suicidality in the entire sample) explained 24% of the suicidality variance when examined only among depressed participants. 
 
 
 Effects of Medication 
 Table 1  shows that 73% of patients were taking antidepressants among other medications, yet their effects on the VS connectivity were modest. Comparisons of 28 medicated versus 10 unmedicated depressed participants yielded no significant effects of medication on functional connectivity, Furthermore, regression analyses showed no modifications in the significant VS functional connectivity estimates when controlling for antidepressant use. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 This study compared the striatal network of depressed patients versus healthy control adults during the processing of positive and negative monetary outcomes. It also examined whether the strength of connectivity in the striatal network was associated with self-report ratings of anhedonia, depressed mood, suicidality and severity of depression. 
 Our first hypothesis, which predicted higher PFC-VS coupling for losses versus earnings among depressed participants, was confirmed. Our results ( Figure 2 ,  Table 2 ) show significant group effects, reflecting higher cortical to VS connectivity (particularly midline cortical structures to the VS) in depressed patients compared to healthy controls. Group effects are chiefly due to higher mid-cortical to VS connectivity during processing of loss or disappointment versus relief or win. Additionally, higher VS connectivity to caudate and mid-cingulate is present in all depressed versus control adults. 
 The insular cortex is primarily coupled with the VS during the processing of distinct but negative valenced outcomes (i.e., loss versus disappointment), while higher caudate, mid-cingulate gyrus and insula to VS coupling characterized group differences for distinct positive outcomes (i.e., relief versus win). Finally, our second hypothesis pertaining to higher VS to mid-temporal coupling for negative versus positive events in depressed compared to healthy individuals was not confirmed and no significant clusters were found for disappointment versus relief. 
 Our second goal was to explore associations between the striatal network and key depression symptoms. The results suggest that they are associated to higher left VS-caudate/mid cingulate coupling during monetary losses vs. rewards, an intra-striatal network that was present for all symptoms except for suicidality. Instead, for suicidality, there may be a distinct circuitry (i.e., bilateral VS-mid/superior frontal gyrus and precuneus coupling) for losses versus earnings, observed both in the whole sample and among depressed participants only. 
 
 Midline Cortical to VS Connectivity in Depression 
 As noted in the introduction, the VS receives excitatory projections from both PFC and mid-temporal limbic areas such as the amygdala and the hippocampus, but it does not directly project to the PFC; instead its contribution to these areas takes place through the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Given our results, it is possible that experiences of loss alter the PFC inputs to the VS via the VTA ( Friston, et al., 1997 ). However, it may be difficult to detect changes in VTA activity given its deep location in the brain. For now, our results suggest predominant midline cortical inputs to the VS in depressed versus healthy adults during processing of losses versus rewards, but no differences in mid-temporal inputs to the VS across groups. Further research is needed to determine the directionality of effects (e.g., output from PFC to VS versus input from VTA to PFC) that undergird key depressive symptoms. 
 With excitatory projections from both mid-temporal and PFC regions, the VS integrates information regarding emotional salience as well as executive/motor plans, in order to facilitate goal directed behavior. Previous literature suggests that limbic and PFC inputs to the VS compete to control behavioral outcomes ( Sturup, Kristiansson, & Lindqvist, 2011 ). The behavioral outcomes during which the limbic areas coordinate with the VS appear to be distinct from PFC related events. Specifically, limbic-VS coupling supports learning of basic reward directed behaviors and memory of predictors of rewards ( Wimmer, Daw, & Shohamy, 2012 ). In particular, signals of DA neurons during unexpected rewards (or stimuli that predict them) are used for learning simple behavioral response strategies, yet, such responses are relatively inflexible. By contrast, input from the PFC to the VS allows for behavioral flexibility of learned responses to adapt to changes in the value of reward cues or of internal motivational states ( Sturup, et al., 2011 ). In other words, limbic-VS connections facilitate learning of basic emotion guided behaviors, and PFC-VS connections allow for flexible deployment and adaptation of behavior to changing circumstances. 
 In the context of those competing roles, our results might mean that depressed patients show preponderant PFC inputs to the VS during losses, but similar VS coupling with mid-temporal limbic structures (e.g., amygdala or hippocampus) relative to healthy controls given that VS coupling to these structures did not differ between the groups. Thus, the balance of limbic versus PFC input to the VS may be tilted toward VS-PFC coupling in depressed patients during losses to the detriment of rewards. Higher VS-PFC (BA9, 10) coupling suggests engagement of the executive control network during receipt of losses in depressed patients ( Figure 3 , Panels A, B, C). By contrast, healthy controls engage midline cortical structures-VS circuits more for rewards than for losses ( Table 2 ). This might mean preferential planning and self-referential processing specifically for losses in depressed adults relative to healthy adults ( Ehrensaft & Cohen, 2012 ;  Sylvester et al., 2003 ). Finally, stronger VS-precuneus and to mid-cingulate coupling among depressed patients during disappointment versus win was observed. The precuneus, with direct connections to the basal ganglia ( Cavanna, 2007 ), sustains visuo-spatial imagery, episodic memory retrieval and self-referential processing and consciousness ( Dammann et al., 2011 ). Depressed individuals may engage in increased self-processing ( Cavanna, 2007 ) during thwarted rewards, rather than attributing positive outcomes (win or relief) to the self. In a similar vein, depressed patients have been documented to show reduced activity in lingual gyri, cuneus, precuneus and PCC when processing positive valenced faces ( Fu et al., 2007 ). Further, their altered functionality of midline cortical substrates has been associated with increased self-focus and negative self-attribution ( Grimm et al., 2008 ). Thus stronger VS-precuneus coupling during losses versus earning an expected gain might represent self-attribution of negative results, which might perpetuate dysfunctional self-cognitions. Comparing functional connectivity during planning versus self-attributions of negative and positive events would clarify what specific cognitive functions are associated with striatal-PFC or striatal-limbic networks among depressed patients. 
 
 
 Ventral Striatum Connectivity to Limbic Structures in Depression 
 During negative outcomes, we noted higher VS-insula and inferior frontal gyrus connectivity ( Figure 3 , Panel D, loss versus disappointment). The insula supports awareness of interoceptive states and processing of salient emotional events ( Menon & Uddin, 2010 ). Depressed individuals might experience stronger negative interoceptive sensations during losses than healthy controls. Additionally, high ACC-VS coupling to loss versus relief in depressed patients ( Figure 3 , Panel A) may implicate motivational processes and/or higher engagement of cognitive effort regarding negative outcomes in depressed patients ( Beer, Lombardo, & Bhanji, 2010 ;  Gilbert et al., 2006 ;  Leshikar & Duarte, 2012 ;  Ramnani, Elliott, Athwal, & Passingham, 2004 ). Dorsal ACC inputs to the VS enable planning of responses to future losses ( Downar, Crawley, Mikulis, & Davis, 2002 ) by predicting cognitive demands that optimize future behavioral responses ( Shenhav, Botvinick, & Cohen, 2013 ;  Sheth et al., 2012 ). Thus planning future behavior might be exacerbated for negative events in depressed patients. However, as noted before, the ACC, insula and midline cortical structures enable a variety of functions, therefore future research would need to delve into which of those functions is affected during processing of negative versus positive events. 
 Regarding positive outcomes (i.e. relief and win), depressed patients showed increased VS coupling with limbic areas including the caudate, insula, and mid-cingulate gyrus ( Figure 3 , Panel E: relief versus win). The caudate subserves goal-directed behavior ( Delgado, et al., 2000 ;  Grahn, Parkinson, & Owen, 2008 ;  Tricomi, Delgado, & Fiez, 2004 ). Given combined coupling between VS and these limbic and limbic cortex structures, it is possible that depressed patients experience relatively less positive outcomes as more salient, which in turn could either reduce behavioral preparedness (i.e. eliciting less planning) for positive outcomes or enhanced behavioral preparedness for potentially negative outcomes. Notably, VS-cortical coupling, which was strongly engaged during losses versus rewards among depressed patients, did not differ between depressed and control participants during receipt of positive outcomes, i.e., during relief or win. Thus, higher functions during receipt of good news might be comparable across healthy controls and depressed patients. However, heightened caudate and insula to VS connectivity for relief vs. win among depressed adults suggests that they may be more behaviorally prepared for relatively less positive outcomes. 
 
 
 Associations between abnormal corticostriatal network and depression symptoms 
 As  Table 3  shows, suicidality was linked to stronger VS to middle and superior frontal gyrus coupling, including the ACC, and VS-precuneus coupling during losses versus rewards, with 31% of the variance in suicidality accounted by the variables in the regression model. The middle and superior frontal gyrus and ACC are dedicated to working memory, self monitoring, error detection, and executive planning ( Brandi, Wohlschlager, Sorg, & Hermsdorfer, 2014 ;  Kim, 2013 ). The more dorsal ACC controls behavioral responses to stimuli that demand effortful cognitive control or that bear conflicting emotional information ( Gasquoine, 2013 ). The latter region of the ACC is the one showing higher functional connectivity with the VS in depressed patients in the present study ( Figure 3 , Panels A and B), suggesting that predominant cognitive effort and planning dedicated to negative versus positive outcomes might be a risk factor for suicide thoughts or behaviors. VS connectivity with the precuneus also suggests the involvement of autobiographical memory and self-referential processing in suicide thoughts. 
 Our results also show that high left VS-caudate and mid-cingulate regions coupling during negative versus positive outcomes predicted higher anhedonia and depressive mood symptoms (which also involved VS-precuneus coupling) across all participants. These findings again suggest that that behavioral planning and goal-oriented cognitions for negative outcomes may underlie these two key symptoms of depression. As noted, the caudate subserves goal-directed behavior ( Grahn, et al., 2008 ), thus depressive mood and anhedonia might be associated to greater behavioral preparedness for negative versus positive outcomes. Finally, severity of depression in the whole sample was associated with greater VS coupling to caudate, mid cingulate and precuneus, similar to depressive mood. It is notable that with the exception of suicidality, the left VS seed was the predominant source of connectivity associated to symptoms of depression ( Table 3 ). This might indicate that predominant PFC and striatal inputs to the left VS are associated to more severe depression symptoms. 
 
 
 Conclusions 
 The striatal circuitry, which evolved to process natural rewards ( Carlezon & Thomas, 2009 ;  Volman, et al., 2013 ) shows abnormally heightened midline cortical input to the VS (with notable contributions of the cingulate, the PFC and insula) during processing of losses in depressed patients. Our results replicate reviews regarding the typical VS functional connectivity ( Cardinal, Parkinson, Hall, & Everitt, 2002 ;  Postuma & Dagher, 2006 ), while also showing biased stimuli representations that mediate choice behavior in depressed patients. Heightened connectivity between the VS and midline cortical areas in depressed patients, suggests biased executive function, monitoring, self-referential and attention processes toward losses and away from positive stimuli. 
 Depressed patients showed no difference in VS coupling with excitatory mid-temporal structures (amygdala, hippocampus) or with the VTA, compared to controls. Instead the striatal circuitry of depressed patients appears to be shifted toward higher cortical versus limbic contributions to the VS, indicating that depression, in this sample, is notable for exaggerated attention, greater allocation of cognitive resources, and/or increased self-attributions for losses over rewards. Finally, while processing relief and win the striatal network of depressed patients is biased toward processing of relatively least positive among available outcomes, i.e. more for relief than for winning. In summary, during depressive episodes, the striatal circuitry might be exquisitely attuned toward preferential processing of punishments and losses even in the context of positive events. 
 Cardinal symptoms of depression (anhedonia, depressed mood and suicide thoughts) are partially explained by heightened VS coupling to the caudate, mid-cingulate, ACC and precuneus during negative versus positive events ( Table 3 ). Treatments aimed at changing negatively biased corticostriatal circuitry may effectively alleviate several core symptoms of depression, given their shared neurobiology. Findings also suggest that diminished cortical input to the VS during negative stimuli may represent a prognostic marker for less suicidality. 
 
 
 Limitations 
 The participants in this study have had depressive episodes for several years, thus it is possible that biases in VS to cortical areas coupling represent the effects of chronicity, and not a signature of depression or of the symptoms investigated. However, length of illness was not a significant covariate or predictor of functional connectivity. Additionally, a number of participants had a prior history of substance use, which could also confound the results and increase the difficulty in discerning the specific effects of depression. The self-report questionnaire employed to survey the scales symptoms of depression is a relatively new tool, it would be desirable to replicate the links between symptomatology and corticostriatal circuitry with better established questionnaires or structured interviews. The task employed had 6 trials per outcome condition, lasting 20 seconds each, although this task has been extensively used to detect BOLD activity differences; this is the first time that is used to estimate functional connectivity with PPI. While, there is at least one paper that set 5 trials or less per condition as the limit to exclude participants from PPI analyses ( Hutchinson, Uncapher, & Wagner, 2015 ) it will be important to replicate our findings with this task and in other populations to ensure that the length of the trials did not diminish the power to detect functional connectivity estimates. Finally, the analyses that explored how striatal circuitry supported self-reported symptoms (suicidality, anhedonia, depressive mood and severity of depression) were conducted without controlling for each of the other symptoms because symptom scales were derived from the same instrument and were highly correlated. In particular anhedonia and depressed mood were highly correlated and had some items that comprised the scales that were common to both. Thus it is possible that there was not enough divergent validity for these scales to differentiate these symptoms dimensions. As such, these results should be taken with caution and viewed as exploratory in nature. Future studies ought to conduct these analyses while controlling for symptoms derived from different instruments to increase the likelihood that circuits are specific and unique to symptoms such as suicidality, depressed mood or anhedonia. This would also confirm or disprove whether suicidality, anhedonia and depressive mood are in fact sustained by similar circuitry. 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by a NIMH, K01MH092601 to the first author. We are very grateful to Drs. Tom Zeffiro and Kathleen Thomas: key mentors and supporters of the first author’s K award application and progress. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 Financial Disclosures : None of the authors report biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 1972 
 Depression; causes and treatment 
 Philadelphia 
 University of Pennsylvania Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 2008 
 The Evolution of the Cognitive Model of Depression and Its Neurobiological Correlates 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 165 
 8 
 969 
 977 
 10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.08050721 
 18628348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 Brown 
 G 
 
 
 Steer 
 RA 
 
 
 Eidelson 
 JI 
 
 
 Riskind 
 JH 
 
 
 1987 
 Differentiating anxiety and depression: a test of the cognitive content-specificity hypothesis 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 96 
 3 
 179 
 183 
 3680754 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beer 
 JS 
 
 
 Lombardo 
 MV 
 
 
 Bhanji 
 JP 
 
 
 2010 
 Roles of medial prefrontal cortex and orbitofrontal cortex in self-evaluation 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 22 
 9 
 2108 
 2119 
 10.1162/jocn.2009.21359 
 19925187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blair 
 JR 
 
 
 Spreen 
 O 
 
 
 1989 
 Predicting premorbid IQ: A revision of the national adult reading test 
 Clinical Neuropsychology 
 3 
 129 
 136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bouhuys 
 AL 
 
 
 Geerts 
 E 
 
 
 Gordijn 
 MC 
 
 
 1999 
 Depressed patients’ perceptions of facial emotions in depressed and remitted states are associated with relapse: a longitudinal study 
 J Nerv Ment Dis 
 187 
 10 
 595 
 602 
 10535652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brandi 
 ML 
 
 
 Wohlschlager 
 A 
 
 
 Sorg 
 C 
 
 
 Hermsdorfer 
 J 
 
 
 2014 
 The neural correlates of planning and executing actual tool use 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 39 
 13183 
 13194 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0597-14.201434/39/13183 [pii] 
 25253863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canli 
 T 
 
 
 Sivers 
 H 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 Whitfield-Gabrieli 
 S 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2004 
 Brain activation to emotional words in depressed vs healthy subjects 
 Neuroreport 
 15 
 17 
 2585 
 2588 
 15570157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cardinal 
 RN 
 
 
 Parkinson 
 JA 
 
 
 Hall 
 J 
 
 
 Everitt 
 BJ 
 
 
 2002 
 Emotion and motivation: the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and prefrontal cortex 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 26 
 3 
 321 
 352 
 doi: S0149763402000076 [pii] 
 12034134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carlezon 
 WA 
 Jr 
 
 
 Thomas 
 MJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Biological substrates of reward and aversion: a nucleus accumbens activity hypothesis 
 Neuropharmacology 
 56 
 Suppl 1 
 122 
 132 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.06.075S0028-3908(08)00268-2 [pii] 
 18675281 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cavanna 
 AE 
 
 
 2007 
 The precuneus and consciousness 
 CNS Spectr 
 12 
 7 
 545 
 552 
 17603406 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cisler 
 JM 
 
 
 Bush 
 K 
 
 
 Steele 
 JS 
 
 
 2014 
 A comparison of statistical methods for detecting context-modulated functional connectivity in fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 84 
 1042 
 1052 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.018S1053-8119(13)00954-3 [pii] 
 24055504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cuijpers 
 P 
 
 
 van Straten 
 A 
 
 
 Warmerdam 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Behavioral activation treatments of depression: a meta-analysis 
 Clin Psychol Rev 
 27 
 3 
 318 
 326 
 10.1016/j.cpr.2006.11.001 
 17184887 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dammann 
 G 
 
 
 Hugli 
 C 
 
 
 Selinger 
 J 
 
 
 Gremaud-Heitz 
 D 
 
 
 Sollberger 
 D 
 
 
 Wiesbeck 
 GA 
 
 
 Walter 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 The self-image in borderline personality disorder: an in-depth qualitative research study 
 J Pers Disord 
 25 
 4 
 517 
 527 
 10.1521/pedi.2011.25.4.517 
 21838566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 2007 
 Reward-related responses in the human striatum 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1104 
 70 
 88 
 10.1196/annals.1390.002 
 17344522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Nystrom 
 LE 
 
 
 Fissell 
 C 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 2000 
 Tracking the hemodynamic responses to reward and punishment in the striatum 
 J Neurophysiol 
 84 
 6 
 3072 
 3077 
 11110834 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Der-Avakian 
 A 
 
 
 Markou 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 The neurobiology of anhedonia and other reward-related deficits 
 Trends Neurosci 
 35 
 1 
 68 
 77 
 10.1016/j.tins.2011.11.005 
 22177980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Martino 
 A 
 
 
 Scheres 
 A 
 
 
 Margulies 
 DS 
 
 
 Kelly 
 AMC 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Shehzad 
 Z 
 
 
 Milham 
 MP 
 
 
 2008 
 Functional Connectivity of Human Striatum: A Resting State fMRI Study 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 18 
 12 
 2735 
 2747 
 10.1093/cercor/bhn041 
 18400794 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Disner 
 SG 
 
 
 Beevers 
 CG 
 
 
 Haigh 
 EA 
 
 
 Beck 
 AT 
 
 
 2011 
 Neural mechanisms of the cognitive model of depression 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 12 
 8 
 467 
 477 
 10.1038/nrn3027 
 21731066 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downar 
 J 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 Mikulis 
 DJ 
 
 
 Davis 
 KD 
 
 
 2002 
 A cortical network sensitive to stimulus salience in a neutral behavioral context across multiple sensory modalities 
 J Neurophysiol 
 87 
 1 
 615 
 620 
 11784775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Downar 
 J 
 
 
 Geraci 
 J 
 
 
 Salomons 
 TV 
 
 
 Dunlop 
 K 
 
 
 Wheeler 
 S 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 Giacobbe 
 P 
 
 
 2014 
 Anhedonia and reward-circuit connectivity distinguish nonresponders from responders to dorsomedial prefrontal repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in major depression 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 76 
 3 
 176 
 185 
 doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.026S0006-3223(13)01034-2 [pii] 
 24388670 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dozois 
 DJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Stability of negative self-structures: a longitudinal comparison of depressed, remitted, and nonpsychiatric controls 
 J Clin Psychol 
 63 
 4 
 319 
 338 
 10.1002/jclp.20349 
 17279521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 2000 
 Functional anatomical abnormalities in limbic and prefrontal cortical structures in major depression 
 Prog Brain Res 
 126 
 413 
 431 
 10.1016/S0079-6123(00)26027-5 
 11105660 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drevets 
 WC 
 
 
 Price 
 JL 
 
 
 Furey 
 ML 
 
 
 2008 
 Brain structural and functional abnormalities in mood disorders: implications for neurocircuitry models of depression 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 213 
 1–2 
 93 
 118 
 10.1007/s00429-008-0189-x 
 18704495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ehrensaft 
 MK 
 
 
 Cohen 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Contribution of family violence to the intergenerational transmission of externalizing behavior 
 Prev Sci 
 13 
 4 
 370 
 383 
 10.1007/s11121-011-0223-8 
 21720783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Elman 
 I 
 
 
 Borsook 
 D 
 
 
 Volkow 
 ND 
 
 
 2013 
 Pain and suicidality: insights from reward and addiction neuroscience 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 109 
 1 
 27 
 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.003 
 23827972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Epstein 
 J 
 
 
 Pan 
 H 
 
 
 Kocsis 
 JH 
 
 
 Yang 
 Y 
 
 
 Butler 
 T 
 
 
 Chusid 
 J 
 
 
 Silbersweig 
 DA 
 
 
 2006 
 Lack of ventral striatal response to positive stimuli in depressed versus normal subjects 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 163 
 10 
 1784 
 1790 
 doi: 163/10/1784 [pii]10.1176/appi.ajp.163.10.1784 
 17012690 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eryilmaz 
 H 
 
 
 Van De Ville 
 D 
 
 
 Schwartz 
 S 
 
 
 Vuilleumier 
 P 
 
 
 2014 
 Lasting impact of regret and gratification on resting brain activity and its relation to depressive traits 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 23 
 7825 
 7835 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0065-14.2014 34/23/7825 [pii] 
 24899706 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fales 
 CL 
 
 
 Barch 
 DM 
 
 
 Rundle 
 MM 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Sheline 
 YI 
 
 
 2008 
 Altered emotional interference processing in affective and cognitive-control brain circuitry in major depression 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 63 
 4 
 377 
 384 
 doi: S0006-3223(07)00565-3 [pii]10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.06.012 
 17719567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 First 
 MB 
 
 
 Spitzer 
 RL 
 
 
 Gibbon 
 M 
 
 
 Williams 
 JBW 
 
 
 1995 
 Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders-Patient Edition (SCID-I/P, Version 2.0) 
 New York 
 Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 PB 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Maller 
 J 
 
 
 Daskalakis 
 ZJ 
 
 
 2008 
 A meta-analytic study of changes in brain activation in depression 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 29 
 6 
 683 
 695 
 10.1002/hbm.20426 
 17598168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Folstein 
 M 
 
 
 Folstein 
 S 
 
 
 McHugh 
 P 
 
 
 1975 
 Mini-mental state. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician 
 Journal of Psychiatric Research 
 12 
 3 
 189 
 198 
 1202204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Buechel 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Morris 
 J 
 
 
 Rolls 
 E 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 1997 
 Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging 
 Neuroimage 
 6 
 3 
 218 
 229 
 doi: S1053-8119(97)90291-3 [pii]10.1006/nimg.1997.0291 
 9344826 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fu 
 CH 
 
 
 Williams 
 SC 
 
 
 Brammer 
 MJ 
 
 
 Suckling 
 J 
 
 
 Kim 
 J 
 
 
 Cleare 
 AJ 
 
 
 Bullmore 
 ET 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural responses to happy facial expressions in major depression following antidepressant treatment 
 Am J Psychiatry 
 164 
 4 
 599 
 607 
 17403973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gasquoine 
 PG 
 
 
 2013 
 Localization of function in anterior cingulate cortex: from psychosurgery to functional neuroimaging 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 37 
 3 
 340 
 348 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.01.002S0149-7634(13)00003-1 [pii] 
 23313645 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 SJ 
 
 
 Spengler 
 S 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Steele 
 JD 
 
 
 Lawrie 
 SM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 2006 
 Functional specialization within rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10): a meta-analysis 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 18 
 6 
 932 
 948 
 16839301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 1981 
 Self-reinforcement and recall: differential deficits in depressed and nondepressed psychiatric inpatients 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 90 
 6 
 521 
 530 
 7320323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 2010 
 Cognition and depression: current status and future directions 
 Annu Rev Clin Psychol 
 6 
 285 
 312 
 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.121208.131305 
 20192795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Krasnoperova 
 E 
 
 
 1998 
 Biased information processing as a vulnerability factor for depression 
 Behavior Therapy 
 29 
 4 
 Fal 1998 
 603 
 617 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Krasnoperova 
 E 
 
 
 Yue 
 DN 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 2004 
 Attentional biases for negative interpersonal stimuli in clinical depression 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 113 
 1 
 121 
 135 
 10.1037/0021-843X.113.1.121 
 14992665 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 Lewinsohn 
 PM 
 
 
 Seeley 
 JR 
 
 
 Rohde 
 P 
 
 
 
 1993 
 Negative cognitions and attributional style in depressed adolescents: An examination of stability and specificity 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 102 
 4 
 607 
 615 
 8282931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grahn 
 JA 
 
 
 Parkinson 
 JA 
 
 
 Owen 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 The cognitive functions of the caudate nucleus 
 Prog Neurobiol 
 86 
 3 
 141 
 155 
 doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2008.09.004S0301-0082(08)00101-9 [pii] 
 18824075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graybiel 
 AM 
 
 
 2005 
 The basal ganglia: learning new tricks and loving it 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 15 
 6 
 638 
 644 
 10.1016/j.conb.2005.10.006 
 16271465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grimm 
 S 
 
 
 Ernst 
 J 
 
 
 Boesiger 
 P 
 
 
 Schuepbach 
 D 
 
 
 Hell 
 D 
 
 
 Boeker 
 H 
 
 
 Northoff 
 G 
 
 
 2008 
 Increased self-focus in major depressive disorder is related to neural abnormalities in subcortical-cortical midline structures 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 10.1002/hbm.20693 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haber 
 SN 
 
 
 Knutson 
 B 
 
 
 2010 
 The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 35 
 1 
 4 
 26 
 doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.129npp2009129 [pii] 
 19812543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 JP 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 Furman 
 DJ 
 
 
 Lemus 
 MG 
 
 
 Johnson 
 RF 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2012 
 Functional neuroimaging of major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and new integration of base line activation and neural response data 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 169 
 7 
 693 
 703 
 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11071105 
 22535198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamilton 
 JP 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural substrates of increased memory sensitivity for negative stimuli in major depression 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 63 
 12 
 1155 
 1162 
 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.12.015 
 18281017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hankin 
 BL 
 
 
 Abramson 
 LY 
 
 
 Miller 
 N 
 
 
 Haeffel 
 GJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Cognitive vulnerability-stress theories of depression: Examining affective specificity in the prediction of depression versus anxiety in three prospective studies 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 28 
 3 
 309 
 345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Harvey 
 PO 
 
 
 Pruessner 
 J 
 
 
 Czechowska 
 Y 
 
 
 Lepage 
 M 
 
 
 2007 
 Individual differences in trait anhedonia: a structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging study in non-clinical subjects 
 Mol Psychiatry 
 12 
 8 
 703 
 767 
 775 
 doi: 4002021 [pii]10.1038/sj.mp.4002021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ho 
 TC 
 
 
 Yang 
 G 
 
 
 Wu 
 J 
 
 
 Cassey 
 P 
 
 
 Brown 
 SD 
 
 
 Hoang 
 N 
 
 
 Yang 
 TT 
 
 
 2014 
 Functional connectivity of negative emotional processing in adolescent depression 
 J Affect Disord 
 155 
 65 
 74 
 10.1016/j.jad.2013.10.025 
 24268546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutchinson 
 JB 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2015 
 Increased functional connectivity between dorsal posterior parietal and ventral occipitotemporal cortex during uncertain memory decisions 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 117 
 71 
 83 
 doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2014.04.015 S1074-7427(14)00083-5 [pii] 
 24825621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 2005 
 Inhibition, rumination, and mood regulation in depression 
 Cognitive limitations in aging and psychopathology: Attention, working memory, and executive functions 
 275 
 312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Cognitive aspects of depression 
 Handbook of depression 
 2 
 298 
 321 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Joormann 
 J 
 
 
 Hertel 
 PT 
 
 
 LeMoult 
 J 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2009 
 Training forgetting of negative material in depression 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 118 
 1 
 34 
 43 
 10.1037/a0013794 
 19222312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 K Lönnqvist 
 J 
 
 
 2000 
 Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: depression 
 The international handbook of suicide and attempted suicide 
 107 
 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kelley 
 AE 
 
 
 2004 
 Ventral striatal control of appetitive motivation: role in ingestive behavior and reward-related learning 
 Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
 27 
 8 
 765 
 776 
 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2003.11.015 
 15019426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kim 
 SI 
 
 
 2013 
 Neuroscientific model of motivational process 
 Front Psychol 
 4 
 98 
 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00098 
 23459598 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Emotion circuits in the brain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 1993 
 Emotional memory systems in the brain 
 Behav Brain Res 
 58 
 1–2 
 69 
 79 
 8136051 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lemogne 
 C 
 
 
 le Bastard 
 G 
 
 
 Mayberg 
 H 
 
 
 Volle 
 E 
 
 
 Bergouignan 
 L 
 
 
 Lehericy 
 S 
 
 
 Fossati 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 In search of the depressive self: extended medial prefrontal network during self-referential processing in major depression 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 doi: nsp008 [pii]10.1093/scan/nsp008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leppanen 
 JM 
 
 
 2006 
 Emotional information processing in mood disorders: a review of behavioral and neuroimaging findings 
 Curr Opin Psychiatry 
 19 
 1 
 34 
 39 
 doi: 10.1097/01.yco.0000191500.46411.0000001504-200601000-00007 [pii] 
 16612176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leshikar 
 ED 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Medial prefrontal cortex supports source memory accuracy for self-referenced items 
 Soc Neurosci 
 7 
 2 
 126 
 145 
 10.1080/17470919.2011.585242 
 21936739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levens 
 SM 
 
 
 Gotlib 
 IH 
 
 
 2010 
 Updating positive and negative stimuli in working memory in depression 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 139 
 4 
 654 
 664 
 10.1037/a0020283 
 21038984 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Light 
 SN 
 
 
 Heller 
 AS 
 
 
 Johnstone 
 T 
 
 
 Kolden 
 GG 
 
 
 Peterson 
 MJ 
 
 
 Kalin 
 NH 
 
 
 Davidson 
 RJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Reduced right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity while inhibiting positive affect is associated with improvement in hedonic capacity after 8 weeks of antidepressant treatment in major depressive disorder 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 70 
 10 
 962 
 968 
 doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.06.031S0006-3223(11)00738-4 [pii] 
 21867991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MacLeod 
 AK 
 
 
 Salaminiou 
 E 
 
 
 2001 
 Reduced positive future-thinking in depression: Cognitive and affective factors 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 15 
 1 
 99 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marchand 
 WR 
 
 
 Lee 
 JN 
 
 
 Johnson 
 S 
 
 
 Thatcher 
 J 
 
 
 Gale 
 P 
 
 
 Wood 
 N 
 
 
 Jeong 
 EK 
 
 
 2012 
 Striatal and cortical midline circuits in major depression: implications for suicide and symptom expression 
 Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
 36 
 2 
 290 
 299 
 doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2011.10.016S0278-5846(11)00313-7 [pii] 
 22079109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McGirr 
 A 
 
 
 Renaud 
 J 
 
 
 Seguin 
 M 
 
 
 Alda 
 M 
 
 
 Benkelfat 
 C 
 
 
 Lesage 
 A 
 
 
 Turecki 
 G 
 
 
 2007 
 An examination of DSM-IV depressive symptoms and risk for suicide completion in major depressive disorder: a psychological autopsy study 
 J Affect Disord 
 97 
 1–3 
 203 
 209 
 10.1016/j.jad.2006.06.016 
 16854469 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 2010 
 Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function 
 Brain Struct Funct 
 214 
 5–6 
 655 
 667 
 10.1007/s00429-010-0262-0 
 20512370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mies 
 GW 
 
 
 Van den Berg 
 I 
 
 
 Franken 
 IH 
 
 
 Smits 
 M 
 
 
 Van der Molen 
 MW 
 
 
 Van der Veen 
 FM 
 
 
 2013 
 Neurophysiological correlates of anhedonia in feedback processing 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 7 
 96 
 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00096 
 23532800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mooij 
 T 
 
 
 Smeets 
 E 
 
 
 de Wit 
 W 
 
 
 2011 
 Multi-level aspects of social cohesion of secondary schools and pupils’ feelings of safety 
 Br J Educ Psychol 
 81 
 Pt 3 
 369 
 390 
 10.1348/000709910X526614 
 21770911 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nock 
 MK 
 
 
 Borges 
 G 
 
 
 Bromet 
 EJ 
 
 
 Alonso 
 J 
 
 
 Angermeyer 
 M 
 
 
 Beautrais 
 A 
 
 
 Williams 
 D 
 
 
 2008 
 Cross-national prevalence and risk factors for suicidal ideation, plans and attempts 
 Br J Psychiatry 
 192 
 2 
 98 
 105 
 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.040113 
 18245022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nolen-Hoeksema 
 S 
 
 
 2000 
 The role of rumination in depressive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms 
 J Abnorm Psychol 
 109 
 3 
 504 
 511 
 11016119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nrugham 
 L 
 
 
 Larsson 
 B 
 
 
 Sund 
 AM 
 
 
 2008 
 Predictors of suicidal acts across adolescence: influences of familial, peer and individual factors 
 J Affect Disord 
 109 
 1–2 
 35 
 45 
 doi: S0165-0327(07)00389-8 [pii]10.1016/j.jad.2007.11.001 
 18096243 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 2004 
 Reward representations and reward-related learning in the human brain: insights from neuroimaging 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 14 
 6 
 769 
 776 
 10.1016/j.conb.2004.10.016 
 15582382 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Buchanan 
 TW 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Predictive neural coding of reward preference involves dissociable responses in human ventral midbrain and ventral striatum 
 Neuron 
 49 
 1 
 157 
 166 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.11.014 
 16387647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oquendo 
 MA 
 
 
 Galfalvy 
 H 
 
 
 Russo 
 S 
 
 
 Ellis 
 SP 
 
 
 Grunebaum 
 MF 
 
 
 Burke 
 A 
 
 
 Mann 
 JJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Prospective study of clinical predictors of suicidal acts after a major depressive episode in patients with major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder 
 American Journal of Psychiatry 
 161 
 8 
 1433 
 1441 
 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.8.1433 
 15285970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papageorgiou 
 C 
 
 
 Wells 
 A 
 
 
 2003 
 An empirical test of a clinical metacognitive model of rumination and depression 
 Cognitive Therapy and Research 
 27 
 3 
 261 
 273 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Papay 
 JP 
 
 
 Hedl 
 JJ 
 Jr 
 
 
 1978 
 Psychometric characteristics and norms for disadvantaged third and fourth grade children on the state-trait anxiety inventory for children 
 J Abnorm Child Psychol 
 6 
 1 
 115 
 120 
 632452 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 Wager 
 T 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 2002 
 Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 2 
 331 
 348 
 10.1006/nimg.2002.1087 
 12030820 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Postuma 
 RB 
 
 
 Dagher 
 A 
 
 
 2006 
 Basal Ganglia Functional Connectivity Based on a Meta-Analysis of 126 Positron Emission Tomography and Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Publications 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 16 
 10 
 1508 
 1521 
 10.1093/cercor/bhj088 
 16373457 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramnani 
 N 
 
 
 Elliott 
 R 
 
 
 Athwal 
 BS 
 
 
 Passingham 
 RE 
 
 
 2004 
 Prediction error for free monetary reward in the human prefrontal cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 3 
 777 
 786 
 15528079 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rothwell 
 NJ 
 
 
 Stock 
 MJ 
 
 
 1982 
 Effects of early overnutrition and undernutrition in rats on the metabolic responses to overnutrition in later life 
 J Nutr 
 112 
 3 
 426 
 435 
 6950034 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schiller 
 CE 
 
 
 Minkel 
 J 
 
 
 Smoski 
 MJ 
 
 
 Dichter 
 GS 
 
 
 2013 
 Remitted major depression is characterized by reduced prefrontal cortex reactivity to reward loss 
 J Affect Disord 
 151 
 2 
 756 
 762 
 doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.06.016S0165-0327(13)00496-5 [pii] 
 23835103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schlaepfer 
 TE 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Frick 
 C 
 
 
 Kosel 
 M 
 
 
 Brodesser 
 D 
 
 
 Axmacher 
 N 
 
 
 Sturm 
 V 
 
 
 2008 
 Deep brain stimulation to reward circuitry alleviates anhedonia in refractory major depression 
 Neuropsychopharmacology 
 33 
 2 
 368 
 377 
 doi: 1301408 [pii]10.1038/sj.npp.1301408 
 17429407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shenhav 
 A 
 
 
 Botvinick 
 MM 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 2013 
 The expected value of control: an integrative theory of anterior cingulate cortex function 
 Neuron 
 79 
 2 
 217 
 240 
 doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.007S0896-6273(13)00607-7 [pii] 
 23889930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheth 
 SA 
 
 
 Mian 
 MK 
 
 
 Patel 
 SR 
 
 
 Asaad 
 WF 
 
 
 Williams 
 ZM 
 
 
 Dougherty 
 DD 
 
 
 Eskandar 
 EN 
 
 
 2012 
 Human dorsal anterior cingulate cortex neurons mediate ongoing behavioural adaptation 
 Nature 
 488 
 7410 
 218 
 221 
 doi: 10.1038/nature11239nature11239 [pii] 
 22722841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Siegle 
 GJ 
 
 
 Steinhauer 
 SR 
 
 
 Thase 
 ME 
 
 
 Stenger 
 VA 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 2002 
 Can’t shake that feeling: event-related fMRI assessment of sustained amygdala activity in response to emotional information in depressed individuals 
 Biol Psychiatry 
 51 
 9 
 693 
 707 
 doi: S0006322302013148 [pii] 
 11983183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spijker 
 J 
 
 
 de Graaf 
 R 
 
 
 Ten Have 
 M 
 
 
 Nolen 
 WA 
 
 
 Speckens 
 A 
 
 
 2010 
 Predictors of suicidality in depressive spectrum disorders in the general population: results of the Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence Study 
 Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 
 45 
 5 
 513 
 521 
 10.1007/s00127-009-0093-6 
 19618093 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stuhrmann 
 A 
 
 
 Suslow 
 T 
 
 
 Dannlowski 
 U 
 
 
 2011 
 Facial emotion processing in major depression: a systematic review of neuroimaging findings 
 Biol Mood Anxiety Disord 
 1 
 1 
 10 
 10.1186/2045-5380-1-10 
 22738433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sturmey 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 Behavioral activation is an evidence-based treatment for depression 
 Behav Modif 
 33 
 6 
 818 
 829 
 10.1177/0145445509350094 
 19933444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sturup 
 J 
 
 
 Kristiansson 
 M 
 
 
 Lindqvist 
 P 
 
 
 2011 
 Violent behaviour by general psychiatric patients in Sweden - validation of Classification of Violence Risk (COVR) software 
 Psychiatry Res 
 188 
 1 
 161 
 165 
 doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2010.12.021S0165-1781(10)00789-4 [pii] 
 21216473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sylvester 
 CY 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Lacey 
 SC 
 
 
 Hernandez 
 L 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Switching attention and resolving interference: fMRI measures of executive functions 
 Neuropsychologia 
 41 
 3 
 357 
 370 
 12457760 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tricomi 
 EM 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 2004 
 Modulation of caudate activity by action contingency 
 Neuron 
 41 
 2 
 281 
 292 
 doi: S0896627303008481 [pii] 
 14741108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volman 
 SF 
 
 
 Lammel 
 S 
 
 
 Margolis 
 EB 
 
 
 Kim 
 Y 
 
 
 Richard 
 JM 
 
 
 Roitman 
 MF 
 
 
 Lobo 
 MK 
 
 
 2013 
 New insights into the specificity and plasticity of reward and aversion encoding in the mesolimbic system 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 45 
 17569 
 17576 
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3250-13.201333/45/17569 [pii] 
 24198347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wimmer 
 GE 
 
 
 Daw 
 ND 
 
 
 Shohamy 
 D 
 
 
 2012 
 Generalization of value in reinforcement learning by humans 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 35 
 7 
 1092 
 1104 
 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08017.x 
 22487039 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winer 
 ES 
 
 
 Nadorff 
 MR 
 
 
 Ellis 
 TE 
 
 
 Allen 
 JG 
 
 
 Herrera 
 S 
 
 
 Salem 
 T 
 
 
 2014 
 Anhedonia predicts suicidal ideation in a large psychiatric inpatient sample 
 Psychiatry Res 
 218 
 1–2 
 124 
 128 
 doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2014.04.016S0165-1781(14)00294-7 [pii] 
 24774075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 H 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Jia 
 Z 
 
 
 Gong 
 Q 
 
 
 2014 
 Dysfunction of neural circuitry in depressive patients with suicidal behaviors: a review of structural and functional neuroimaging studies 
 Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
 53 
 61 
 66 
 doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2014.03.002S0278-5846(14)00046-3 [pii] 
 24632395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zink 
 CF 
 
 
 Pagnoni 
 G 
 
 
 Martin-Skurski 
 ME 
 
 
 Chappelow 
 JC 
 
 
 Berns 
 GS 
 
 
 2004 
 Human striatal responses to monetary reward depend on saliency 
 Neuron 
 42 
 3 
 509 
 517 
 15134646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Card guessing task 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Areas of increased functional connectivity with the ventral striatum in depressed versus control participants across all negative versus positive outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Areas of increased functional connectivity with the ventral striatum (yellow spheres) in depressed versus control participants during the receipt of distinct negative versus positive outcomes. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 
 
 
 MDD Depressed (n=38) 
 Healthy Control (n=30) 
 Statistic 
 p value 
 
 
 
 
 Age at Scan m, SD 
 30.68 
 7.73 
 31.98 
 6.11 
 t (66) = 0.76 
 0.45 
 
 
 Sex n, % 
 
 
 
 
 x 2 (1)=1.52 
 0.218 
 
 
    Female 
 27 
 71.05% 
 17 
 56.67% 
 
 
 
 
    Male 
 11 
 28.95% 
 13 
 43.33% 
 
 
 
 
 IQ m, SD 
 112.04 
 9.24 
 112.82 
 7.2 
 t (66) = 0.38 
 0.7 
 
 
 Level of Education *  m, SD 
 6 
 1.34 
 6.43 
 1.31 
 t (66) = 1.34 
 0.18 
 
 
 HAM-D 
 26.84 
 5.67 
 1.8 
 2.43 
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Age of Illness Onset m, SD 
 18.03 
 7.09 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Illness Duration (months) m, SD 
 12.65 
 7.42 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Number of Psychotropics m, SD 
 1.53 
 1.31 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Total-Medication Load m, SD 
 2.18 
 2 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Lifetime Presence of Anxiety Disorder n, % 
 24 
 63.16% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Lifetime Presence of Eating Disorder n, % 
 2 
 5.26% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Lifetime Presence of Somatoform Disorder n, % 
 1 
 2.63% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Prior History of Alcohol/Drug Abuse or Dependence n, % 
 14 
 36.84% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Antidepressants n, % 
 28 
 73.68% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Benzodiazepines n, % 
 10 
 26.32% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Antipsychotics n, % 
 3 
 7.89% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 Mood Stabilizers n, % 
 3 
 7.89% 
 –          
 –          
 – 
 –          
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 Level of Education: 1= Less than 7 th  grade, 6= technical school or associate degree, 8= graduate or professional degree. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Areas and Contrasts for which Depressed versus Healthy Adults show Higher Connectivity with the VS. 
 
 
 
 
 Contrast for Outcome Conditions and Areas of Higher Activity 
 Cluster Size (K) 
 p(K) 
 Hemispher es of areas of FC with the VS 
 MNI 
 
 p 
 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 F/t 
 
 
 
 
 Main Effect of Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus, BA7 
 206 
 0 
 Right 
 21 
 −48 
 45 
 33.06 
 0.000 
 
 
 Middle & Superior Frontal Gyrus, ACC, BA8 
 1310 
 0 
 Right 
 30 
 39 
 45 
 31.38 
 0.001 
 
 
 Caudate, Mid-Cingulate, BA32, 8, 24 
 257 
 0 
 Left 
 −15 
 0 
 33 
 25.52 
 0.012 
 
 
 Loss versus Relief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ACC, BA32, 24 
 7781 
 0 
 Right and Left 
 −21 
 33 
 24 
 6.4 
 0 
 
 
 Middle & Superior Frontal Gyrus, BA9, 10 
 30 
 45 
 24 
 6.2 
 0 
 
 
 Loss versus Win 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate, Mid-Cingulate, BA24 
 974 
 0 
 Right and Left 
 −15 
 0 
 33 
 5.1 
 0.005 
 
 
 Putamen 
 2536 
 0 
 Right 
 24 
 9 
 15 
 4.9 
 0.021 
 
 
 Inferior Frontal Gyrus, BA9 
 42 
 −3 
 24 
 4.9 
 0.024 
 
 
 Middle & Superior Frontal Gyrus, BA10 
 30 
 45 
 24 
 4.8 
 0.031 
 
 
 Middle & Inferior Frontal Gyrus, BA10 
 335 
 0.008 
 Left 
 −30 
 36 
 12 
 4.9 
 0.053 
 
 
 Disappointment versus Win 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precuneus, BA7 
 243 
 0.034 
 Right 
 18 
 −51 
 45 
 5.3 
 0.005 
 
 
 Mid-Cingulate 
 413 
 0.003 
 Right 
 18 
 9 
 33 
 5.3 
 0.006 
 
 
 Loss versus Disappointment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mid-Insula, BA13 
 423 
 0.002 
 Right 
 48 
 0 
 15 
 5.2 
 0.008 
 
 
 Anterior Insula & Inferior Frontal Gyrus, BA47 
 39 
 18 
 −18 
 4.8 
 0.038 
 
 
 Relief versus Win 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caudate 
 368 
 0.004 
 Right and Left 
 24 
 0 
 24 
 5.2 
 0.009 
 
 
 Left Insula 
 555 
 0 
 Right and Left 
 −21 
 −42 
 33 
 4.7 
 0.044 
 
 
 Cingulate 
 −30 
 −30 
 24 
 4.7 
 0.053 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Neurobiological Substrates of Depression Symptoms: Neural Areas Coupled with the Ventral Striatum during Loss versus Reward Events (N=68) 
 
 
 
 
 Symptom 
 R 2 
 Predictor: Neural Area of FC with the VS 
 Hemis phere of VS Seed 
 MNI of Target Area of high connectivity with the VS 
 Std. β 
 Unst-SE 
 t 
 p 
 Tolera nce 
 VIF 
 
 
 
 
 Depressive Mood 
 0.249 
 Caudate, Mid Cingulate 
 L 
 −15, 0, 33 
 0.305 
 12.785 
 2.455 
 0.017 
 0. 798 
 1.253 
 
 
 Precuneus, BA7 
 L 
 21, 48, 45 
 0.281 
 9.08 
 2.261 
 0.027 
 
 
 Anhedonia 
 0.155 
 Caudate, Mid Cingulate 
 L 
 −15, 0, 33 
 0.393 
 0.507 
 4.37 
 0.001 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 Suicidality 
 0.305 
 Middle & Superior Frontal Gyrus, ACC, BA8 
 L 
 30, 39, 45 
 0.384 
 1.332 
 3.205 
 0.002 
 0.792 
 1.262 
 
 
 Precuneus, BA7 
 R 
 21, 48, 45 
 0.58 
 2.169 
 2.155 
 0.035 
 
 
 Depression Severity 
 0.288 
 Precuneus, BA7 
 L 
 21, 48, 45 
 0.315 
 12.017 
 2.643 
 0.010 
 0.786 
 1.273 
 
 
 Caudate, Mid Cingulate 
 L 
 −15, 0, 33 
 0.312 
 16.203 
 2.670 
 0.010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 We examined the striatal network, which encodes natural rewards, in depressed and healthy adults. 
 
 
 Depressed adults show high striatal connectivity with neocortical areas during losses versus rewards. 
 
 
 Suicidality, anhedonia, and depressive mood are associated with higher VS connectivity to the Prefrontal Cortex. 
 
 
 
 
