
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0020713 
 6083 
 Neuropsychologia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 Neuropsychologia 
 
 0028-3932 
 1873-3514 
 
 
 27908591 
 5253082 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.11.019 
 NIHMS833681 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 An fMRI investigation of the relationship between future imagination and cognitive flexibility 
 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 R.P. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Wiebels 
 K. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Sumner 
 R.L. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 van Mulukom 
 V. 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 
 
 Grady 
 C.L. 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 D.L. 
 
 4 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 D.R. 
 
 1 
 5 
 
 
 1 School of Psychology and Centre for Brain Research, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 
 2 Centre for Research in Psychology, Behaviour and Achievement, Coventry University, Coventry, UK 
 3 Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest Hospital and Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
 4 Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 
 5 Brain Research New Zealand 
 
 Corresponding author: Reece Roberts, School of Psychology, The University of Auckland Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand,  r.roberts@auckland.ac.nz 
 
 
 5 
 12 
 2016 
 
 
 28 
 11 
 2016 
 
 
 27 
 1 
 2017 
 
 
 27 
 1 
 2018 
 
 95 
 156 
 172 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 While future imagination is largely considered to be a cognitive process grounded in default mode network activity, studies have shown that future imagination recruits regions in both default mode and frontoparietal control networks. In addition, it has recently been shown that the ability to imagine the future is associated with cognitive flexibility, and that tasks requiring cognitive flexibility result in increased coupling of the default mode network with frontoparietal control and salience networks. In the current study, we investigated the neural correlates underlying the association between cognitive flexibility and future imagination in two ways. First, we experimentally varied the degree of cognitive flexibility required during future imagination by manipulating the disparateness of episodic details contributing to imagined events. To this end, participants generated episodic details (persons, locations, objects) within three social spheres; during fMRI scanning they were presented with sets of three episodic details all taken from the same social sphere ( Congruent  condition) or different social spheres ( Incongruent  condition) and required to imagine a future event involving the three details. We predicted that, relative to the  Congruent  condition, future simulation in the  Incongruent  condition would be associated with increased activity in regions of the default mode, frontoparietal and salience networks. Second, we hypothesized that individual differences in cognitive flexibility, as measured by performance on the Alternate Uses Task, would correspond to individual differences in the brain regions recruited during future imagination. A task partial least squares (PLS) analysis showed that the  Incongruent  condition resulted in an increase in activity in regions in salience networks (e.g. the insula) but, contrary to our prediction, reduced activity in many regions of the default mode network (including the hippocampus). A subsequent functional connectivity (within-subject seed PLS) analysis showed that the insula exhibited increased coupling with default mode regions during the  Incongruent  condition. Finally, a behavioral PLS analysis showed that individual differences in cognitive flexibility were associated with differences in activity in a number of regions from frontoparietal, salience and default-mode networks during both future imagination conditions, further highlighting that the cognitive flexibility underlying future imagination is grounded in the complex interaction of regions in these networks. 
 
 
 autobiographical memory 
 cognitive flexibility 
 default mode network 
 divergent thinking 
 episodic simulation 
 frontoparietal control network 
 future thinking 
 salience network 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Much recent research has focused on the notion that the brain is a fundamentally prospective organ ( Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007 ), using information gleaned from the present environment and past memories to generate predictions about the future. Indeed, much of our time is consumed by various types of future-oriented thoughts that range in their depth and flexibility ( Szpunar, Spreng, & Schacter, 2014 ). Like many species, humans can enlist inflexible reproductions of memorized or instinctual behaviors in a future-directed fashion ( Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007 ). Humans, however, can also construct mental simulations of novel future events in sufficient detail to support effective planning ( Buckner & Carroll, 2007 ;  Gilbert & Wilson, 2007 ;  Schacter, 2012 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 ;  Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). In fact, it is likely that the ability to simulate experiences beyond the immediate present environment underlies the human capacity to respond flexibly to unexpected changes in the environment ( Buckner & Carroll, 2007 ;  Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007 ). 
 The constructive nature of the episodic memory system ( Bartlett, 1932 ;  Schacter, Norman, & Koutstaal, 1998 ) makes it well-suited to support the construction of novel simulations. According to the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis ( Schacter & Addis, 2007 ), the storage of episodic memories as a pattern of features distributed across the cortex ( Damasio, 1989 ;  Schacter et al., 1998 ;  Squire, 1992 ) facilitates the extraction of episodic details—such as familiar people, places and objects—as content for simulations. Support for the idea that  access  to episodic memory is required for simulation comes from neuroimaging studies reporting that both memory and simulation engage a core network of regions overlapping substantially with the default mode network (DMN;  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 ;  Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007 ) as well as patient studies documenting corresponding deficits in episodic memory and simulation ( Addis, Sacchetti, Ally, Budson, & Schacter, 2009 ;  Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 2008 ;  Andelman, Hoofien, Goldberg, Aizenstein, & Neufeld, 2010 ;  Hassabis, Kumaran, Vann, & Maguire, 2007 ; Klein, Loftus, & Kihlstrom, 2002;  Kwan, Carson, Addis, & Rosenbaum, 2010 ; but see also  Squire et al., 2010 ). In addition to episodic memory, semantic memory also plays a critical role in future simulation, providing a scaffold for event representations ( Irish & Piguet, 2013 ). Indeed, without access to semantic memory, future simulation is impaired ( Duval et al., 2012 ;  Irish, Addis, Hodges, & Piguet, 2012 ;  Viard et al., 2014 ), and interestingly the network associated with semantic memory overlaps considerably with the DMN ( Binder & Desai, 2011 ;  Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009 ;  Burianova, McIntosh, & Grady, 2010 ) further suggesting a critical interplay between these systems during simulation. 
 According to the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis, extracted episodic details must also be  recombined  into a coherent event simulation. This recombinatory ability is thought to be central to  flexibly  imagining the future – to construct as well as disassemble and rework the components of scenarios to create different outcomes to enhance future behavior ( Addis, Pan, Musicaro, & Schacter, 2016 ;  Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). Despite this theoretical importance, little is known about the recombination process, including its neural correlates. Much of the existing evidence rests on neuroimaging reports of increased activity during the simulation of future events relative to remembering past events (e.g.,  Addis, Cheng, Roberts, & Schacter, 2010 ;  Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 2007 ;  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ). Increased activity for future imagination relative to remembering the past has been interpreted as reflecting the recombination of episodic details into a coherent scenario because, by definition, the details comprising a novel event are less congruent than the details previously bound into a past event, and thus should impose higher demands on recombinatory processes. Regions across the DMN have been reported as exhibiting such effects, including frontopolar/dorsomedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, lateral temporal and parietal cortex, precuneus, posterior cingulate, and hippocampus ( Abraham, Schubotz, & von Cramon, 2008 ;  Addis et al., 2010 ,  2007 ;  Addis, Pan, Vu, Laiser, & Schacter, 2009 ;  Gilmore, Nelson, & McDermott, 2016 ;  Szpunar, Watson, & McDermott, 2007 ;  Viard et al., 2011 ; for a meta-analysis, see  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ) 
 The hippocampus has been a focus in the study of recombination during simulation – perhaps unsurprising given the established role of this structure in relational processing, including the binding together of disparate elements during working memory as well as episodic encoding and retrieval ( Axmacher et al., 2010 ;  Eichenbaum, 2001 ;  Hannula & Ranganath, 2008 ;  Hannula, Tranel, & Cohen, 2006 ;  Staresina & Davachi, 2009 ). Indeed, the simulations generated by hippocampal amnesics are not only sparse in episodic detail but also less coherent than those of healthy controls ( Hassabis et al., 2007 ). Hippocampal amnesics are diminished in their ability to imagine future events that draw heavily on semantic information (e.g. the presidential election in 2032), suggesting the hippocampus may also play a role in the binding together of semantic details to produce complex semantic representations ( Race, Keane, & Verfaellie, 2013 ). Moreover, simulation-related hippocampal activity is greatest when constructing future events for the first time ( Gaesser, Spreng, McLelland, Addis, & Schacter, 2013 ;  van Mulukom, Schacter, Corballis, & Addis, 2013 ), particularly when these events are specific in nature ( Addis et al., 2010 ) and comprise greater amounts of detail ( Addis & Schacter, 2008 ;  Madore, Szpunar, Addis, & Schacter, 2016 ). These construction effects are evident even when controlling other possible determinants of hippocampal activity such as event novelty ( Gaesser et al., 2013 ) and encoding ( Martin, Schacter, Corballis, & Addis, 2011 ; for additional discussion see  Schacter, Addis, & Szpunar, in press ). Interestingly,  Weiler, Suchan, & Daum (2010)  found that simulating less probable events (that likely involve more incongruent combinations of details) engages the hippocampus more than commonplace, high probability events, although the disparateness of details was not directly measured. 
 This evidence, however, is limited in that these studies provide only  indirect  support of the recombination process; as yet, the effects of explicitly modulating recombinatory demands on simulation-related brain activity have not been investigated directly. Moreover, the focus on the hippocampus has been at the expense of characterizing recombination effects in other DMN regions. Thus, the current study is the first to experimentally manipulate the disparateness of details comprising future simulations, thereby directly testing this hypothesized function of the hippocampus and exploring the effects on extra-hippocampal regions during future simulation. 
 In addition to recombinatory processes, we propose that successfully organizing disparate elements into a coherent scenario places demands on other domain-general processes supported by networks outside of the DMN. One such process is spontaneous cognitive flexibility ( Eslinger & Grattan, 1993 ) which refers specifically to the ability to spontaneously generate a diversity of ideas (in contrast to reactive cognitive flexibility – the ability to shift mental set in response to changing environmental demands). Spontaneous cognitive flexibility (referred to hereafter as cognitive flexibility) involves the ability to “break conventional or obvious patterns of thinking” ( Dietrich, 2004 , p.1014) in the service of generating novel ideas, and as such can be indexed by divergent thinking 1  measures ( Eslinger & Grattan, 1993 ;  Tomer, Fisher, Giladi, & Aharon-Peretz, 2002 ), such as the flexibility measure of the Alternate Uses Task (AUT;  Guilford, 1967 ). Indeed, this domain-general ability supports many forms of creative processing, including music, poetry and, relevant here, imagination ( Beaty, Benedek, Silvia, & Schacter, 2016 ). Consistent with the notion that cognitive flexibility is important for recombining disparate details during simulation,  Addis, Pan, Musicaro, & Schacter (2016)  found that the amount of episodic detail comprising future simulations was positively associated with divergent thinking as measured by the AUT. 
 It is important to note that although divergent thinking has been linked with the DMN, in particular the temporal pole and hippocampus (e.g.  Benedek, Jauk, Fink, et al., 2014 ;  Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & Christoff, 2012 ;  Takeuchi et al., 2011 ) this activity reflects the associative component of the task and is distinct from the executive component of the task – namely, cognitive flexibility – that is grounded in frontoparietal control network (FPCN) activity, especially lateral frontopolar cortex, including the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex ( Benedek, Jauk, Sommer, Arendasy, & Neubauer, 2014 ;  Gilhooly, Fioratou, Anthony, & Wynn, 2007 ;  Niendam et al., 2012 ). Indeed, FPCN is particularly active during tasks that require cognitive flexibility and consistent with its domain-general role, the FPCN influences the activation of  other  task-specific networks ( Cole et al., 2013 ). For instance,  Beaty, Benedek, Kaufman, and Silvia (2015)  found that FPCN regions (e.g., rostrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) were functionally coupled with DMN regions during a divergent thinking task; moreover, the insula (part of the salience network, SN) was also coupled with the DMN in the early stages of the task, likely supporting the switching between large-scale networks ( Menon & Uddin, 2010 ). In addition, the same study showed that more cognitively flexible individuals (i.e. those with the most creative responses in the AUT) exhibited increased coherence between FPCN and DMN regions. Additionally, it has been shown that during flexible future planning, the FPCN couples with DMN regions ( Spreng, Stevens, Chamberlain, Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010 ), supporting the top-down evaluation and modification of self-generated ideas to meet task-specific goals ( Beaty et al., 2016 ). 
 Interestingly, in a recent meta-analysis of activation during future simulation,  Benoit & Schacter (2015)  report five clusters falling within the boundaries of the FCPN that exhibit greater activity when imagining the future relative to remembering the past. Thus, while it is clear that the FPCN is often recruited during future simulation, whether this is related to the degree of cognitive flexibility required by the simulation task remains unknown. We explored this question in two ways. First, our manipulation of detail disparateness should affect not only the demands placed on recombinatory process but also on cognitive flexibility. Specifically, recombining  incongruent  details in a meaningful way requires more cognitive flexibility than integrating  congruent  details, and thus under those task demands we expect to see not only activation the DMN, but also the FPCN (and the SN, supporting switching between these networks), as well as increased functional connectivity between these networks. Second, we investigated whether individual differences in cognitive flexibility (as indexed by divergent thinking) are related to brain activity while individuals are imagining the future. 
 To this end, we used a recently-developed version of the experimental recombination paradigm in which the disparateness of memory details to be incorporated into each imagined scenario was directly manipulated ( van Mulukom, Schacter, Corballis, & Addis, 2016 ). Specifically, prior to scanning, participants generated lists of people, places and objects associated with distinct social spheres in their own lives (e.g., work, home, sports team). The key premise underlying this manipulation is that details from the same sphere (e.g., Brother, Nanna’s House, Dad’s car) are more congruent and more easily recombined into a scenario than are details from different spheres (e.g., Mum, Prof. Tulving’s office, soccer ball). Participants’ ratings on this task confirm that the social sphere manipulation affects the disparateness of details: within-sphere (congruent) details are rated as more likely to co-occur in everyday life than across-sphere (incongruent) details. Thus, unlike previous versions of the recombination paradigm where random sets of episodic details are presented during scanning ( Addis, Pan, et al., 2009 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ), in the current study participants were presented with  congruent  and  incongruent  sets of episodic details to incorporate into their future simulations; by experimentally manipulating the disparateness of the details to be included in an imagined scenario, we modulated the degree to which recombinatory and cognitive flexibility processes were required during future simulation. We also collected data on dimensions that potentially affect the intensity of simulation-related brain activity (i.e., encoding, detail, plausibility, novelty, difficulty) to enable us to isolate activation related to integration of disparate details. 
 We predicted that constructing future simulations from disparate details ( Incongruent  condition) would be associated with (1) increased activation of the DMN, including the hippocampus, reflecting increased recombinatory demands; (2) increased recruitment of the FPCN and SN, reflecting the executive functions underlying domain-general cognitive flexibility and (3) increased functional connectivity between SN, FPCN and DMN regions. Moreover, we investigated whether individual differences in cognitive flexibility (as indexed by the flexibility measure of the AUT) were related to activity in regions of both the DMN and FPCN while individuals are imagining the future. We predicted that such brain-behavior relationships would be stronger in the  Incongruent  condition, as this condition should draw more heavily on associative processing (subserved by DMN regions) and executive function (FPCN regions) than the  Congruent  condition, and previous work has shown cognitive flexibility to be related to both associative and executive processing ( Beaty, Silvia, Nusbaum, Jauk, & Benedek, 2014 ). 
 
 
 2. Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Twenty-five healthy young adults with no history of neurological or psychiatric conditions participated in this study, providing informed written consent in a manner approved by the University of Auckland Human Ethics Committee. All participants were fluent in English and right-handed (as determined using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory;  Oldfield, 1971 ). Data from two participants were excluded because they were unable to complete the fMRI scan, and one due to task non-compliance during the post-scan interview. Thus, data from 22 individuals (7 males;  M age =21.2,  SD age =3.74) were included in the analyses. 
 
 
 2.2 Tasks 
 
 2.2.1 Alternate Uses Task (AUT) 
 Divergent thinking was measured using the AUT ( Guilford, 1967 ). On each of six trials, participants were required to generate as many alternate uses as possible for the given object (brick, button, automobile tyre, key, pencil, and paperclip). Each trial was three minutes in duration; at the two minute mark, participants were alerted that they had one minute remaining. Participant responses were recorded, transcribed and scored for flexibility—the number of distinct categories their responses for an item could be grouped into—by two independent coders. For example, on the trial  paperclip , the responses ‘to make a bracelet’, ‘to make a ring’, and ‘to make earrings’ would all be grouped together in one category, and the response ‘to use as mini rodent ice skates’ in another, resulting in a flexibility score of 2. For each participant, the total flexibility score summed across the six trials was used for analysis. Two independent raters scored all responses; a two-way mixed model confirmed a high degree of inter-rater reliability (standardized Cronbach’s alpha = .97). 
 
 
 2.2.2 Future Simulation fMRI Task 
 During a pre-scan session, participants were asked to identify three distinct social spheres (e.g. university, work, family etc.) For each sphere, they provided a list of 40 persons, locations and objects encountered within the last 5 years. No detail could be duplicated across spheres, and any person that the participant indicated could be placed into more than one sphere was removed. Each detail was then rated for familiarity (0=only encountered once; 3=as familiar as a parent or spouse) and frequency of encounter (0=encountered annually; 1=monthly; 2=weekly, 3=daily). The person, location and object details were then used to create 45 person/place/object detail sets for each of two conditions: (1)  Congruent , where the 3 details comprising a detail set were from the same sphere; and (2)  Incongruent , where each detail comprising a detail set came from a different sphere. Mean familiarity and frequency of encounter ratings of details comprising congruent and incongruent sets were matched across the two conditions (familiarity:  t 21  = .27,  p  = .793; frequency of encounter;  t 21  = .54,  p  = .598). 
 For each future simulation trial during scanning, participants were presented with a detail set on the screen (i.e., three words that corresponded to a person, location and object) from the  Congruent  or  Incongruent  condition (10  s ); the order in which the person, place and object details were presented was counterbalanced across trials. Participants were instructed to imagine, from a field perspective (i.e., “through their own eyes”), a specific future event that could occur within the next 5 years that incorporated the three details. Once they had an event in mind, participants made a button press and then elaborated the event for the remainder of the trial. Each trial was followed by a rating scale (4  s ) for the amount of detail comprising the simulation (0 = little or no detail, 3 = vivid detail). 
 Immediately following the scan, participants completed a post-scan session in two parts. First, to measure degree of encoding of simulations generated during scanning, participants completed a cued-recall test for detail sets shown in the future task ( Martin et al., 2011 ); for each set, two details were presented and they had to recall the third missing detail. The test was self-paced and the type of detail to be recalled (person, location, object) was counterbalanced across trials. Second, participants were presented with each complete detail set and asked to briefly describe the future event they had generated during the scanner. This description was used to confirm that the event was future-oriented, self-relevant (i.e., they imagined themselves in the event) and specific in time and place; any trials for which this was not the case were dropped from further analyses. Participants provided an estimated date for each future event (in years). They also rated the plausibility of the event (0 = very implausible; 3 = very plausible), its novelty assessed by rating the similarity of the event to previously experienced or imagined events (0 = not at all similar; 3 = very similar) and how difficult it was to construct the simulation (0 = not at all difficult; 3 = very difficult). To confirm our manipulation of detail disparateness, participants rated each detail set for how likely the three details would be to co-occur in everyday life (0 = not at all likely; 3 = very likely). 
 
 
 2.2.3 Control fMRI Task 
 The scanning session also included 45 trials of a sentence construction control task that involved retrieval of semantic information and visual imagery ( Addis, Pan, et al., 2009 ). A list of 27 highly familiar (M = 5.48, SD = 1.01), imageable (M = 6.44, SD = 0.27) and concrete (M = 6.94, SD = 0.06) nouns was compiled from the  Clark and Paivio (2004)  extended norms. For each trial, three nouns were randomly selected from this list and presented (10  s ). Participants made a size judgement by generating a sentence in the form of ‘ X is bigger than Y, which is bigger than Z ’ (e.g. ‘car is bigger than bag, which is bigger than phone’). Once constructed, they made a button press and focused on the semantic definition of each noun for the remaining time. Participants then rated the difficulty they had constructing the sentence (0 = very easy, 3 = very difficult; 4  s ). 
 
 
 
 2.3 Scanning Session 
 Participants completed 7 practice trials (4 simulation trials and 3 control trials) outside of the scanner; participants were ask to describe the simulations they generated on these trials to confirm they understood the task instructions (i.e., that they were imagining future scenarios that involved themselves and doing so from a field perspective). 
 Participants completed five runs of functional scanning, each 482  s  in duration. Each run comprised 18 future simulation trials (half  Congruent  and half  Incongruent ) and 9 control trials. Null trials (fixation cross) comprised 22% (104  s ) of each run. The randomized order of all trials, and the jittered duration of null trials, was determined using Opts eq 2 .0 ( Dale, 1999 ). 
 
 2.3.1 MRI Acquisition Parameters 
 MRI data were acquired on a 3T Siemens MAGNETOM Skyra scanner. Anatomical scans were acquired using a magnetization prepared rapidly acquired gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence. Whole-brain functional scans were acquired using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence (TR = 3000 ms, TE = 27 ms, FOV = 225 mm, flip angle = 90°) with 59 coronal-oblique slices (3.5 mm) acquired in an interleaved fashion at an angle perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus. Field maps were acquired using Siemens standard double-echo field map sequence (TR = 577ms; TE = 4.92 and 7.38ms). Task stimuli (black text on white background) were projected onto a mirror incorporated into the 20-channel head coil. E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc., Pittsburgh, P.A.) was used for timed presentation of stimuli and collection of participants responses made via a 4-button MR-compatible response box. 
 
 
 
 2.4 Procedure 
 Participants completed three sessions, spaced approximately one week apart. During Session 1, participants provided person, location and object details for the future simulation tasks. During Session 2, participants completed the AUT. During Session 3, participants completed the scanning session and post-scan interview. 
 
 
 2.5 Data Analysis 
 
 2.5.1 Trial Selection 
 Any trials on which no response was recorded or response times were less than 500ms were excluded from further analysis. In addition, any future trials for which no specific event could be described during the post-scan interview were excluded. 
 
 
 2.5.2. Behavioral Analyses 
 Paired  t -tests and analyses of variance (ANOVA) were used as appropriate to assess effects of condition on behavioral measures. For ANOVAs, if the assumption of sphericity was violated (ε<.90), a correction factor to account for the inflation in Type I error rate was applied to the degrees of freedom of the F-distribution ( Geisser & Greenhouse, 1958 ). Pearson correlations were performed between AUT flexibility scores and  Incongruent-Congruent  difference scores for the following behavioral measures: construction response time, subsequent memory (proportion correct), and subjective ratings (difficulty, plausibility, detail and novelty). We used difference scores due to the subjective nature of the ratings; if different participants use the rating scales differently, it could obscure any relationships between the AUT flexibility scores and the behavioral ratings, rendering the results difficult to interpret. However, any given participant is unlikely to use the rating scale differently for the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions, rendering difference scores as most appropriate for this analysis. We predicted that highly flexible individuals will show less of a  Congruent-Incongruent  difference in subjective ratings conditions (i.e., a negative relationship between behavioral difference scores and flexibility scores). For example, relative to someone low in cognitive flexibility, a highly flexible individual is predicted to experience a smaller shift in difficulty (or any of the dimensions) between the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions. 
 
 
 2.5.3 Preprocessing 
 The first four images from each run were discarded to allow the longitudinal magnetization to reach equilibrium. Functional images were preprocessed using SPM8 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK). Preprocessing included slice-time correction, correction for motion and distortion (using SPM8’s Realign and Unwarp routine together with the Field Map toolbox ( Hutton et al., 2002 ), co-registration with the anatomical scan, spatial normalization using parameters derived during segmentation to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template (resampled at 2×2×2 mm voxels) and spatial smoothing (8mm full-width half maximum Gaussian kernel). 
 
 
 2.5.4 Spatiotemporal Partial Least Squares (ST-PLS) 
 Event-related functional data were analyzed using a ST-PLS approach, a multivariate approach used extensively in studies on autobiographical memory and future simulation (e.g.  Addis, McIntosh, Moscovitch, Crawley, & McAndrews, 2004 ;  Addis, Roberts, & Schacter, 2011 ;  Addis, Pan, et al., 2009 ;  Burianova & Grady, 2007 ;  Burianova et al., 2010 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ;  Spreng & Grady, 2010 ). Partial least squares (PLS) offers more power than univariate approaches; unlike univariate approaches where a separate statistical analysis is computed at every voxel, PLS is a multivariate technique and so all voxels are included one analysis. Therefore, a correction for multiple comparisons is not required. It also makes no assumptions about the shape and time course of the hemodynamic response function (HRF). 
 
 2.5.4.1 Task PLS Analyses 
 Data were analyzed using non-rotated task ST-PLS analyses over a temporal window of 5 TRs (15  s ). A data matrix comprising blood-oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal from all participants and all voxels (within a custom-made gray matter mask derived by segmenting an MNI brain and binarizing the resulting gray matter image) for specified conditions at each TR in this temporal window was constructed; for each trial, BOLD signal data from TRs in the temporal window were normalized relative to the signal at the onset of the trial. The data matrix was cross-correlated with the design matrix (comprising vectors specifying  a priori  contrasts of conditions). The resultant cross-product matrix underwent singular value decomposition, producing latent variables comprised of: (i) a singular value indicating the amount of covariance for which the LV accounts; (ii) a linear contrast across conditions that codes for the effect depicted by voxels; and (iii) a singular image of voxel weights (“saliences”) that indicates the voxels exhibiting the greatest covariance with the linear contrast during each TR. The weighted value of a salience can be either positive or negative, depending on its relation to the specified contrast of conditions. Brain scores (a weighted average of all voxel saliences associated with a condition) were also derived for each participant in each condition, specifying how strongly the spatiotemporal brain pattern for a given LV is expressed by that participant. 
 The overall statistical significance of each LV was determined using permutation testing (1000 permutations). For each permutation, all participants’ data were reassigned to conditions, the ST-PLS was re-run and a new singular value obtained. Significance indicated the probability of the number of times the singular value from the permuted data exceeded the actual singular value ( McIntosh, Bookstein, Haxby, & Grady, 1996 ); a threshold of  p  < .05 was used. Note that because PLS is a multivariate technique, all voxels are included in the same analysis and thus because only one analysis is computed, the need to correct for multiple comparisons is obviated 2 . 
 Bootstrapping estimation of the standard error (SE) was used to determine the reliability of voxel saliences; participants were randomly resampled with replacement, the ST-PLS was re-run and the saliences computed. After this procedure was completed 1000 times, the SE of the saliences was computed. Voxels in which bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to  p  <.001) were considered to represent reliable voxels; only clusters of 10 or more voxels are presented for brevity. Confidence intervals for brain scores (which are based on saliences) were also calculated using this procedure. Examination of 95% confidence intervals around brain scores provides an indication of whether a condition reliably contributes to the spatiotemporal pattern associated with the contrast (as indicated by confidence intervals that do not include zero) and whether the conditions contributed differentially to the pattern (as indicated by non-overlapping confidence intervals). 
 As is common practice in studies using event-related PLS (e.g.,  Addis et al., 2004 ,  2011 ;  Hirshhorn, Grady, Rosenbaum, Winocur, & Moscovitch, 2012 ), we report results from TRs in which the effects were maximal (i.e., the TRs at which the spatial pattern comprised the greatest number of voxels); focusing on maximal TRs has the benefit of brevity while still providing critical insights into the spatial patterns and temporal trajectories associated with the conditions. The MNI co-ordinates of the peak voxels within each cluster were localized using Harvard-Oxford Atlases ( Desikan et al., 2006 ). In addition, each cluster was localized to functional networks by determining each cluster’s degree of overlap with the seven network cortical parcellation of ( Yeo et al., 2011 ; available from  https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/CorticalParcellation_Yeo2011 ), allowing us to determine which clusters belonged to the DMN, FPCN and SN. For illustrative purposes, singular images were overlaid on the MNI ICBM 152 nonlinear anatomical template image ( Fonov et al., 2011 ) and percent signal change values from the peak voxels of clusters in the DMN, FPCN and SN were extracted and plotted for illustrative purposes. 
 Using the above-described ST-PLS procedure, we ran a series of analyses; for each, the relevant  a priori  contrast of conditions was specified. (1) The first analysis contrasted the two future conditions relative to the control task as a data quality check; as the results replicated previous findings (i.e., significant activation of the default mode network during future simulation), these result are not discussed any further. (2) The second analysis contrasted  Congruent  and  Incongruent  future events to test our main hypotheses. However, as the two conditions differed along a range of phenomenological dimensions (detail, plausibility, novelty, difficulty) and on levels of encoding (i.e., performance on the cued-recall test; see  Section 3.1 ), it could be the case that any activation differences between the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions simply reflected differences in these behavioral dimensions rather than the experimental manipulation  per se . To determine which clusters of activation were affected by these behavioral variables, we computed Analysis 2 five times, each time using functional data that had been residualized for the effect of one of these covariates (detail ratings, plausibility ratings, novelty ratings, difficulty ratings, encoding success - proportion correct) as described below (Section 2.5.4.2). Thus, we restricted our reporting of Analysis 2 to only those clusters that were evident in each of the five analyses using residualized data. 
 
 
 2.5.4.2 Residualization Procedure for Task PLS 
 Because the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions differ on a number of behavioral dimensions that could influence relevant brain activity, we developed a residualization procedure for task PLS analyses to correct the BOLD data for these differences. Specifically, we removed variance that was shared by (i)  Congruent-Incongruent  differences in behavioral scores, AND (ii)  Congruent-Incongruent  differences in BOLD signal ( Wiebels, Roberts, & Addis, 2016 ). We could have opted to run the residualization procedure separately for each condition, but controlling for behavior within each condition separately is confounded by between-subject variability associated with both behavioral responses and the BOLD signal. In the current study, a potential source of between-subject variability in the behavioral data is the use of subjective rating scales that can be interpreted differently by different participants. Importantly, however, any given participant is unlikely to use a rating scale differently across conditions. Likewise, some of the between-subject variance in the amplitude of the BOLD signal is likely to derive from sources that vary across participants but are unrelated to the experimental conditions (e.g., physiological factors;  Dubois & Adolphs, 2016 ). 
 Thus, based on the logic of repeated-measures ANOVA (where between-subject variance is removed from the error term), we used  Congruent-Incongruent  difference scores so as not to confound our residualization with between-subject variability. We reasoned that if a  Congruent-Incongruent  activation difference is driven by a difference in behavior between the two conditions, there should be a linear across-subject relationship between these two sets of difference scores. For example, if the plausibility of simulated events is driving BOLD activity in a region, it should be the case that individuals with greater differences in plausibility ratings between the two conditions should also exhibit greater differences in BOLD activation between the conditions. Importantly, simply regressing out the effects of behavior for each condition separately does not necessarily remove the shared variance associated with a linear relationship between BOLD and behavior difference scores (see  Supplementary Materials, Section S1 , for a more detailed explanation of this point). 
 To regress out the behavioral differences from differences in fMRI data, difference scores were calculated for each TR at each voxel for each subject, creating vectors of difference scores ( Eq. 1 ). Likewise, difference scores were calculated for the following behavioral scores: detail, plausibility, difficulty, novelty and encoding ( Eq. 2 ).
 (Eq.1) BOLD → Diff = BOLD → Congruent − BOLD → incongruent 
 (Eq.2) Behav → Diff = Behav → Congruent − Behav → incongruent 
 Separately, each behavioral difference score was regressed out of the BOLD differences, resulting in a difference between  Congruent  and  Incongruent  for each voxel at each TR that was independent of any differences in behavioral scores between the two conditions ( Eq. 3 ).
 (Eq.3) BOLD → Resid Diff = ( ( I − Behav → Diff * Behav → Diff T * Behav → Diff ) − 1 * Behav → Diff T ) * BOLD → Diff ) + p * I = identity matrix ; p = intercept of regression line ; T = transposed 
Next, these residualized difference scores were projected back onto the original data matrix by subtracting them from the original percent signal change values in the  Congruent  condition ( Eq. 4 ). This created a new set of percent signal change values for the  Incongruent  condition, by replacing the original difference between the two conditions with a difference that showed no relationship to the difference between the conditions on a given behavioral score. For a graphical description of this process, please see  Supplementary Materials (Section S2) .
 (Eq.4) BOLD Resid incongruent = BOLD Congruent − BOLD Resid Diff 
 
 
 2.5.4.3 Seed PLS Analyses 
 To further explore the results of the  Incongruent-Congruent  Task PLS analysis, we assessed the functional connectivity of regions of interest within the FPCN and SN (i.e., FPCN: dorsolateral and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex; SN: insula, anterior cingulate cortex;  Beaty et al., 2015 ) with the DMN, with the hypothesis that these regions reflecting domain-general cognitive flexibility will be more strongly coupled with the DMN during the Incongruent condition. Task-related functional connectivity was assessed for any regions of interest that were evident in the results of the Incongruent>Congruent task PLS analysis. To this end, we computed task-related functional connectivity using a novel version of seed PLS which we call within-subjects seed PLS (ws-seed PLS) that assesses temporal, within-subject correlations between a seed region and the rest of the brain ( Roberts, Hach, Tippett, & Addis, 2016 ) 3 . Briefly, ws-seed PLS involves calculating the mean BOLD signal for each trial in each voxel, thereby creating a vector of BOLD signal values for each voxel in each condition. This is similar to the beta-series correlation approach ( Rissman, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2004 ), except that the “series” are BOLD percent signal change values and not beta values derived from the general linear model. For each future simulation condition, these vectors were then correlated with the vector of BOLD signal values from the seed region (a 6mm cube comprising 27 voxels centered on the peak voxel in the left insula,  xyz  −38 4 14), creating a within-subject correlation coefficient for each voxel of the brain specifying the strength and direction of the temporal correlation of each voxel with the seed region. These seed-brain correlation coefficients were then submitted to a singular value decomposition to produce latent variables specifying task-related differences and similarities in functional connectivity between the seed and the rest of the brain. Permutation testing and bootstrapping procedures were conducted as described above in  Section 2.5.4.1 , and results were thresholded using a BSR of ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .001) and a spatial extent threshold of 10 voxels. 
 
 
 2.5.4.4 Behavior PLS 
 To identify regions in which task-related activity correlated with divergent thinking, a behavior PLS analysis on BOLD data from the two future simulation tasks was conducted. Specifically, for each task, BOLD signal from every voxel was correlated with a vector containing AUT flexibility scores in an across-subject fashion. These brain-behavior correlation coefficients were then submitted to a singular value decomposition, producing latent variables specifying task-related differences and similarities in correlations between activity and AUT flexibility scores. Permutation testing and bootstrapping procedures were conducted as described above in  Section 2.5.4.1 , and results were thresholded using a BSR of ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to  p  < .001) and a spatial extent threshold of 10 voxels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1 Behavioral Results 
 The number of trials and response time (RT) data for all conditions, and the phenomenological measures for the two future simulation conditions, are presented in  Table 1 . For all conditions, only trials on which a RT was recorded or with RTs greater than 500ms were analyzed. An average of 1.64 and 2.82 trials per participant were excluded for the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions respectively on this basis. For simulation trials, analysis was further restricted to include only those trials for which a specific event was recounted during the post-scan interview. The resulting bin sizes differed by condition ( F 1.29,27.14 =29.35,  p <.001,  η 2  = .59): there were more trials in the control condition than the future conditions ( p  values < .001), and the  Congruent  condition had more trials than the  Incongruent  condition ( p  < .001). 
 An ANOVA on RT data resulted in a main effect of condition ( F 1.14,23.99 =32.39,  p <.001,  η 2  = .61). Pairwise comparisons indicated that average RTs were faster in the control relative to future conditions ( p  values < .001). Although RTs in the  Congruent  future condition were significantly faster than RTs in the  Incongruent  condition ( t 21 =−3.32,  p  = .003,  r 2 =.34), the size of this difference was small relative to the duration of the trial (5  s ) and the TR (3  s ). Thus, it is unlikely that this RT difference affected any differences between the estimated HRFs of the two conditions. 
 Phenomenological data are also presented in  Table 1 . In line with our manipulation, the within-sphere details comprising  Congruent  detail sets were rated as significantly more likely to co-occur than the across-sphere details comprising the  Incongruent  detail sets ( t 21 =7.68,  p  < .001,  r 2 =.74). The estimated temporal distances of  Incongruent  future events were slightly further from the present than  Congruent  events although this difference was not significant ( t 21 =−1.81,  p  < .085,  r 2 =.13) and the averages for both conditions were well within the 5 year limit imposed on participants. 
 Future simulations constructed in the  Incongruent  condition were rated by participants as more difficult to construct ( t 21 =−5.43,  p  < .001,  r 2 =.58), less similar to previous events ( t 21 =−5.91,  p  < .001,  r 2 =.62), less plausible ( t 21 =8.49,  p  < .001,  r 2 =.77), and less detailed ( t 21 =3.51,  p  = .002,  r 2 =.37) than events in the  Congruent  condition. Moreover, the proportion of detail sets correctly remembered during the cued-recalled test was lower in the  Incongruent  condition ( t 21 =6.28,  p  < .001,  r 2 =.65). 
 Finally, we computed correlations between AUT flexibility scores and each of the difference scores between Congruent and Incongruent condition (i.e., for each behavioral measure). These analyses revealed significant negative correlations of flexibility scores with difficulty ( r  = −.49,  p  = .02) and plausibility ( r  = −.53,  p  = .01) difference scores. While the relationship between flexibility scores and detail difference scores was also negative, this effect was not significant ( r  = −.31,  p  =.16). Novelty and encoding difference scores were not correlated with flexibility scores (novelty r = 0.07, encoding r = 0.00; both  p  values > 0.70). 
 
 
 3.2 Task PLS Results 
 The non-rotated task PLS analysis examining  Incongruent  versus  Congruent  future simulations produced a significant latent variable ( p  < .001), showing distinct whole-brain patterns of activity associated with each future simulation condition across the temporal window (5 TRs). As shown in  Figure 1 , positive brain scores (weighted averages of activity across all voxels associated with each task) and positive saliences were associated with regions in which BOLD signal was greater in the  Congruent  condition, while negative brain scores and saliences were associated with regions in which BOLD signal was greater for the  Incongruent  condition. As shown in  Figure 2 , the number of voxels responding to  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions varied across the temporal window, with the greatest number of significant voxels (thresholded at a BSR of ±3) showing a  Congruent  >  Incongruent  effect at TR 4 (9–12  s  into the trial). Inversely, the TR in which the greatest number of voxels showed an  Incongruent  >  Congruent  effect was earlier in the temporal window (TR 2, 3–6  s  into the trial). The effects at these maximal TRs are described in more detail below. Importantly, only those regions that are evident following the residualization of BOLD data for differences in all five behavioral dimensions ( Section 2.5.4.2)  are reported below so as to restrict our description of results to those regions showing effects  independent  of differences in behavior (see  Section S3  for the results of the task PLS analysis computed on raw (i.e., unresidualized) BOLD data and clusters affected by each residualization procedure; see  Figure S7  for a graphical depiction of the effect of the residualization procedure on activation). 
 
 3.2.1 TR 2 
 During TR 2 (3–6  s  into the trial), the  Incongruent  condition was associated with increased BOLD responses relative to the  Congruent  condition in a number of regions that were largely outside the core network/DMN network (see  Table 2A ). Specifically, a number of regions in the SN were responsive to the increased constructive demands of the  Incongruent  condition. To interrogate these effects more closely, percent signal change values were extracted from peak voxels of selected clusters and plotted. 
 The region in which the  Incongruent  >  Congruent  effect was the most robust was in the left anterior/mid insula ( xyz  −38 4 14). As shown in  Figure 3A , the effect in this region was characterized by a relative reduction in deactivation for the  Incongruent  condition. That is, while both conditions resulted in a reduction in a BOLD signal in this region relative to the start of the trial, this deactivation was less marked for the  Incongruent  condition. Likewise, as shown in  Figure 3B , the supramarginal gyrus showed a similar effect with the  Incongruent  condition exhibiting slight activation compared to the deactivation observed in the  Congruent  condition at this early point in the temporal window. Conversely, there were some clusters outside the SN (e.g. fusiform gyrus and subcallosal cortex,  Figures 3C and D ) that exhibited greater activations (i.e., positive percent signal change relative to the start of the trial) during the  Incongruent  relative to  Congruent  condition. Clusters in DMN regions (middle temporal gyrus, medial parietal and medial frontal cortices) showed increased activity in the  Congruent  condition at this time-point. In addition, a cluster in part of the SN, the right insula, showed reduced deactivation in the  Congruent  condition relative to the  Incongruent  condition. 
 
 
 3.2.2 (TR 4) 
 Contrary to our hypothesis, it was the  Congruent  condition that resulted in increased activation of the core network/DMN relative to the  Incongruent  condition (see  Table 2D ). A single, massive cluster of activation (> 10,000 voxels), with a peak voxel located in the left cerebellum, extended bilaterally into medial parietal (retrosplenial cortex, posterior cingulate and precuneus) and medial temporal cortices. In addition, bilateral lateral temporal cortices and the right angular gyrus also showed this  Congruent>Incongruent  effect. As shown in  Figure 4 , percent signal change extracted from peak voxels of clusters showed that while both conditions recruited the DMN, this effect was significantly more pronounced for the  Congruent  condition. It is important to note that while the responses to the  Congruent  condition were greater in magnitude, most of these key DMN regions (shown in  Figure 4 ) also showed reliable responses to the  Incongruent  condition (i.e. one-sample  t -tests confirmed percent signal change values at TR 4 to be significantly different from zero; all  p  values < .02). The exception to this finding was in the left hippocampus, in which the  Incongruent  condition elicited percent signal change values that were not reliably different from zero ( p  > .09). In addition to the DMN, the  Congruent  condition also produced increased activation in some regions in the FPCN (e.g. right middle frontal gyrus, superior parietal lobule) and SN (e.g. right insula, bilateral precentral gyrus). At this TR, a single cluster, located in the left insula showed a reliable Incongruent > Congruent effect; this cluster was the same locus of activity as the left insula cluster showing the same effect at TR2. 
 
 
 
 3.3 Seed PLS – Left Insula 
 We were interested in examining the functional connectivity of regions of interest in the FPCN (dorsolateral and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex) and SN (insula, anterior cingulate cortex) associated with the  Incongruent  condition, in line with previous reports of these regions coupling with the DMN during tasks that require increased cognitive flexibility ( Beaty et al., 2015 ). The only one of these regions to exhibit an  Incongruent  >  Congruent  effect was the insula. Specifically, during both TRs 2 and 4, the left mid-anterior insula ( xyz  −38 4 14) showed reduced deactivation during the  Incongruent  condition relative to the  Congruent  condition. A mean-centered ws-seed PLS analysis on the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions produced a significant LV ( p  < .005) indicating reliable whole-brain differences between the two conditions in functional connectivity with a 6mm 3  ROI centered on the left mid-anterior insula ( xyz  −38 4 14). As shown in  Figure 5 , during the  Incongruent  condition the insula seed showed differential functional connectivity with two DMN regions: the left temporal pole ( xyz  −56 8 −30) and the right angular gyrus ( xyz  50 −62 28) (see  Table 3 ). In addition, a cluster in the left parahippocampal gyrus ( xyz  −22 −26 −24) also showed the same effect, but failed to meet the chosen cluster size threshold of 10 voxels. The seed region did not show preferential functional connectivity to any regions in either the SN or the FPCN. During the  Congruent  condition, increased functional connectivity with the left insula seed was most prominent in a large bilateral prefrontal cluster (maximal in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) that extended into the anterior cingulate cortex. 
 
 
 3.4 Behavior PLS – Cognitive Flexibility 
 A behavior PLS analysis using AUT flexibility scores was computed to identify regions in which activity during future simulation correlated with divergent thinking abilities – an index of cognitive flexibility. This analysis yielded a significant LV ( p  < .05) explaining 70.46% of the crossblock covariance, revealing a set of brain regions linearly associated with AUT flexibility scores similarly for  both  future simulation tasks (see  Figure 6 ). As for the task PLS analyses, we again restricted our description of results to the TR in which the greatest number of significant voxels was apparent: TR 3 in this case. During this time-window, AUT flexibility scores showed reliable correlations—both positive and negative—with BOLD signal in regions from various functional networks. As shown in  Figure 7  and  Table 4 , AUT flexibility scores were positively associated with bilateral rostrolateral prefrontal cortices ( xyz  −20 62 10; 24 60 16), with these clusters extending into both the DMN and FPCN. Likewise, signal in the right temporal pole (DMN:  xyz  52 4 −18) during the future simulation tasks showed a positive association with AUT flexibility scores. Inversely, a cluster in the left hippocampus (DMN:  xyz  −30 −28 −16) was negatively associated with AUT flexibility scores. Lateral prefrontal cortices (FPCN:  xyz  −46 38 8; 46 44 12) as well as bilateral amygdalae ( xyz  −32 −4 −24; 30 0 −26) also showed a negative association with cognitive flexibility. 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 The current study investigated the neural correlates of recombinatory demands during the flexible simulation of future events using two approaches. First, we experimentally increased recombinatory demands during the simulation process by manipulating the disparateness of episodic memory details comprising an imagined future scenario, and assessed changes in both mean BOLD signal (Task PLS) and functional connectivity (ws-seed PLS) induced by this manipulation. Second, to determine if and how individual differences in cognitive flexibility relate to brain activity while imagining future scenarios, we performed brain-behavior correlations (Behavioral PLS) between flexibility scores from a divergent thinking task (AUT) and brain activity during future simulation. 
 Given that the hippocampus has previously been characterized as a key structure involved in the recombination of memory details during episodic future simulation (Addis & Schacter 2012;  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ), we predicted that increasing the disparateness of memory details (and hence increasing the demand placed on recombinatory processes) during the  Incongruent  condition should be associated with increased hippocampal activity as compared with the  Congruent  condition. Instead, our results showed that the  Congruent  condition resulted in stronger activation in a number of key DMN regions, including the hippocampus. This is particularly surprising, as  Weiler et al. (2010)  reported that right anterior hippocampal activity increased linearly as the plausibility of events decreased. There are, however, important differences between the two studies. In our study, participants were presented with three details that were to be integrated into imagined events, while  Weiler et al. (2010)  presented generic event cues (e.g. “Christmas dinner”). A consequence of this difference in experimental paradigm is that the episodic details retrieved and then recombined in the Weiler et al. study were internally generated, while our paradigm imposed additional constraints on the content of imagined scenarios. An effect of this manipulation was that the events in our study―even those in the  Congruent  condition―were rated as considerably less plausible than the events generated in the Weiler et al. study. This suggests that the linear relationship between plausibility and hippocampal activity observed in the Weiler et al. study may not hold for the entire spectrum of plausibility. Instead, extremely implausible events may be associated with decreased hippocampal activity (relative to less implausible events), as observed in the current study where hippocampal activity was reduced in the  Incongruent  condition. 
 As the epoch in which the  Congruent  >  Incongruent  effect was greatest (9–12  s  into the trial) corresponded to the elaboration phase of the imagined scenario ( Addis et al., 2007 ), a plausible interpretation of the increased hippocampal activity during the  Congruent  condition is that it reflects increased episodic memory retrieval, rather than recombination demands: perhaps due to the strong episodic associations between the congruent details comprising these events, more episodic information was retrieved, contributing to the generation of more elaborate imagined scenarios (as confirmed by higher detail ratings for  Congruent  simulations). By this account, the related details act as strong cues for the hippocampus to retrieve additional memory details associated with the three presented details (i.e. pattern completion;  McClelland, McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995 ;  Norman & O’Reilly, 2003 ). This proposal also bears resemblance to the notions of spreading activation (Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, 2001) and autobiographical memory chaining ( Mace, 2014 ), whereby retrieval of autobiographical memories triggers the automatic activation or retrieval of related memories. In addition, any increase in the number of memory details retrieved during the  Congruent  condition would also, necessarily, result in an increase in the recombinatory load associated with that condition, resulting in greater hippocampal activity. By this account, the recombinatory processes carried out by the hippocampus are determined not only by the novelty or disparateness of the memory details comprising an event (greater in the  Incongruent  condition), but also the number of details contributing the event (greater in the  Congruent  condition). Note also that this view is consistent with and indeed emerges from the multi-component model of hippocampal contributions to episodic future simulation put forth by Addis and Schacter (2012), which links the hippocampus with distinct components of future simulations, including both retrieval of episodic details and recombining those details. 
 Although the  Incongruent  condition was associated with less activation of the hippocampus and other DMN regions relative to the  Congruent  condition, we did find that the  Incongruent  condition was accompanied by recruitment of SN regions earlier in the trial (TR 2), which was in line with our hypothesis. This effect of reduced deactivation was most prominent in the left mid-anterior insula, a region previously shown to be strongly associated with task difficulty and error-monitoring ( Bastin et al., 2016 ;  Eckert et al., 2009 ;  Kosillo & Smith, 2010 ;  Taylor, Stern, & Gehring, 2007 ;  Tregellas, Davalos, & Rojas, 2006 ). That the effect in the left insula survives residualization for behavioral and phenomenological differences suggests, however, that this region plays an active role in the recombination of disparate autobiographical details as opposed to merely signaling shifts in task difficulty. The literature offers two potentially complimentary interpretations of the role of the insula in future simulation that are commensurate with our data. First, the insula has been shown to be integral to the detection and processing of salient information ( Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Uddin, 2015 ). This function is not restricted to a particular modality, applicable to “odd-ball” targets in both visual and auditory domains (e.g.  Linden et al., 1999 ). Particularly relevant to the current study are a large number of studies showing, across a range of cognitive domains, that the insula is sensitive to experimental paradigms involving the matching of unexpected or incongruent stimuli. For example,  Meyer, Greenlee & Wuerger (2011)  have shown greater activation in the left anterior insula for incongruent audio-visual pairings (body movements and speech sounds) relative to congruent pairings. Likewise, a number of studies have shown insula involvement in the processing of incongruent word-color combinations during the Stroop task (e.g.  Chen, Lei, Ding, Li, & Chen, 2013 ;  van Veen & Carter, 2005 ), semantically incongruent word-pairs ( van der Heiden et al., 2014 ) and the atypical stressing of syllables during speech perception ( Rothermich & Kotz, 2013 ). Recently,  Wakusawa et al. (2015)  reported insula activation when imagining using novel tools, or using familiar tools in novel situations. Together, these studies suggest a domain-general function of insula processing that involves the detection of salient stimuli that deviate from sensory, perceptual or conceptual expectations. According to this framework, the left insula effect we report in the task-PLS analysis, in which the  Incongruent  condition resulted in greater activity than the  Congruent  condition, likely reflects the registering of unusual detail combinations presented in the  Incongruent  condition as salient. 
 Interestingly, although the  Incongruent  condition produced increased activity in the left insula, the task PLS also produced the reversed effect in the right insula later in the temporal window, with greater BOLD signal associated with the  Congruent  condition. The reason for this discrepancy in effects in left and right insulae is unclear. The right insula has previously been shown to be involved in self-attributed evaluation of task-performance ( Späti et al., 2014 ) and, given the phenomenological differences between the two conditions (e.g. difficulty, detail, plausibility), it is possible that the right insula activity in our task corresponds to participants’ evaluation of their own performance on the simulation task. This is unlikely, however, as  Späti et al. (2014)  showed that self-attributed poor performance was associated with  increased  activity in the right insula, while in the current study the condition on which participants would have likely judged their performance as poor (i.e. the  Incongruent  condition) produced  decreased  activity. Resting-state functional connectivity studies have shown lateralized connectivity effects in the insula ( Cauda et al., 2011 ;  Sridharan, Levitin, & Menon, 2008 ), and further research is required to investigate how such lateralized functions are related to episodic simulation, as suggested by the current study. 
 In addition to registering unexpected or incongruent stimuli, as a key node of the SN, a second key function of the insula is the initiation of the switch between activation of the DMN and FPCN ( Menon & Uddin, 2010 ;  Uddin, 2015 ). Furthermore, recent work has implicated the anterior insula in the dynamic coupling of these networks during creative tasks that require cognitive flexibility (e.g., divergent thinking tasks;  Beaty et al., 2015 ,  2016 ), with DMN regions initially showing connectivity with the insula early on in the task, before coupling with regions in the FPCN. Similarly, our ws-seed PLS results show that the trial-to-trial variability in the magnitude of the BOLD response in certain DMN regions is associated with the degree of deactivation in the left insula: those trials in which the angular gyrus and temporal pole respond maximally to the  Incongruent  condition are accompanied by the left insula “staying online”, but during trials when these regions are weakly engaged, the insula is strongly deactivated. During the  Congruent  condition, however, the left insula shows enhanced functional connectivity with regions in the FPCN and SN. These functional connectivity findings are interesting because, while previous research has focused on the SN’s role in switching between networks in response to externally-directed tasks that typically result in the suppression of the DMN ( Sridharan, Levitin, & Menon, 2008 ;  Uddin, 2015 ), our findings suggest that the left insula is also capable of increasing DMN activity when required during “salient internal thought” ( Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014 ). 
 To summarize, our findings suggest that the left insula plays an important role in both registering unusual memory detail sets as salient, as well as coupling with DMN regions to enable successful construction of imagined future events involving incongruent memory details. However, it should be noted that previous research has implicated an additional mechanism responsible for the switching between networks during autobiographical thinking:  Spreng, Stevens, Chamberlain, Gilmore, & Schacter (2010)  found that it was the FPCN that flexibly switches from being coupled with the DMN and (in that study) the dorsal attention network depending on current task demands. However, although their task was autobiographical, it required participants to engage in long-term planning rather than to construct future simulations. Thus, taken together with our findings, it would appear that the mechanisms associated with changes in network coupling vary depending on specific experimental contexts and forms of autobiographical thinking. 
 Motivated by previous behavioral work highlighting the relationship between episodic future simulation and divergent thinking ( Addis et al., 2016 ;  Madore, Addis, & Schacter, 2015 ;  Madore, Jing, & Schacter, 2016 ), we explored whether our behavioral and BOLD variables were associated with this form of cognitive flexibility (as measured by the AUT flexibility scores). Our results revealed that AUT flexibility scores were negatively correlated with  Congruent-Incongruent  difference scores for both plausibility and difficulty ratings. This finding suggests that more flexible individuals are less affected by the increasing recombinatory demands associated with the  Incongruent  condition, providing further behavioral evidence for the link between divergent thinking and episodic simulation. Additionally, our behavior PLS analysis showed that brain activation during both conditions was linearly associated with AUT flexibility scores in a number of DMN and FPCN regions. Specifically, clusters in bilateral rostrolateral prefrontal cortices (extending into both the DMN and FPCN) showed positive correlations with flexibility scores, demonstrating that cognitively flexible individuals recruit these regions during future imagination to a greater degree than less cognitively flexible individuals. Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex has been associated with a diverse range of cognitive domains, including mentalizing, episodic retrieval and working memory ( Gilbert et al., 2006 ), suggesting that it carries out domain-general processes ( Wendelken, Chung, & Bunge, 2012 ). A large body of research has also implicated the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex in relational integration, reasoning, and the evaluation of self-generated thought ( Christoff et al., 2001 ;  Ellamil et al., 2012 ;  Green, Kraemer, Fugelsang, Gray, & Dunbar, 2010 ;  Wendelken & Bunge, 2009 ;  Wendelken et al., 2012 ;  Wendelken, Nakhabenko, Donohue, Carter, & Bunge, 2007 ;  Westphal, Reggente, Ito, & Rissman, 2016 ). Thus, we propose that when completing an episodic simulation task in which participants are provided with specific details to integrate together, the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex may support the generation and evaluation of  reasons  for the co-occurrence of episodic details that have not occurred together in the past – and that cognitively flexible individuals recruit this region to a greater degree, thereby providing a more plausible context for their imagined scenario. This form of relational reasoning relies not merely on the retrieval of episodic memories but also on semantic information (e.g., schemas), thereby providing a plausible “semantic scaffolding” to guide the simulation of a novel yet coherent event ( Irish et al., 2012 ;  Irish & Piguet, 2013 ). 
 Indeed, the behavior PLS analysis also showed that activity in the right lateral temporal pole—a region strongly associated with the representation of semantic information ( Bonner & Price, 2013 ;  Lambon Ralph, Pobric, & Jefferies, 2009 ;  Lambon Ralph, Sage, Jones, & Mayberry, 2010 ) , including autobiographical semantic information ( Graham, Lee, Brett, & Patterson, 2003 )—was also positively correlated with cognitive flexibility. Interestingly, anterior temporal regions also showed increased functional connectivity to the left insula during the  Incongruent  condition. In addition, the right angular gyrus, which has been shown to exhibit greater coupling with medial temporal lobe regions during autobiographical memory retrieval relative to rest ( Bellana, Liu, Anderson, Moscovitch, & Grady, 2016 ), and has been linked with semantic processing ( Binder et al., 2009 ;  Price, Bonner, Peelle, & Grossman, 2015 ;  Seghier, 2013 ), also exhibited preferential connectivity to the insula during the  Incongruent  condition. Together these results suggest that, in addition to more flexible recruitment of semantic regions during future imagination, decreasing the congruence of memory details comprising an imagined event is associated with increased coupling of the insula to DMN regions mediating semantic processing. 
 Although activity in the rostrolateral prefrontal and temporopolar cortices was positively correlated with AUT flexibility scores during simulation, there were also a number of regions that exhibited negative relationships with cognitive flexibility. Most surprising of these regions was the left hippocampus—a region previously implicated in both future simulation (Addis & Schacter, 2012;  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ) and flexible, creative thinking ( Duff, Kurczek, Rubin, Cohen, & Tranel, 2013 ;  Ellamil et al., 2012 ;  Rubin, Watson, Duff, & Cohen, 2014 ). Given that rostrolateral prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus are both involved in relational processing ( Wendelken & Bunge, 2009 ), it is possible that one’s individual level of cognitive flexibility influences the strategy adopted during the task. Specifically, it may be that individuals with lower cognitive flexibility engage the hippocampus to form more concrete, contextual relations between disparate episodic details while highly flexible individuals link episodic details in a meaningful way by engaging in higher-level autobiographical reasoning, via operations in the rostrolateral prefrontal and temporopolar cortices, to generate a framework in which novel scenarios can occur. 
 Another possibility is that the negative association between left hippocampal activity and AUT flexibility scores is due to highly flexible individuals being able to inhibit the  automatic , hippocampally-mediated retrieval of episodic details (i.e., pattern completion) during the construction of future events, and instead restrict retrieval to only those details consistent with task demands. Indeed, it has been shown that one of the key components to generating novel responses in the AUT is the ability to inhibit the activation of memory details directly associated with a cue, thereby avoiding obvious responses ( Beaty & Silvia, 2012 ). According to Beaty and Silvia, the automatic retrieval of memories and concepts directly related to the AUT cue interferes with the ability to generate novel and creative responses. Thus, with respect to the current study, it could be the case that the automatic retrieval of details directly related to the cues in the recombination paradigm interferes with the generation of novel scenarios. One feature of the current data that supports this proposal is that the relationship between AUT flexibility scores and simulation-related activity in the left HC evident in the behavioural PLS was driven by the  Congruent  condition ( r  = −.577,  p  = .005) when the automatic retrieval of episodic details is likely greater (given the provided detail are related), while this relationship was not significant for the  Incongruent  condition ( r  = −.225,  p  = .314). 
 In addition to a negative relationship with the left hippocampus, AUT flexibility scores were also negatively correlated with bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal cortices and amygdalae. We have previously reported amygdala activation when employing versions of this recombination paradigm ( Addis, Pan, et al., 2009 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ), and have attributed this activity to novelty processing related to unusual detail sets ( van Mulukom et al., 2013 ) . The finding that this novelty signal is negatively correlated with cognitive flexibility suggests that more flexible individuals experience these simulations as less unusual or bizarre. This interpretation is supported by the finding that increasing divergent thinking ability was associated with smaller differences in plausibility ratings between  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions – a result that indicates that more flexible individuals rated the future events they constructed from incongruent details as more similar in plausibility to the future events based on congruent details. 
 While episodic future simulation has generally been regarded as a process subserved by increased activation in the core network/ DMN, we have used multivariate analysis techniques to show that increasing the relational demands associated with future imagination results in reduced recruitment of key DMN nodes, increased activation in areas within the SN and increased functional connectivity between SN and DMN regions. In addition, individual differences in cognitive flexibility covary with engagement of regions in both the FPCN and DMN during episodic simulation, highlighting the complex interaction of these networks during forms of flexible cognition ( Beaty et al., 2015 ,  2016 ;  Ellamil et al., 2012 ;  Spreng et al., 2010 ), including imagination of personal future scenarios. 
 
 
 Supplementary Material 
 
 Supplementary Materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 While divergent thinking is often defined as synonymous with “creativity”, in of itself, it is just one component of the creative thinking faculty, along with convergent thinking, working memory, sustained attention, etc. ( Dietrich, 2004 ). 
 
 
 2 
 In contrast to the multivariate approach where data from all voxels are included in the same analysis, the univariate approach requires multiple statistical analyses be computed (one at each voxel), thus requiring a correction for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
 3 
 Standard seed PLS analyses involves taking voxels’ mean percent signal change values and performing atemporal, across-subject correlations between the seed and the rest of the brain. As we have shown ( Roberts, Hach, Tippett, … Addis, 2016 ), within- and across-subject correlations of BOLD data often produce different findings, meaning that standard seed PLS results are not necessarily informative of the temporal interaction between brain regions. 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by a Marsden Fund grant (12-UOA-254) and Rutherford Discovery Fellowship (RDF-10-UOA-024) awarded to DRA. DLS was supported by NIMH grant MH060941. We thank Inge Strauss and Jae-Min Lee for scoring of Alternate Uses Task responses, and Carolin Wickner for data collation. 
 
 
 References 
 
 
 
 
 Abraham 
 A 
 
 
 Schubotz 
 RI 
 
 
 von Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 Thinking about the future versus the past in personal and non-personal contexts 
 Brain Research 
 2008 
 1233 
 106 
 119 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.084 
 
 18703030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Cheng 
 T 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Hippocampal contributions to the episodic simulation of specific and general future events 
 Hippocampus 
 2010 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20870 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Crawley 
 AP 
 
 
 McAndrews 
 MP 
 
 
 Characterizing spatial and temporal features of autobiographical memory retrieval networks: a partial least squares approach 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 23 
 4 
 1460 
 1471 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.08.007 
 
 15589110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Pan 
 L 
 
 
 Musicaro 
 R 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Divergent thinking and constructing episodic simulations 
 Memory (Hove, England) 
 2016 
 24 
 1 
 89 
 97 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2014.985591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Pan 
 L 
 
 
 Vu 
 M-A 
 
 
 Laiser 
 N 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Constructive episodic simulation of the future and the past: distinct subsystems of a core brain network mediate imagining and remembering 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 11 
 2222 
 2238 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.10.026 
 
 19041331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Age-related neural changes in autobiographical remembering and imagining 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2011 
 49 
 13 
 3656 
 3669 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.09.021 
 
 21945808 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Sacchetti 
 DC 
 
 
 Ally 
 BA 
 
 
 Budson 
 AE 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Episodic simulation of future events is impaired in mild Alzheimer’s disease 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2009 
 47 
 12 
 2660 
 2671 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.05.018 
 
 19497331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Effects of detail and temporal distance of past and future events on the engagement of a common neural network 
 Hippocampus 
 2008 
 18 
 227 
 237 
 18157862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Wong 
 AT 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Remembering the past and imagining the future: common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elaboration 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2007 
 45 
 7 
 1363 
 1377 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.10.016 
 
 17126370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Wong 
 AT 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Age-related changes in the episodic simulation of future events 
 Psychological Science: A Journal of the American Psychological Society / APS 
 2008 
 19 
 1 
 33 
 41 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02043.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andelman 
 F 
 
 
 Hoofien 
 D 
 
 
 Goldberg 
 I 
 
 
 Aizenstein 
 O 
 
 
 Neufeld 
 MY 
 
 
 Bilateral hippocampal lesion and a selective impairment of the ability for mental time travel 
 Neurocase 
 2010 
 16 
 5 
 426 
 435 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/13554791003623318 
 
 20401802 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Smallwood 
 J 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 The default network and self-generated thought: component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 2014 
 1316 
 1 
 29 
 52 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12360 
 
 24502540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Axmacher 
 N 
 
 
 Henseler 
 MM 
 
 
 Jensen 
 O 
 
 
 Weinreich 
 I 
 
 
 Elger 
 CE 
 
 
 Fell 
 J 
 
 
 Cross-frequency coupling supports multi-item working memory in the human hippocampus 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 7 
 3228 
 3233 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0911531107 
 
 20133762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bartlett 
 FC 
 
 
 Remembering 
 1932 
 Retrieved March 22, 2016, from  http://www.cambridge.org/nz/academic/subjects/psychology/cognition/remembering-study-experimental-and-social-psychology-2nd-edition?format=PB&isbn=9780521483568 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bastin 
 J 
 
 
 Deman 
 P 
 
 
 David 
 O 
 
 
 Gueguen 
 M 
 
 
 Benis 
 D 
 
 
 Minotti 
 L 
 
 
 Jerbi 
 K 
 
 
 Direct recordings from human anterior insula reveal its leading role within the error-monitoring network 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2016 
 bhv352 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaty 
 RE 
 
 
 Benedek 
 M 
 
 
 Kaufman 
 SB 
 
 
 Silvia 
 PJ 
 
 
 Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production 
 Scientific Reports 
 2015 
 5 
 10964 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/srep10964 
 
 26084037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaty 
 RE 
 
 
 Benedek 
 M 
 
 
 Silvia 
 PJ 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Creative Cognition and Brain Network Dynamics 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2016 
 20 
 2 
 87 
 95 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.004 
 
 26553223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaty 
 RE 
 
 
 Silvia 
 PJ 
 
 
 Why do ideas get more creative across time? An executive interpretation of the serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks 
 Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 
 2012 
 6 
 4 
 309 
 319 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0029171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beaty 
 RE 
 
 
 Silvia 
 PJ 
 
 
 Nusbaum 
 EC 
 
 
 Jauk 
 E 
 
 
 Benedek 
 M 
 
 
 The roles of associative and executive processes in creative cognition 
 Memory & Cognition 
 2014 
 42 
 7 
 1186 
 1197 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-014-0428-8 
 
 24898118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bellana 
 B 
 
 
 Liu 
 Z 
 
 
 Anderson 
 JA 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Laterality effects in functional connectivity of the angular gyrus during rest and episodic retrieval 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2016 
 80 
 24 
 34 
 26559474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benedek 
 M 
 
 
 Jauk 
 E 
 
 
 Fink 
 A 
 
 
 Koschutnig 
 K 
 
 
 Reishofer 
 G 
 
 
 Ebner 
 F 
 
 
 Neubauer 
 AC 
 
 
 To create or to recall? Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative new ideas 
 NeuroImage 
 2014 
 88 
 125 
 133 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.11.021 
 
 24269573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benedek 
 M 
 
 
 Jauk 
 E 
 
 
 Sommer 
 M 
 
 
 Arendasy 
 M 
 
 
 Neubauer 
 AC 
 
 
 Intelligence, creativity, and cognitive control: The common and differential involvement of executive functions in intelligence and creativity 
 Intelligence 
 2014 
 46 
 73 
 83 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2014.05.007 
 
 25278640 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Specifying the core network supporting episodic simulation and episodic memory by activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2015 
 75 
 450 
 457 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.06.034 
 
 26142352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 The neurobiology of semantic memory 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2011 
 15 
 11 
 527 
 536 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.10.001 
 
 22001867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Desai 
 RH 
 
 
 Graves 
 WW 
 
 
 Conant 
 LL 
 
 
 Where Is the semantic system? A critical review and meta-Analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2009 
 19 
 12 
 2767 
 2796 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp055 
 
 19329570 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bonner 
 MF 
 
 
 Price 
 AR 
 
 
 Where is the anterior temporal lobe and what does it do? 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2013 
 33 
 10 
 4213 
 4215 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0041-13.2013 
 
 23467339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Carroll 
 DC 
 
 
 Self-projection and the brain 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2007 
 11 
 2 
 49 
 57 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.004 
 
 17188554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Common and unique neural activations in autobiographical, episodic, and semantic retrieval 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 19 
 9 
 1520 
 1534 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.9.1520 
 
 17714013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Burianova 
 H 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 A common functional brain network for autobiographical, episodic, and semantic memory retrieval 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 49 
 1 
 865 
 874 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.08.066 
 
 19744566 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cauda 
 F 
 
 
 D’Agata 
 F 
 
 
 Sacco 
 K 
 
 
 Duca 
 S 
 
 
 Geminiani 
 G 
 
 
 Vercelli 
 A 
 
 
 Functional connectivity of the insula in the resting brain 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 55 
 1 
 8 
 23 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.049 
 
 21111053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 Z 
 
 
 Lei 
 X 
 
 
 Ding 
 C 
 
 
 Li 
 H 
 
 
 Chen 
 A 
 
 
 The neural mechanisms of semantic and response conflicts: An fMRI study of practice-related effects in the Stroop task 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 66 
 577 
 584 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.028 
 
 23103691 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Prabhakaran 
 V 
 
 
 Dorfman 
 J 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Z 
 
 
 Kroger 
 JK 
 
 
 Holyoak 
 KJ 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during deasoning 
 NeuroImage 
 2001 
 14 
 5 
 1136 
 1149 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0922 
 
 11697945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 JM 
 
 
 Paivio 
 A 
 
 
 Extensions of the Paivio, Yuille, and Madigan (1968) norms 
 Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers: A Journal of the Psychonomic Society, Inc 
 2004 
 36 
 3 
 371 
 383 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cole 
 MW 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 JR 
 
 
 Power 
 JD 
 
 
 Repovs 
 G 
 
 
 Anticevic 
 A 
 
 
 Braver 
 TS 
 
 
 Multi-task connectivity reveals flexible hubs for adaptive task control 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 2013 
 16 
 9 
 1348 
 1355 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3470 
 
 23892552 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1999 
 8 
 2–3 
 109 
 114 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damasio 
 AR 
 
 
 Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: a systems-level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition 
 Cognition 
 1989 
 33 
 1–2 
 25 
 62 
 2691184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Desikan 
 RS 
 
 
 Ségonne 
 F 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Quinn 
 BT 
 
 
 Dickerson 
 BC 
 
 
 Blacker 
 D 
 
 
 Killiany 
 RJ 
 
 
 An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 31 
 3 
 968 
 980 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021 
 
 16530430 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dietrich 
 A 
 
 
 The cognitive neuroscience of creativity 
 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 
 2004 
 11 
 6 
 1011 
 1026 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196731 
 
 15875970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dubois 
 J 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 Building a science of individual differences from fMRI 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 2016 
 20 
 6 
 425 
 443 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.014 
 
 27138646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duval 
 C 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 de La Sayette 
 V 
 
 
 Belliard 
 S 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 Piolino 
 P 
 
 
 What happens to personal identity when semantic knowledge degrades? A study of the self and autobiographical memory in semantic dementia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 254 
 265 
 
 http://doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.11.019 
 
 22155259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Kurczek 
 J 
 
 
 Rubin 
 R 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Hippocampal amnesia disrupts creative thinking 
 Hippocampus 
 2013 
 23 
 12 
 1143 
 1149 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22208 
 
 24123555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eckert 
 MA 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Walczak 
 A 
 
 
 Ahlstrom 
 J 
 
 
 Denslow 
 S 
 
 
 Horwitz 
 A 
 
 
 Dubno 
 JR 
 
 
 At the heart of the ventral attention system: The right anterior insula 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2009 
 30 
 8 
 2530 
 2541 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20688 
 
 19072895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 The hippocampus and declarative memory: cognitive mechanisms and neural codes 
 Behavioural Brain Research 
 2001 
 127 
 1–2 
 199 
 207 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4328(01)00365-5 
 
 11718892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ellamil 
 M 
 
 
 Dobson 
 C 
 
 
 Beeman 
 M 
 
 
 Christoff 
 K 
 
 
 Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process 
 NeuroImage 
 2012 
 59 
 2 
 1783 
 1794 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.008 
 
 21854855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eslinger 
 PJ 
 
 
 Grattan 
 LM 
 
 
 Frontal lobe and frontal-striatal substrates for different forms of human cognitive flexibility 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1993 
 31 
 1 
 17 
 28 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(93)90077-D 
 
 8437679 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fonov 
 V 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 Botteron 
 K 
 
 
 Almli 
 CR 
 
 
 McKinstry 
 RC 
 
 
 Collins 
 DL 
 
 
 Unbiased average age-appropriate atlases for pediatric studies 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 54 
 1 
 313 
 327 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033 
 
 20656036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gaesser 
 B 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 McLelland 
 VC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Imagining the future: Evidence for a hippocampal contribution to constructive processing 
 Hippocampus 
 2013 
 23 
 12 
 1150 
 1161 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22152 
 
 23749314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geisser 
 S 
 
 
 Greenhouse 
 SW 
 
 
 An extension of Box’s results on the use of the F distribution in multivariate analysis 
 The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 
 1958 
 29 
 3 
 885 
 891 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 DT 
 
 
 Wilson 
 TD 
 
 
 Prospection: Experiencing the future 
 Science 
 2007 
 317 
 5843 
 1351 
 1354 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1144161 
 
 17823345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 SJ 
 
 
 Spengler 
 S 
 
 
 Simons 
 JS 
 
 
 Steele 
 JD 
 
 
 Lawrie 
 SM 
 
 
 Frith 
 CD 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 Functional specialization within rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10): a meta-analysis 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2006 
 18 
 6 
 932 
 948 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.6.932 
 
 16839301 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilhooly 
 KJ 
 
 
 Fioratou 
 E 
 
 
 Anthony 
 SH 
 
 
 Wynn 
 V 
 
 
 Divergent thinking: Strategies and executive involvement in generating novel uses for familiar objects 
 British Journal of Psychology 
 2007 
 98 
 4 
 611 
 625 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8295.2007.tb00467.x 
 
 17535464 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 The contextual association network activates more for remembered than for imagined events 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2016 
 26 
 2 
 611 
 617 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu223 
 
 25260708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graham 
 KS 
 
 
 Lee 
 ACH 
 
 
 Brett 
 M 
 
 
 Patterson 
 K 
 
 
 The neural basis of autobiographical and semantic memory: new evidence from three PET studies 
 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2003 
 3 
 3 
 234 
 254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Green 
 AE 
 
 
 Kraemer 
 DJM 
 
 
 Fugelsang 
 JA 
 
 
 Gray 
 JR 
 
 
 Dunbar 
 KN 
 
 
 Connecting long distance: Semantic distance in analogical reasoning modulates frontopolar cortex activity 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 2010 
 20 
 1 
 70 
 76 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp081 
 
 19383937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guilford 
 JP 
 
 
 The nature of human intelligence 
 1967 
 McGraw-Hill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Medial temporal lobe activity predicts successful relational memory binding 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2008 
 28 
 1 
 116 
 124 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3086-07.2008 
 
 18171929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 The long and the short of it: Relational memory impairments in amnesia, even at short lags 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2006 
 26 
 32 
 8352 
 8359 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5222-05.2006 
 
 16899730 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Kumaran 
 D 
 
 
 Vann 
 SD 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new experiences 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2007 
 104 
 5 
 1726 
 1731 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0610561104 
 
 17229836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hirshhorn 
 M 
 
 
 Grady 
 C 
 
 
 Rosenbaum 
 RS 
 
 
 Winocur 
 G 
 
 
 Moscovitch 
 M 
 
 
 Brain regions involved in the retrieval of spatial and episodic details associated with a familiar environment: An fMRI study 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2012 
 50 
 13 
 3094 
 3106 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.08.008 
 
 22910274 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hutton 
 C 
 
 
 Bork 
 A 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Deichmann 
 R 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 Image distortion correction in fMRI: A quantitative evaluation 
 NeuroImage 
 2002 
 16 
 1 
 217 
 240 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1054 
 
 11969330 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irish 
 M 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Hodges 
 JR 
 
 
 Piguet 
 O 
 
 
 Considering the role of semantic memory in episodic future thinking: evidence from semantic dementia 
 Brain 
 2012 
 135 
 7 
 2178 
 2191 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws119 
 
 22614246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irish 
 M 
 
 
 Piguet 
 O 
 
 
 The pivotal role of semantic memory in remembering the past and imagining the future 
 Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2013 
 7 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klein 
 SB 
 
 
 Loftus 
 J 
 
 
 Kihlstrom 
 JF 
 
 
 Memory and temporal experience: The effects of episodic memory loss on an amnesic patient’s ability to remember the past and imagine the future 
 Social Cognition 
 20 
 5 
 353 
 379 
 n.d. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kosillo 
 P 
 
 
 Smith 
 AT 
 
 
 The role of the human anterior insular cortex in time processing 
 Brain Structure and Function 
 2010 
 214 
 5–6 
 623 
 628 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-010-0267-8 
 
 20512365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kwan 
 D 
 
 
 Carson 
 N 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Rosenbaum 
 RS 
 
 
 Deficits in past remembering extend to future imagining in a case of developmental amnesia 
 Neuropsychologia 
 2010 
 48 
 11 
 3179 
 3186 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.06.011 
 
 20561535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Pobric 
 G 
 
 
 Jefferies 
 E 
 
 
 Conceptual knowledge is underpinned by the temporal pole bilaterally: convergent evidence from rTMS 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991) 
 2009 
 19 
 4 
 832 
 838 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhn131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 Sage 
 K 
 
 
 Jones 
 RW 
 
 
 Mayberry 
 EJ 
 
 
 Coherent concepts are computed in the anterior temporal lobes 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 6 
 2717 
 2722 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907307107 
 
 20133780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linden 
 DE 
 
 
 Prvulovic 
 D 
 
 
 Formisano 
 E 
 
 
 Völlinger 
 M 
 
 
 Zanella 
 FE 
 
 
 Goebel 
 R 
 
 
 Dierks 
 T 
 
 
 The functional neuroanatomy of target detection: an fMRI study of visual and auditory oddball tasks 
 Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991) 
 1999 
 9 
 8 
 815 
 823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mace 
 JH 
 
 
 Involuntary autobiographical memory chains: Implications for autobiographical memory organization 
 Frontiers in Psychiatry 
 2014 
 5 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Creativity and memory: Effects of an episodic-specificity induction on divergent thinking 
 Psychological Science 
 2015 
 26 
 9 
 1461 
 1468 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615591863 
 
 26205963 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Jing 
 HG 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Divergent creative thinking in young and older adults: Extending the effects of an episodic specificity induction 
 Memory & Cognition 
 2016 
 44 
 974 
 988 
 27001170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Episodic specifcity induction impacts activity in a core brain network during construction of imagined future experiences 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
 2016 
 113 
 10696 
 10701 
 
 http://doi/10.1073/pnas.1612278113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 VC 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 A role for the hippocampus in encoding simulations of future events 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2011 
 108 
 13858 
 13863 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1105816108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClelland 
 JL 
 
 
 McNaughton 
 BL 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory 
 Psychological Review 
 1995 
 102 
 3 
 419 
 457 
 7624455 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McIntosh 
 AR 
 
 
 Bookstein 
 FL 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Spatial pattern analysis of functional brain images using partial least squares 
 NeuroImage 
 1996 
 3 
 3 Pt 1 
 143 
 157 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1996.0016 
 
 9345485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function 
 Brain Structure & Function 
 2010 
 214 
 5–6 
 655 
 667 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-010-0262-0 
 
 20512370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meyer 
 GF 
 
 
 Greenlee 
 M 
 
 
 Wuerger 
 S 
 
 
 Interactions between auditory and visual semantic stimulus classes: Evidence for common processing networks for speech and body actions 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2011 
 23 
 9 
 2291 
 2308 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21593 
 
 20954938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Niendam 
 TA 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Ray 
 KL 
 
 
 Dean 
 YM 
 
 
 Glahn 
 DC 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Meta-analytic evidence for a superordinate cognitive control network subserving diverse executive functions 
 Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2012 
 12 
 2 
 241 
 268 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-011-0083-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 O’Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 Modeling hippocampal and neocortical contributions to recognition memory: a complementary-learning-systems approach 
 Psychological Review 
 2003 
 110 
 4 
 611 
 646 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.4.611 
 
 14599236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oldfield 
 RC 
 
 
 The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1971 
 9 
 1 
 97 
 113 
 5146491 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price 
 AR 
 
 
 Bonner 
 MF 
 
 
 Peelle 
 JE 
 
 
 Grossman 
 M 
 
 
 Converging Evidence for the Neuroanatomic Basis of Combinatorial Semantics in the Angular Gyrus 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 2015 
 35 
 7 
 3276 
 3284 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3446-14.2015 
 
 25698762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Race 
 E 
 
 
 Keane 
 MM 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 Losing sight of the future: Impaired semantic prospection following medial temporal lobe lesions 
 Hippocampus 
 2013 
 23 
 4 
 268 
 277 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22084 
 
 23197413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a cognitive task 
 NeuroImage 
 2004 
 23 
 2 
 752 
 763 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.035 
 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RP 
 
 
 Hach 
 S 
 
 
 Tippett 
 LJ 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 The Simpson’s paradox and fMRI: Similarities and differences between functional connectivity measures derived from within-subject and across-subject correlations 
 NeuroImage 
 2016 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.04.028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rothermich 
 K 
 
 
 Kotz 
 SA 
 
 
 Predictions in speech comprehension: fMRI evidence on the meter-semantic interface 
 NeuroImage 
 2013 
 70 
 89 
 100 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.12.013 
 
 23291188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin 
 RD 
 
 
 Watson 
 PD 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 The role of the hippocampus in flexible cognition and social behavior 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 2014 
 8 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00742 
 
 24478674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Adaptive constructive processes and the future of memory 
 The American Psychologist 
 2012 
 67 
 8 
 603 
 613 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0029869 
 
 23163437 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering the past and imagining the future 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 
 2007 
 362 
 1481 
 773 
 786 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2087 
 
 17395575 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain 
 Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 
 2007 
 8 
 9 
 657 
 661 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2213 
 
 17700624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Martin 
 VC 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 The Future of Memory: Remembering, Imagining, and the Brain 
 Neuron 
 2012 
 76 
 4 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Escaping the past: Contributions of the hippocampus to future thinking and imagination 
 The Hippocampus from Cells to Systems: Structure, Connectivity, and Functional Contributions to Memory and Flexible Cognition 
 New York 
 Springer 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory 
 Annual Review of Psychology 
 1998 
 49 
 289 
 318 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seghier 
 ML 
 
 
 The angular gyrus: Multiple functions and multiple subdivisions 
 The Neuroscientist 
 2013 
 19 
 1 
 43 
 61 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/1073858412440596 
 
 22547530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Späti 
 J 
 
 
 Chumbley 
 J 
 
 
 Brakowski 
 J 
 
 
 Dörig 
 N 
 
 
 Grosse Holtforth 
 M 
 
 
 Seifritz 
 E 
 
 
 Spinelli 
 S 
 
 
 Functional lateralization of the anterior insula during feedback processing 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2014 
 35 
 9 
 4428 
 4439 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22484 
 
 24753396 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Grady 
 CL 
 
 
 Patterns of brain activity supporting autobiographical memory, prospection, and theory of mind, and their relationship to the default mode network 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2010 
 22 
 6 
 1112 
 1123 
 19580387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Stevens 
 WD 
 
 
 Chamberlain 
 JP 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition 
 NeuroImage 
 2010 
 53 
 1 
 303 
 317 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.016 
 
 20600998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans 
 Psychological Review 
 1992 
 99 
 2 
 195 
 231 
 1594723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 van der Horst 
 AS 
 
 
 McDuff 
 SGR 
 
 
 Frascino 
 JC 
 
 
 Hopkins 
 RO 
 
 
 Mauldin 
 KN 
 
 
 Role of the hippocampus in remembering the past and imagining the future 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2010 
 107 
 44 
 19044 
 19048 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1014391107 
 
 20956323 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sridharan 
 D 
 
 
 Levitin 
 DJ 
 
 
 Menon 
 V 
 
 
 A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2008 
 105 
 34 
 12569 
 12574 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800005105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staresina 
 BP 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Mind the gap: Binding experiences across space and time in the human hippocampus 
 Neuron 
 2009 
 63 
 2 
 267 
 276 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2009.06.024 
 
 19640484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suddendorf 
 T 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it unique to humans? 
 The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 2007 
 30 
 3 
 299-313-351  http://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525×07001975 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 A taxonomy of prospection: Introducing an organizational framework for future-oriented cognition:  Fig. 1 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 2014 
 111 
 52 
 18414 
 18421 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417144111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Watson 
 JM 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 Neural substrates of envisioning the future 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 2007 
 104 
 2 
 642 
 647 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0610082104 
 
 17202254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takeuchi 
 H 
 
 
 Taki 
 Y 
 
 
 Hashizume 
 H 
 
 
 Sassa 
 Y 
 
 
 Nagase 
 T 
 
 
 Nouchi 
 R 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Failing to deactivate: The association between brain activity during a working memory task and creativity 
 NeuroImage 
 2011 
 55 
 2 
 681 
 687 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.052 
 
 21111830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Stern 
 ER 
 
 
 Gehring 
 WJ 
 
 
 Neural systems for error monitoring recent findings and theoretical perspectives 
 The Neuroscientist 
 2007 
 13 
 2 
 160 
 172 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/1073858406298184 
 
 17404376 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tomer 
 R 
 
 
 Fisher 
 T 
 
 
 Giladi 
 N 
 
 
 Aharon-Peretz 
 J 
 
 
 Dissociation between spontaneous and reactive flexibility in early Parkinson’s disease 
 Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology 
 2002 
 15 
 2 
 106 
 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tregellas 
 JR 
 
 
 Davalos 
 DB 
 
 
 Rojas 
 DC 
 
 
 Effect of task difficulty on the functional anatomy of temporal processing 
 NeuroImage 
 2006 
 32 
 1 
 307 
 315 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.02.036 
 
 16624580 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uddin 
 LQ 
 
 
 Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 2015 
 16 
 1 
 55 
 61 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3857 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van der Heiden 
 L 
 
 
 Liberati 
 G 
 
 
 Sitaram 
 R 
 
 
 Kim 
 S 
 
 
 Jaśkowski 
 P 
 
 
 Raffone 
 A 
 
 
 Veit 
 R 
 
 
 Insula and inferior frontal triangularis activations distinguish between conditioned brain responses using emotional sounds for basic BCI communication 
 Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 
 2014 
 8 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00247 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Mulukom 
 V 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Re-imagining the future: repetition decreases hippocampal involvement in future simulation 
 PloS One 
 2013 
 8 
 7 
 e69596 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0069596 
 
 23936055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Mulukom 
 V 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 The degree of disparateness of event details modulates future simulation construction, plausibility, and recall 
 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 2016 
 69 
 2 
 234 
 242 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1051559 
 
 26052883 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Veen 
 V 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Separating semantic conflict and response conflict in the Stroop task: A functional MRI study 
 NeuroImage 
 2005 
 27 
 3 
 497 
 504 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.04.042 
 
 15964208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viard 
 A 
 
 
 Chételat 
 G 
 
 
 Lebreton 
 K 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Landeau 
 B 
 
 
 de La Sayette 
 V 
 
 
 Piolino 
 P 
 
 
 Mental time travel into the past and the future in healthy aged adults: an fMRI study 
 Brain and Cognition 
 2011 
 75 
 1 
 1 
 9 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2010.10.009 
 
 21093970 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viard 
 A 
 
 
 Piolino 
 P 
 
 
 Belliard 
 S 
 
 
 Sayette 
 V 
 
 
 de 
 L 
 
 
 Desgranges 
 B 
 
 
 Eustache 
 F 
 
 
 Episodic future thinking in semantic dementia: A cognitive and fMRI Study 
 PLOS ONE 
 2014 
 9 
 10 
 e111046 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111046 
 
 25333997 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wakusawa 
 K 
 
 
 Sugiura 
 M 
 
 
 Sassa 
 Y 
 
 
 Jeong 
 H 
 
 
 Yomogida 
 Y 
 
 
 Horie 
 K 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 Adaptive ability to cope with atypical or novel situations involving tool use: an fMRI approach 
 Neuroscience Research 
 2015 
 90 
 72 
 82 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2014.03.008 
 
 24709370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weiler 
 JA 
 
 
 Suchan 
 B 
 
 
 Daum 
 I 
 
 
 Foreseeing the future: occurrence probability of imagined future events modulates hippocampal activation 
 Hippocampus 
 2010 
 20 
 6 
 685 
 690 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20695 
 
 19693779 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Transitive inference: Distinct contributions of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2009 
 22 
 5 
 837 
 847 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Chung 
 D 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex: Domain-general or domain-sensitive? 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2012 
 33 
 8 
 1952 
 1963 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21336 
 
 21834102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wendelken 
 C 
 
 
 Nakhabenko 
 D 
 
 
 Donohue 
 SE 
 
 
 Carter 
 CS 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 “Brain Is to thought as stomach Is to??”: Investigating the role of rostrolateral rrefrontal cortex in relational reasoning 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 2007 
 20 
 4 
 682 
 693 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Westphal 
 AJ 
 
 
 Reggente 
 N 
 
 
 Ito 
 KL 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Shared and distinct contributions of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex to analogical reasoning and episodic memory retrieval 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 2016 
 37 
 3 
 896 
 912 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23074 
 
 26663572 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiebels 
 KW 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RP 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Controlling for behavioural confounds in partial least squares analyses 
 2016 
 Presented at the Organization for Human Brain Mapping 
 Geneva, Switzerland 
 Retrieved from  https://ww5.aievolution.com/hbm1601/index.cfm?do=abs.viewAbs&abs=2251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yeo 
 BTT 
 
 
 Krienen 
 FM 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Sabuncu 
 MR 
 
 
 Lashkari 
 D 
 
 
 Hollinshead 
 M 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 2011 
 106 
 3 
 1125 
 1165 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00338.2011 
 
 21653723 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Average brain scores for future simulation conditions 
 Brain scores are weighted averages of activity across all voxels associated with each task. Error bars are bootstrapped confidence intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Results of the task PLS analysis comparing  Congruent  and  Incongruent  future simulation conditions 
 Images of activation at TRs 2-5, thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.00 (equivalent to p < .001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels, superimposed on a standard anatomical template. Warm saliences correspond to areas associated with the  Congruent  condition and cool saliences with the  Incongruent  task. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Incongruent  >  Congruent  Task PLS results in selected regions of interest 
 Regions showing an  Incongruent  >  Congruent  effect (negative saliences/cool colors) at TR 2:  (A)  Left insula ( xyz  −38 4 14);  (B)  left supramarginal gyrus ( xyz  −64 −26 18);  (C)  left fusiform gyrus ( xyz  −30 −62 −10); and  (D)  right subcallosal cortex ( xyz  6 30 −12). Images are thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.00 (equivalent to  p  < .001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels, and are superimposed on a standard anatomical template. Plots show percent signal change (extracted from peak voxels) for each future simulation condition as a function of TR. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Congruent  >  Incongruent  Task PLS results in selected regions of interest 
 Default mode network regions showing a  Congruent  >  Incongruent  effect (positive saliences/warm colors) at TR 4:  (A)  left cerebellum ( xyz  −38 −54 −22);  (B)  right precuneus ( xyz  12 −62 20);  (C)  left temporal pole ( xyz  −46 16 −26);  (D)  left temporal pole ( xyz  −62 −10 −10);  (E)  left parahippocampal gyrus ( xyz  −28 −24 −20); and  (F)  left hippocampus ( xyz  −32 −24 −12) Images are thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.00 (equivalent to  p  < .001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels, and are superimposed on a standard anatomical template. Plots show percent signal change (extracted from peak voxels) for each future simulation condition as a function of TR. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Within-subject seed PLS results 
 (A)  A significant latent variable indicated that functional connectivity with the left mid-anterior insula seed ( xyz  −38 4 14) differed according to future simulation condition. Regions with negative saliences (cool colors) exhibited an  Incongruent  >  Congruent  effect, and included  (B)  right angular gyrus ( xyz  50 −62 28) and  (C)  left temporal pole ( xyz  −56 8 −30). Regions with positive saliences (warm colors), such as  (D)  left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( xyz  −50 30 26), exhibited a  Congruent  >  Incongruent  effect. Images are thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.00 (equivalent to  p  < .001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels, and are superimposed on a standard anatomical template. Plots show seed-voxel correlations (extracted from peak voxels) for each future simulation condition. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Behavior PLS results 
 This plot depicts the correlation profile for a significant latent variable showing correlations between AUT flexibility scores and brain scores during  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7 
 
 Behavior PLS results 
 Correlations of Alternate Uses Task flexibility score for  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions with BOLD signal from selected regions of interest:  (A)  Left rostrolateral prefrontal cortex ( xyz  −20 62 10);  (B)  right rostrolateral prefrontal cortex ( xyz  24 60 16);  (C)  left hippocampus ( xyz  −30 −28 −16);  (D)  right temporal pole ( xyz  52 4 −18);  (E)  left inferior frontal gyrus ( xyz  −46 38 8);  (F)  right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex ( xyz  46 44 12);  (G)  left amygdala ( xyz  −32 −4 −24);  (H)  right amygdala ( xyz  30 0 −26). Images are thresholded using a bootstrap ratio of ±3.00 (equivalent to  p  < .001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels, and are superimposed on a standard anatomical template. PSC = percent signal change; AUT = Alternate Uses Task flexibility scores; Cong = Congruent condition; Incong = Incongruent condition 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral and Phenomenological Measures for Future Simulation and Control Conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean (SD) 
 
 
 Control Condition 
 Congruent Future Condition 
 Incongruent Future Condition 
 
 
 
 
 Number of trials * 
 44 (3) 
 39 (4) 
 34 (7) 
 
 
 Reaction Time ( s )  * 
 4.01 (0.90) 
 4.93 (1.11) 
 5.12 (1.18) 
 
 
 Likelihood of co-occurrence * † 
 n/a 
 1.00 (0.42) 
 0.42 (0.26) 
 
 
 Temporal distance (years) 
 n/a 
 1.53 (0.44) 
 1.66 (0.63) 
 
 
 Difficulty * † 
 n/a 
 0.93 (0.39) 
 1.24 (0.45) 
 
 
 Similarity to previous events * † 
 n/a 
 0.70 (0.48) 
 0.38 (0.38) 
 
 
 Plausibility * † 
 n/a 
 1.20 (0.46) 
 0.61 (0.31) 
 
 
 Detail * † 
 n/a 
 1.65 (0.34) 
 1.51 (0.37) 
 
 
 Subsequent cued-recall (proportion correct) 
 n/a 
 .60 (.16) 
 .48 (.20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 † 
 Note . Rating scale (0–3) where 0 = low, and 3 = high. 
 
 
 * 
 Significant difference between conditions (p < .001). 
 
 
 SD, standard deviation;  s , seconds. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Task PLS results: Negative and positive saliences associated with the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  future simulation conditions 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 Coordinates (MNI) 
 BSR 
 Cluster size ( k ) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Incongruent > Congruent (TR 2 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     R Subcallosal Cortex 
 6 
 30 
 −12 
 −4.26 
 33 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     L Insula 
 −38 
 4 
 14 
 −6.40 
 53 
 
 
     L Supramarginal Gyrus 
 −64 
 −26 
 18 
 −4.33 
 29 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 48 
 −74 
 −24 
 −4.65 
 213 
 
 
     L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −44 
 −46 
 6 
 −4.36 
 19 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −46 
 −76 
 −26 
 −4.07 
 60 
 
 
     L Frontal Orbital Cortex 
 −20 
 28 
 −20 
 −4.07 
 47 
 
 
     L Fusiform Cortex 
 −30 
 −62 
 −10 
 −4.04 
 10 
 
 
 
 (B) Congruent > Incongruent (TR 2 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     L Paracingulate Gyrus 
 −12 
 42 
 −2 
 4.37 
 16 
 
 
     R Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 56 
 −2 
 −22 
 4.26 
 21 
 
 
     R Precuneus/Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 2 
 −54 
 26 
 3.53 
 11 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     R Insula 
 40 
 14 
 −4 
 3.67 
 24 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     R Occipital Pole 
 28 
 −98 
 −14 
 4.99 
 11 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −18 
 −46 
 −22 
 4.27 
 64 
 
 
     L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −40 
 −60 
 12 
 4.11 
 25 
 
 
 
 (C) Incongruent > Congruent (TR4 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     L Insula 
 −34 
 4 
 14 
 −3.82 
 10 
 
 
 
 (D) Congruent > Incongruent (TR 4 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −38 
 −54 
 −22 
 9.92 
 10841 
 
 
     extends into: R Precuneus 
 12 
 −62 
 20 
 7.07 
 
 
 
                         L Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 −28 
 −24 
 −20 
 4.58 
 
 
 
                         R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 28 
 −24 
 −18 
 4.08 
 
 
 
                         L Hippocampus 
 −32 
 −24 
 −12 
 4.04 
 
 
 
     R Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 58 
 −34 
 −26 
 6.63 
 549 
 
 
     L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −48 
 −24 
 −8 
 6.05 
 876 
 
 
     extends into: L Temporal Pole 
 −62 
 −10 
 −10 
 4.89 
 
 
 
     L Temporal Pole 
 −46 
 16 
 −26 
 5.48 
 152 
 
 
     R Superior Parietal Lobule/Angular Gyrus 
 28 
 −50 
 52 
 4.91 
 391 
 
 
     R Temporal Pole 
 56 
 12 
 −24 
 4.70 
 21 
 
 
     R Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 52 
 −8 
 −20 
 4.43 
 101 
 
 
     R Frontal Pole 
 52 
 36 
 2 
 4.38 
 18 
 
 
     L Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 −46 
 −4 
 −36 
 4.23 
 97 
 
 
     R Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 52 
 2 
 −32 
 3.88 
 31 
 
 
 
 Frontoparietal Control Network 
 
 
 
     L Superior Parietal Lobule 
 −18 
 −62 
 50 
 5.81 
 1300 
 
 
     R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 36 
 26 
 20 
 4.32 
 10 
 
 
     R Middle Frontal Gyrus D 
 54 
 14 
 40 
 4.25 
 248 
 
 
     L Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 −66 
 −56 
 −4 
 3.89 
 62 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     L Supplementary Motor Cortex 
 −4 
 6 
 54 
 5.49 
 396 
 
 
     R Insula D 
 34 
 16 
 10 
 5.08 
 353 
 
 
     R Supramarginal Gyrus 
 42 
 −44 
 22 
 4.97 
 28 
 
 
     L Precentral Gyrus 
 −8 
 −20 
 46 
 4.85 
 55 
 
 
     R Precentral Gyrus 
 58 
 4 
 14 
 4.47 
 197 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 12 
 0 
 76 
 4.43 
 780 
 
 
     R Insula 
 38 
 0 
 6 
 3.78 
 17 
 
 
     R Insula 
 42 
 −10 
 6 
 3.56 
 13 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     L Thalamus 
 −6 
 −18 
 0 
 5.94 
 86 
 
 
     L Precentral Gyrus 
 −42 
 −12 
 54 
 5.35 
 1584 
 
 
     R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 44 
 −68 
 −6 
 4.93 
 107 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −10 
 −46 
 −50 
 4.91 
 183 
 
 
     R Temporal Pole 
 40 
 26 
 −34 
 4.80 
 20 
 
 
     L Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 −20 
 2 
 −34 
 4.64 
 56 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 10 
 −42 
 −42 
 4.57 
 44 
 
 
     L Precentral Gyrus 
 −40 
 6 
 24 
 4.42 
 38 
 
 
     R Thalamus 
 12 
 −18 
 14 
 4.25 
 108 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 20 
 −10 
 72 
 4.13 
 27 
 
 
     R Postcentral Gyrus 
 52 
 −18 
 44 
 4.13 
 33 
 
 
     L Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 −28 
 −84 
 30 
 4.01 
 108 
 
 
     L Occipital Pole 
 −14 
 −96 
 −2 
 3.96 
 172 
 
 
     L Lingual Gyrus 
 −6 
 −40 
 4 
 3.90 
 95 
 
 
     R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 20 
 −6 
 −26 
 3.88 
 19 
 
 
     R Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 48 
 −14 
 −42 
 3.42 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to  p -value <.001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels was applied.  k  = number voxels comprising a cluster. 
 
 
 D 
 Greater than 20% of cluster extended into default mode network. 
 
 
 BSR, bootstrap ratio; L, left; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; R, right. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 ws-seed PLS results: Negative and positive saliences exhibiting functional connectivity with the left insula during the  Congruent  and  Incongruent  conditions 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 Coordinates (MNI) 
 BSR 
 Cluster size ( k ) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Incongruent > Congruent 
 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     L Temporal Pole 
 −56 
 8 
 −30 
 4.13 
 24 
 
 
     R Angular Gyrus 
 50 
 −62 
 28 
 3.76 
 37 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 14 
 −46 
 −16 
 4.00 
 72 
 
 
     R Temporal Pole 
 32 
 6 
 −28 
 3.96 
 17 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −16 
 −62 
 −44 
 3.68 
 14 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 12 
 −68 
 −40 
 3.64 
 24 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −8 
 −68 
 −34 
 3.46 
 19 
 
 
 
 
 (B) Congruent > Incongruent 
 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 2 
 44 
 46 
 −5.28 
 2671 
 
 
     Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 12 
 48 
 −8 
 −3.61 
 22 
 
 
 
 Frontoparietal Control Network 
 
 
 
     L Middle Frontal Gyrus D 
 −50 
 30 
 26 
 −7.02 
 9188 
 
 
     L Frontal Pole 
 −28 
 44 
 −10 
 −6.31 
 252 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     R Precentral Gyrus 
 56 
 8 
 28 
 −3.66 
 22 
 
 
     L Anterior Cingulate Cortex F 
 −2 
 −4 
 34 
 −3.54 
 17 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     R Caudate 
 16 
 16 
 20 
 −6.70 
 141 
 
 
     L Precentral Gyrus 
 −36 
 −2 
 34 
 −5.07 
 32 
 
 
     L Caudate 
 −16 
 10 
 10 
 −5.04 
 751 
 
 
     R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 48 
 −82 
 18 
 −4.31 
 14 
 
 
     L Caudate 
 −16 
 26 
 2 
 −3.89 
 19 
 
 
     B Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 0 
 36 
 −26 
 −3.83 
 13 
 
 
     R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 28 
 −58 
 48 
 −3.77 
 13 
 
 
     L Supramarginal Gyrus 
 −44 
 −34 
 36 
 −3.48 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to  p  <.001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels was applied.  k  = number voxels comprising a cluster. 
 
 
 D 
 Greater than 20% of cluster extended into default mode network. 
 
 
 F 
 Greater than 20% of cluster extended into frontoparietal control network. 
 
 
 B, bilateral; BSR, bootstrap ratio; L, left; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; R, right. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Behavior PLS results: Negative and positive saliences correlated with Alternate Uses Task flexibility scores 
 
 
 
 
 Structure 
 Coordinates (MNI) 
 BSR 
 Cluster size ( k ) 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (A) Positively correlated with AUT flexibility scores (TR 3 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     L Rostrolateral Prefrontal Cortex F 
 −20 
 62 
 10 
 4.64 
 155 
 
 
     R Superior Temporal Gyrus/Temporal Pole 
 52 
 4 
 −18 
 4.46 
 121 
 
 
     R Rostrolateral Prefrontal Cortex F 
 24 
 60 
 16 
 4.24 
 115 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 22 
 18 
 42 
 3.76 
 14 
 
 
 
 Frontoparietal Network 
 
 
 
     R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 24 
 −84 
 48 
 6.60 
 117 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 30 
 −4 
 64 
 4.13 
 33 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     L Paracingulate Gyrus 
 −12 
 10 
 42 
 3.62 
 14 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     L Cerebellum 
 −6 
 −62 
 −26 
 7.59 
 1341 
 
 
     L Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 −20 
 −2 
 50 
 5.73 
 103 
 
 
     L Thalamus 
 −10 
 −34 
 12 
 5.63 
 52 
 
 
     L Superior Parietal Lobule 
 −30 
 −58 
 60 
 5.56 
 35 
 
 
     L Precuneus 
 −30 
 −60 
 6 
 5.47 
 129 
 
 
     R Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 24 
 0 
 48 
 5.23 
 56 
 
 
     L Occipital Pole 
 −38 
 −94 
 0 
 4.67 
 37 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 26 
 −56 
 −24 
 4.60 
 77 
 
 
     R Intracalcarine Cortex 
 30 
 −60 
 2 
 4.57 
 136 
 
 
     R Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
 56 
 −26 
 −30 
 4.43 
 10 
 
 
     R Lateral Occipital Cortex 
 36 
 −82 
 0 
 4.26 
 54 
 
 
     R Postcentral Gyrus 
 54 
 −12 
 38 
 3.82 
 27 
 
 
     R Caudate 
 16 
 12 
 18 
 3.58 
 16 
 
 
     L Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 −18 
 −32 
 −16 
 3.51 
 18 
 
 
     R Cerebellum 
 14 
 −36 
 −20 
 3.35 
 12 
 
 
 
 (B) Negatively correlated with AUT flexibility scores (TR 3 ) 
 
 
 
 
 Default Mode Network 
 
 
 
     L Hippocampus 
 −30 
 −28 
 −16 
 −5.80 
 17 
 
 
 
 Frontoparietal Network 
 
 
 
     L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 −50 
 14 
 44 
 −4.45 
 36 
 
 
     L Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 −46 
 38 
 8 
 −4.41 
 21 
 
 
     R Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 46 
 44 
 12 
 −3.95 
 33 
 
 
 
 Salience Network 
 
 
 
     L Insula 
 −40 
 4 
 −8 
 −3.99 
 14 
 
 
 
 Other Regions 
 
 
 
     R Postcentral Gyrus 
 56 
 −16 
 54 
 −5.65 
 28 
 
 
     L Amygdala 
 −32 
 −4 
 −24 
 −5.33 
 18 
 
 
     R Amygdala 
 30 
 0 
 −26 
 −3.90 
 10 
 
 
     R Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 16 
 2 
 −24 
 −3.89 
 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note . Bootstrap ratios were greater than ±3.00 (roughly equivalent to a  p -value of <.001) and an extent threshold of 10 voxels was applied.  k  = number voxels comprising a cluster. 
 
 
 F 
 Greater than 20% of cluster extended into frontoparietal control network. 
 
 
 AUT, Alternate Uses Task; BSR, bootstrap ratio; L, left; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; R, right. 
 
 
 
 
