
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0045503 
 1920 
 Brain Res 
 Brain Res. 
 
 Brain research 
 
 0006-8993 
 1872-6240 
 
 
 28073651 
 5867277 
 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.01.007 
 NIHMS938777 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 I  know  I've seen you before: Distinguishing recent-single-exposure-based familiarity from pre-existing familiarity 
 
 
 
 
 Gimbel 
 Sarah I. 
 
 a 
 1 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 James B. 
 
 b 
 
 
 
 Maril 
 Anat 
 
 a 
 
 
 
 a Departments of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, The Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel, 91905 
 
 b Departments of Neurosciences and Radiology, University of California, San Diego, 8950 Villa La Jolla Drive, Suite C212, La Jolla, California, USA, 92037 
 
 Corresponding author: Anat Maril, Departments of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, The Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel, 91905, Tel: +972 2 5880237, Fax: +972 2 5880237,  anat.maril@mail.huji.ac.il 
 
 1 
 Present Address (S.I. Gimbel): Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, 3620A McClintock Ave, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 90089 
 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 2018 
 
 
 07 
 1 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 3 
 2017 
 
 
 26 
 3 
 2018 
 
 1658 
 11 
 24 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 This study examines how individuals differentiate recent-single-exposure-based familiarity from pre-existing familiarity. If these are two distinct cognitive processes, are they supported by the same neural bases? This study examines how recent-single-exposure-based familiarity and multiple-previous-exposure-based familiarity are supported and represented in the brain using functional MRI. In a novel approach, we first behaviorally show that subjects can divide retrieval of items in pre-existing memory into judgments of recollection and familiarity. Then, using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examine the differences in blood oxygen level dependent activity and regional connectivity during judgments of recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity. Judgments of these two types of familiarity showed distinct regions of activation in a whole-brain analysis, in medial temporal lobe (MTL) substructures, and in MTL substructure functional-correlations with other brain regions. Specifically, within the MTL, perirhinal cortex showed increased activation during recent-single-exposure-based familiarity while parahippocampal cortex showed increased activation during judgments of pre-existing familiarity. We find that recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity are represented as distinct neural processes in the brain; this is supported by differing patterns of brain activation and regional correlations. This spatially distinct regional brain involvement suggests that the two separate experiences of familiarity, recent-exposure-based familiarity and pre-existing familiarity, may be cognitively distinct. 
 
 
 familiarity 
 recollection 
 medial temporal lobe 
 functional connectivity 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 While riding the bus to work, a woman looks up and sees a man who appears familiar to her. She racks her brain for information about who this person is and how she knows him. Even though she is absolutely sure that she knows this man, she cannot figure out how. This classic example is known as the “butcher on the bus” phenomenon ( Mandler, 1980 ). Had the woman seen this man behind the meat counter at the supermarket, she would have had no problem placing him as her butcher. However, in the absence of this context and additional information, the woman's recognition of the butcher was expressed merely as a sense of familiarity. The problem of recognizing the butcher becomes more complicated with this recent single exposure on the bus. If the woman was to see the same familiar-looking man on the bus the next day, how would she be able to distinguish if the man was familiar from her pre-existing familiarity (the fact that he's the butcher and she has seen him many times throughout her life) or from her single recent exposure to him on the bus the day before? 
 Taking this situation one step further, the question becomes, is recent-single-exposure-based familiarity cognitively equivalent to (and supported by the same neural bases as) pre-existing familiarity (familiarity due to knowledge accumulated throughout life)? Stimuli, such as frequently seen faces or common words, have a high pre-existing familiarity; with additional exposure, they also have a recent-single-exposure-based familiarity. How are these two types of familiarity distinguished? Given that an individual can make a temporally or spatially distinct familiarity judgment (by identifying with a ‘know’ response that a high-frequency word was on a study list), how is that feeling of familiarity placed into the context of time and place?  Jacoby and Dallas (1981)  propose a process-based familiarity where the fluency of processing the recently-exposed item is what constitutes the basis for a familiarity judgment. Coane and colleagues ( Coane et al., 2011 ) propose a separation of familiarity into baseline levels of pre-existing familiarity for an item and a relative change in familiarity for an item based on recent exposure. They find these two types of familiarity to be behaviorally distinct, representing a fast baseline process and a ‘change detector’ mechanism, which calculates the recent change in relative familiarity. These results indicate that there is a difference in pre-existing familiarity and relative change in familiarity based on recent exposure, but cannot speak to how these two types of familiarity are distinguished. To further this investigation, Bridger and colleagues ( Bridger et al., 2014 ) used ERP data to provide evidence of two topologically distinct familiarity signals that show temporal overlap. They find differences in absolute familiarity in more posteriorly distributed regions while they find a relative familiarity index in more midfrontally distributed regions. These findings support the existence of two cognitively distinct familiarity mechanisms in the brain. The purpose of our research is to determine if recent-single-exposure-based familiarity and pre-existing familiarity recruit similar or different regions and networks of the brain, in order to infer if these two types of familiarity, recently shown to exist, are cognitively distinct. 
 In the current study we used functional MRI to examine if pre-existing familiarity and recent-single-exposure-based familiarity are neurally distinguishable. This distinction is different than that described by Coane and colleagues, whose study led to familiarity findings based on exposure frequency, and Bridger and colleagues, whose study led to familiarity findings based on ERP data. The current study builds upon this work, since if pre-existing and recent-single-exposure-based familiarity elicit distinct neural components, then this may provide a mechanism for an individual's awareness of differences, as supported by an ability to distinguish between the two when making a recent-single-exposure-based familiarity judgment on a high frequency item. Under the suggestion that different cognitive processes rely on different brain regions/networks, this ‘composition of familiarity’ question could be examined using brain imaging. Testing this hypothesis required the examination of how pre-existing familiarity is represented in terms of brain function. Practically, this meant having participants experience well-known items for which they had no additional information other than the sense of familiarity. Brain activity associated with such an experience could then be compared to the brain activity related to recent-single-exposure-based familiarity, where the reported familiarity was only based on recent exposure and had no component of pre-existing familiarity. 
 To accomplish this goal, we scanned subjects during a task of pre-existing familiarity and a task of recent-single-exposure-based familiarity to compare regions involved in these processes. To do this, we exposed subjects to famous faces and used a modified ‘remember-know’ paradigm ( Tulving, 1989 ) to isolate familiarity judgments. In a second portion of the experiment, subjects made a traditional remember/know judgment on recently-exposed faces. Traditionally in the remember-know paradigm, a ‘remember’ judgment is a memory recognition accompanied by some sort of additional information about the encoding event. A ‘know’ judgment is a memory recognition without conscious recollection of anything specific about its occurrence. In both portions of the study we were only interested in the judgments of familiarity. In order to separate familiarity judgments in each of these memory domains, subjects were given the option of identifying each stimulus as recollected, familiar, or new. 
 In the recent-single-exposure task, subjects were exposed to new faces before the scan. During scanning, these faces plus novel faces were presented, and the subject made a ‘remember,’ ‘know,’ or ‘new’ judgment on each face. In the pre-existing (multiple-previous-exposure) memory task, during scanning subjects were exposed to faces that they might recognize from everyday life (famous faces), and were asked to make a ‘remember,’ ‘know,’ or ‘new’ judgment on each face. Note that subjects were making both recollection and familiarity judgments in both the recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing memory tasks. However, the balanced comparison, which is the comparison of interest, is between the pre-existing and recent-single-exposure-based familiarity judgments. The ‘recollection’ trials were not the focus of this study, given the innate differences in the kinds of additional information retrieved during these two types of recollection. Thus, subjects' judgments of recollection and familiarity were used in this study to isolate familiarity judgments and to assure that differences found between recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity would not be attributable to possible differences between these two types of recollection. 
 This study seeks to compare neural activations associated with recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity memory judgments. Given the copious amount of work on recent-single-exposure-based familiarity (referred to in the literature as episodic familiarity), this phenomenon is relatively well understood ( Diana et al., 2007 ;  Montaldi and Mayes, 2010 ;  Vilberg and Rugg, 2007 ;  Yonelinas, 2002 ). However, the relationship between this kind of familiarity and familiarity due to multiple exposures to an item throughout life is not well understood. Recent behavioral ( Coane et al., 2011 ) and ERP work ( Bridger et al., 2014 ) has suggested that there is a distinction between these two types of familiarity, but how and why they are distinct and how they are distinguished at the neural level are not yet understood. In this study, we examine the neural activity accompanying these two types of familiarity. If the neural bases of newly-acquired recent-single-exposure-based familiarity and pre-existing familiarity due to multiple previous exposures throughout life differ from one another, this might suggest that these two processes may be inherently different in nature. Specifically, if there is a ‘reversed association’ where regions are differentially activated by memory conditions and there is a crossover interaction between regions and memory type, it can be assumed that these are two separate memory processes in the brain ( Henson, 2006 ). This difference would obviate the need for an additional cognitive mechanism to distinguish an increment of recent-single-exposure-based familiarity from pre-existing familiarity. Based on previous work related to familiarity, this experiment tests the hypotheses: There are two different familiarity processes in the brain, as evidenced by the separation of the regions and networks of activity responsible for two distinct types of familiarity judgments. If this hypothesis is not supported by our data and the two types of familiarity do not differ in their brain activation, this might suggest that there is a change detector mechanism in the brain, allowing for a difference related to the incremental increase in pre-existing familiarity based on an additional exposure. 
 
 
 2. Results 
 
 2.1 Experiment 1 - Behavioral validation of multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity judgments 
 In order to determine the ability of subjects to recognize a pre-experimentally familiar famous face, a behavioral experiment was conducted where subjects verbally responded to a face with a remember/know judgment (remember, know, or new) and what additional information they recalled about each face ( Table 1 ). For instance, a typical ‘R’ response would be something like “I know who that person is, his name is Bill Clinton.” A typical ‘K’ response would be something like “I've seen that person before, but I don't know anything about her.” Subjects were asked to verbally report the first piece of additional information that came to mind. Testing revealed sufficient R and K responses (49 ± 3% and 14 ± 2% of 377 items, respectively) to allow confidence in moving this task from a behavioral experiment to functional MRI. Of the 2,588 responses where subjects also had additional information about the person, nearly all (2,587) reported additional semantic information. This behavioral test served to validate that subjects could experience multiple-previous-exposures (MPE)-based familiarity and identify a famous face as previously seen with no recollection of any additional information about that person. 
 
 
 2.2 Experiment 2 
 
 2.2.1 MRI analysis of recent-single-exposure-based and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity and recollection: Behavioral Results 
 Prior to scanning, subjects studied non-famous faces presented with a name and made a yes/no judgment about if the name “matched” the face ( Figure 1 , left). The percentage of later recent-single-exposure (RSE)_R, RSE_K, and RSE_N responses was not different based on if the subject had initially identified the faces as matching or not matching the presented name (all  t  < .1, all  p  > 0.90). 
 For each face presented during scanning, subjects were asked to respond by making an R, K, or N judgment. An average of nine trials in the RSE runs and nine trials in the MPE runs did not receive a response, and were excluded from further analysis. Percentage of responses and reaction time were similar for R, K, and N judgments in the RSE and MPE memory conditions. During the RSE memory retrieval runs, 23 ± 4% of all responses were RSE_R, 36 ± 3% were RSE_K, and 38 ± 3% were RSE_N. During the MPE memory retrieval runs, 33 ± 4% of all responses were MPE_R, 30 ± 4% were MPE_K, and 34 ± 3% were MPE_N. For a detailed separation of these responses into R and K hits, misses, correct rejections, and false alarms, please see  Table 2 . In both the RSE and the MPE tasks, participants were able to distinguish between old and new items in their K responses, as evident by the corrected familiarity estimate (d′) ( Yonelinas, Kroll, Dobbins, Lazzara, & Knight, 1998 ), which significantly differed from zero in both tasks (RSE: d′ = 0.38, p < 0.001; MPE: d′ = 0.58, p < 0.001). These d′ values differed from each other (t (12)  = 0.033), driven by participants making fewer false alarm K judgments on MPE trials than RSE trials. In a two-factor repeated measures ANOVA, there was no main effect of memory type (RSE/MPE) or response type (R/K/N). In a two-factor repeated measures ANOVA for response time, there was a main effect of both memory type (F (1,12)  = 7.895,  p  < .05) and response type (F (1,12)  = 19.389,  p  < .001). Post hoc pairwise comparisons (corrected for multiple comparisons) revealed that during RSE memory retrieval, RSE_R trials and RSE_N trials were faster than RSE_K trials ( p  = .009, .044 respectively). During MPE memory trials, MPE_R trials were faster than MPE_K trials ( p  < .001). 
 
 
 2.2.2 Recent-single-exposure- and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity in cortex: Imaging Results 
 RSE_K and RSE_N trials were examined within RSE runs and MPE_K and MPE_N trials were examined within MPE runs. Differences in activation in each memory condition (deltas) were then compared across the RSE and MPE memory conditions in order to examine how familiarity is supported in whole-brain cortical structures and in MTL sub-structures. ‘Miss’ trials were not included in further analysis; while RSE stimuli that had been studied could receive an incorrect RSE_N response (miss), a parallel condition does not exist in the MPE task. If a stimulus was given an MPE_N response, there is no way to confirm that this face had or had not been previously experienced, and thus all N responses are classified as correct rejections. (Note that it is likely not possible for subjects to distinguish between a truly novel face and a previously un-encountered famous face. A face given a novel judgment cannot carry any information that would help experimenters to classify the response as a correct rejection or a miss.) In both the RSE and MPE tasks, N correct rejection responses (RSE_N and MPE_N) are used for comparison with familiar hits. 
 An initial investigation into regions of differential activation between RSE and MPE familiarity (defined as RSE_K versus RSE_N and MPE_K versus MPE_N judgments) revealed distinct regions of involvement ( Figure 2 A,B ;  Table 3 ). RSE_K responses, when compared with RSE_N responses, were associated with activation in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), left middle frontal cortex, and left parietal cortex ( Figure 2A ). MPE_K responses, when compared with MPE_N responses, had regions of activation in left occipital lobe, right middle frontal gyrus, and midline cingulate gyrus ( Figure 2B ). 
 
 
 2.2.3 Recent-single-exposure- and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity in MTL sub-regions 
 Since MTL structures have been implicated in previous studies of episodic memory (for review, see  Montaldi and Mayes, 2010 ), we limited the focus of the next analysis to an anatomically-defined MTL. Focusing only on the MTL, we collapse across familiarity judgments (K) to explore regions involved in familiarity and the inter-regional correlation, or putative network connectivity with other brain structures (see below). Once regions active during K judgments had been identified, beta values were extracted to determine the individual involvement of RSE and MPE judgments. There were two regions in the MTL where activity related to K judgments was different from activity related to N judgments ( p  < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons): right perirhinal cortex and right parahippocampal cortex ( Figure 3 ;  Table 3B , top). There were no regions more active for N judgments than K judgments. Further examination (extraction of voxel-wise beta values averaged across the cluster) showed that in the perirhinal cortex, this difference was driven by the RSE_K - RSE_N delta (RSE_K - RSE_N > MPE_K - MPE_N: two-tailed  t (12)  = 2.21,  p  < .05; RSE_K - RSE_N > 0: two-tailed  t (12)  = 1.94,  p  < .05). While the difference between RSE_K and RSE_N judgments was greater than zero in the perirhinal cortex, the difference between MPE_K and MPE_N judgments drove the parahippocampal cortex result ( Figure 3 ; MPE_K - MPE_N > RSE_K -RSE_N: two-tailed  t (12)  = 2.206,  p  < .05; MPE_K - MPE_N > 0: two-tailed  t (12)  = 2.446,  p  < .05). Additionally, the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices showed an interaction with RSE/MPE memory type ( F (1,12)  = 6.78;  p  < .05). These results showed a ‘reversed association’ necessary to constitute a qualitative difference in RSE_K - RSE_N and MPE_K - MPE_N in these MTL subregions ( Henson, 2006 ); each region was differentially activated by memory condition and there was a crossover interaction between region and RSE/MPE memory. 
 
 
 2.2.4 Recent-single-exposure- and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity: whole-brain networks 
 Given the differences in whole-brain and MTL activation maps for RSE-based and MPE-based familiarity, we were interested in examining cortical regions that correlate with activity in the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortex clusters revealed in the K-N contrast. Cortical regions correlated with perirhinal cortex differed for RSE_K - RSE_N ( Figure 4A , green) and MPE_K - MPE_N judgments ( Figure 4A , purple) (see  Table 4  for a list of functionally-correlated regions). This difference was also seen in the functional correlation with parahipppocampal cortex, where cortical correlations for RSE_K - RSE_N judgments ( Figure 4B , green) differed from correlated regions during MPE_K - MPE_N judgments ( Figure 4B , purple). Regions in left dlPFC and bilateral superior parietal cortex were functionally correlated with both the perirhinal cortex and parahippocampal cortex during judgments of RSE_K ( Figure 4 , green). Bilateral inferior medial frontal cortex was functionally correlated with both the perirhinal cortex and parahippocampal cortex during judgments of MPE_K ( Figure 4 , purple). 
 
 
 2.2.5 Recent-single-exposure and multiple-previous-exposures: Recollection 
 In order to determine if differences found between RSE-based and MPE-based familiarity were specific to familiarity and not representative of general RSE and MPE memory retrieval, the same analyses were performed on recollection trials in cortex and medial temporal lobe ( Figure 5 ;  Table 5 ). In contrast to the examination of RSE_K and MPE_K, this analysis showed a high degree of overlap between cortical activity related to RSE_R and MPE_R, compared to RSE_K and MPE_K ( Figure 5A,B ). 
 To ensure that RSE recollection showed a similar pattern to previous works relating to episodic memory, we also examined MTL activations related to recollection judgments. Within the anatomically defined medial temporal lobe, recollection judgments showed an area of significant activation in the right PHC where R > K regardless of the memory task ( Table 5B ). There was increased activation in this cluster for RSE_R relative to RSE_K ( Figure 5E , green; two-tailed  t (12)  = 9.26,  p  < .001). Similarly, MPE_R judgments also resulted in increased activation relative to MPE_K judgments ( Figure 5E , purple; two-tailed  t (12)  = 9.12,  p  < .001). Unlike for familiarity judgments, there were no differences in the deltas for RSE_R - RSE_K and MPE_R - MPE_K in the MTL (two-tailed  t (12)  = 1.59,  p  = .14). As a second check the same analysis was used to examine regions active across RSE and MPE memory (R-N). Four MTL subregions of activity were found ( Table 5B ) including two hippocampal clusters, but the R-N delta was not different between RSE and MPE memory judgments (RSE_R - RSE_N vs. MPE_R - MPE_N) in any of the regions (two-tailed  t (12)  = 1.82, 1.73, 1.60, 1.43, all  p  > .1, not displayed). 
 
 
 
 
 3. Discussion 
 Given that familiarity-related activity differs for RSE and MPE memory conditions in non-MTL cortical structures, MTL sub-structures, and MTL functional-correlation with other cortical regions, we suggest that recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity may be treated as two separate entities in the brain. We find that regions of non-MTL cortex as well as perirhinal and parahippocampal cortex show differing activity related to RSE-based and MPE-based familiarity; it is only in the presence of retrieval of additional information that activations associated with RSE and MPE memory overlap. To the extent that a brain dissociation is indicative of a cognitive dissociation, the accumulation of evidence we obtained lends support to the notion that recent-single-exposure-based familiarity may be different in nature than pre-existing familiarity. 
 
 3.1 Models of MTL Contributions to Recollection and Familiarity 
 The existing models of MTL contributions to recollection/familiarity have focused on episodic memory, partially due to experimental paradigm constraints. Recent work has shown that semantic memory can be separated into recollection and familiarity as well ( Waidergoren et al., 2012 ). The current study uses a novel approach to show a neural difference between recent-single-exposure-based and multiple-previous-exposure-based familiarity, and can be used to expand previous work. There are many models of how recollection and familiarity-based memories are supported in the brain, and the current study adds important information to the conversation about these models. The binding of item and context (BIC) model implicates hippocampus for recollection but not familiarity ( Diana et al., 2007 ). In this model, the perirhinal cortex supports item familiarity and the parahippocampal cortex supports context recollection. The convergence, recollection, and familiarity theory differs slightly from the BIC model; perirhinal cortex supports item familiarity and parahippocampal cortex supports context familiarity but neither supports recollection ( Montaldi & Mayes, 2010 ). A third model separates the function of these regions based on memory-strength ( Squire, Wixted, & Clark, 2007 ). Our study fits the predictions of the BIC model where posterior parahippocampal cortex was active for recent-single-exposure-based recollection but not familiarity while perirhinal cortex was active for recent-single-exposure-based familiarity but not recollection. 
 Previous studies of patients with MTL damage are consistent with the idea that familiarity is supported by the parahippocampal regions ( Brown & Aggleton, 2001 ;  Eichenbaum, 2006 ), although a distinction between the functions of perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices has not been found ( Eichenbaum, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007 ). In a study of patients with hippocampal and parahippocampal lesions,  Yonelinas et al. (2002)  find that patients with damage to either the anterior or posterior medial temporal lobe substructures show impairments in familiarity, suggesting that both of these regions (perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices) are critical for familiarity. In a recent study, it was shown that a patient with damage localized to the left perirhinal cortex exhibited deficits in familiarity judgments, in memory conditions similar to both RSE and MPE memory ( Bowles et al., 2016 ). This study is in agreement with our finding that the perirhinal cortex supports familiarity in the RSE condition, even though they additionally find that it also supports familiarity in the MPE condition, while we find that MPE familiarity is supported in the parahippocampal cortex. Our findings of perirhinal involvement in recent-single-exposure-based familiarity and parahippocampal involvement in pre-existing familiarity fit with the view derived from studies of patients with MTL damage. Additionally, previous work in rats has identified unique populations of neurons in perirhinal cortex that respond separately to familiarity and recency ( Zhu et al., 1995 ). In the current study, increased activity is observed in this region for recent-single-exposure-based familiarity, which has both a familiar and a recent component. 
 To extend the prediction of the BIC model, we showed that multiple-previous-exposure-based recollection also shows parahippocampal activation when compared to familiarity. We were surprised, however, to find increased activation in parahippocampus, but not perirhinal cortex, for pre-existing familiarity. The literature suggests that perirhinal cortex encodes items in a manner that supports familiarity ( Aggleton & Brown, 1999 ;  Diana et al., 2007 ;  Norman & O'Reilly, 2003 ;  Yonelinas, Otten, Shaw, & Rugg, 2005 ); even though this work has been specific to episodic familiarity, we had not ruled out the idea that pre-existing familiarity might rely on similar structures. Given that our own result is consistent with the literature showing that this region supports RSE familiarity (akin to episodic familiarity), we expected to also see activity in the perirhinal cortex related to MPE familiarity. We acknowledge that traditionally, familiarity effects in the perirhinal cortex are due to increased activity for novelty compared to familiarity. In this study, we see an increase in activity for familiarity compared to novelty. Recently, there has been work suggesting that prior occurrence of faces elicits patterns of perirhinal cortex activity consisting of voxels with both decreases and increases in signal, and that this activity organization can be shaped by the stimulus category to which the stimuli belong ( Martin et al., 2016 ). As this study was also done using faces, this study provides some evidence that increased perirhinal activity could be due to familiarity or novelty, depending on the circumstances. While it has been known that the parahippocampal cortex subserves episodic memory ( Brewer, Zhao, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1998 ;  Davachi, Mitchell, & Wagner, 2003 ;  Gabrieli, Brewer, Desmond, & Glover, 1997 ;  Ranganath et al., 2004 ;  Schacter & Wagner, 1999 ;  Squire, Stark, & Clark, 2004 ;  Wagner, 1998 ) and semantic memory for context ( Bar and Aminoff, 2003 ;  Bar et al., 2008 ), this study extends these findings to show that parahippocampal cortex is also involved in judgments of pre-existing familiarity. Given these findings, it is possible that the parahippocampus is active not only when context is successfully retrieved (as in our RSE_R and MPE_R conditions), but also when there is some sense that context is present (MPE_K). In order for a subject to make a judgment that a face has pre-existing familiarity, there must be some pre-established contextual trace informing this decision. This idea links to previous work on available versus accessible memory traces, where some memories may be stored in the brain, but inaccessible in an ever-growing network of memories and associations ( Tulving and Pearlstone, 1966 ). While the retrieval of context results in parahippocampal activity, it is possible that context retrieval is not necessary for eliciting parahippocampal activity. Rather, when there is inherent knowledge that sought-for information exists in the brain and motivation to search for this additional information, parahippocampus is active whether the search itself is successful or unsuccessful. 
 
 
 3.2 MTL functional correlations for recent-single-exposure-based- and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity 
 As observed in  Figure 5 , the patterns of functional correlations for RSE_K and MPE_K are similar for both MTL-subregion seeds. The activation resulting from the contrast of MPE_K - MPE_N was not significantly different from zero in the perirhinal cortex, nor for RSE_K - RSE_N in the parahippocampal cortex ( Figure 4A ); however, the delta for RSE_K-related activity differed from the delta for MPE_K-related activity in both regions. Therefore, to compare networks that modulate with familiarity-sensitive MTL regions, perirhinal and parahippocampal regions were used as seed regions for the functional connectivity analysis. In their review of the functional differentiation of recollection/familiarity in the MTL,  Montaldi & Mayes (2010)  suggest that functional-correlations with MTL subregions should be examined to determine whether a specific structure's correlations change as a function of the type of memory. Correlations with perirhinal cortex and parahippocampal cortex seeds show that recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity differ in their patterns of correlation from two different MTL substructures (even at  p  = .1 there is no overlap in correlated regions). 
 During MPE_K judgments, activity in perirhinal and parahippocampal cortex is functionally correlated with ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), which has been known to support semantic aspects of a memory ( Ishai et al., 2002 ;  Leveroni et al., 2000 ); its coupling with MTL structures has been associated with the emergence of conceptual knowledge and schema built up around a given item ( Frankland and Bontempi, 2006 ;  Kumaran et al., 2009 ;  Takashima et al., 2006 ;  Takehara-Nishiuchi and McNaughton, 2008 ;  van Kesteren et al., 2010 ). The schema literature does not yet address which aspects of memory retrieval are reliant on a well-developed schema and vmPFC-MTL correlations. Our results show that a judgment of pre-existing familiarity is sufficient to activate vmPFC, even if an attempt to access additional information in the schema is unsuccessful. Additionally, during judgments of multiple-previous-exposure-based familiarity there were correlations between MTL subregions and the fusiform cortex, occipital regions, inferior parietal lobule, and lateral prefrontal cortex. Each of these regions is known to be involved during visual object priming, with activity modulated with repeated processing of objects ( Buckner et al., 1998 ;  Henson et al., 2000 ;  Wagner et al., 2008 ;  Wiggs and Martin, 1998 ). The fusiform and occipital cortices are involved in semantic processing ( Buckner et al., 1998 ;  Henson et al., 2000 ;  Martin and Chao, 2001 ;  Thompson-Schill et al., 1999 ) while prefrontal cortex is thought to play a role in the controlled retrieval of semantic information ( Dapretto and Bookheimer, 1999 ;  Fiez, 1997 ;  Martin and Chao, 2001 ;  Poldrack et al., 1999 ;  Wagner et al., 2000 ). The known roles of these regions in relation to semantic memory can help us to understand their functional connectivity to MTL substructures during MPE familiarity. 
 Recent-single-exposure-based familiarity judgments led to correlations with dlPFC and superior parietal cortex (regions traditionally implicated in episodic memory retrieval). Activity in dlPFC, superior parietal cortex, and parahippocampal gyrus is sometimes related to the extra information held in mind during the retrieval of an item ( Cabeza and Nyberg, 2000 ;  Daselaar et al., 2008 ;  Rypma and D'Esposito, 1999 ), however, there are extensive other processes attributed to these regions. Both the activation and correlated activity observed in the dlPFC during recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity judgments, each compared to judgments of novelty, could be attributed to failed search for additional details necessary to make a recollection judgment. Additional analysis of the cognitive components at play during this retrieval could help explain the recruitment of these regions during judgments of familiarity. Importantly, pre-existing and recent-single-exposure-based familiarity have different and non-overlapping regions of functional-correlation with perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices, suggesting that these two memory processes recruit different networks. 
 
 
 3.3 Conclusions 
 Studies of memory have long taken into account varying levels of pre-existing familiarity for items used in an episodic test. In fact, differences in pre-experiment exposure to high- and low-frequency words helps to explain how these words are episodically remembered or forgotten ( Reder et al., 2000 ). As described above, a recent study examining the contribution of familiarity to recognition of high- and low-frequency words separated familiarity into a baseline level of pre-experimental familiarity for an item and a relative change in familiarity based on new episodic exposure ( Coane et al., 2011 ). Using manipulations in the time subjects have to respond in an item recognition test, they found that these two types of familiarity are behaviorally distinct, representing both a fast baseline familiarity process and a fast computation of a relative change in familiarity (change detector mechanism). Using a different paradigm of famous and studied non-famous faces, our results also suggest two different familiarity processes, although we suggest an alternative to the change detector hypothesis. Our results indicate the existence of regional segregation of pre-existing familiarity signals from recent-single-exposure-based familiarity signals in the brain. At the phenomenological level these two types of familiarity may seem similar since each includes memory for an item without diagnostic information about that item. However, our data suggest that the similarity ends here; recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity are supported by two separate sets of regions and networks in the brain, and may be two separate cognitive constructs. This idea can be put in parallel with the similarity of the subjective experience accompanying these two types of familiarity. While some work has suggested that individuals are able to subjectively distinguish between episodic and semantic familiarity ( Williams et al., 2013 ) and our behavioral study indicates the same, a more in depth examination of the interaction between this subjective feeling and the difference in nature between the neural patterns of MPE and RSE based familiarity is warranted. 
 We note that the data presented here are also consistent with an interpretation of separate cognitive processes associated with the two familiarity conditions (rather than necessarily reflecting two cognitive constructs). The nature of the different cognitive processes associated with recent exposure is an open question that could be related to several different factors. The activations associated with recent-single-exposure-based familiarity may reflect the “relative familiarity” component ( Coane et al., 2011 ); it may reflect the operation of the calculator which computes the difference in “relative familiarity;” it may be related to the computation associated with processing fluency experienced for recently-processed items ( Jacoby & Dallas, 1981 ); it may be related to the known source of the felt recent-single-exposure-based familiarity (as opposed to the unknown source of the pre-existing familiarity); or it could reflect the different search routes taken by the subject when trying to identify or uncover further information about the familiar stimulus. We do not wish to speculate which of these options is more viable based on the pattern of brain activations observed for each type of familiarity (as this would involve committing a reverse inference error). More research aimed specifically at testing each one of these hypotheses is required. 
 In order to answer the question of if pre-existing familiarity is supported by the same or different neural bases as those supporting recent-single-exposure familiarity, this study was designed with famous faces experienced throughout life contrasted with novel faces learned just before the scan. Inherent in this design is the potential confound of the difference in age of the two kinds of memory. While RSE targets and foils are both recent (targets having been exposed for the first time just before the experiment and foils being exposed for the first time during the experiment), MPE targets are older memories while MPE foils are new. The result of this is a match in age between RSE targets and foils but a mismatch for MPE targets and foils. The influence, however, of age of memory on identified brain activity would be expected to be present in both recollection and familiarity judgments. The comparison of RSE and MPE recollection yielded no differences in MTL activity and minimal differences in cortical activity, in contradistinction to the results identified by the comparison of RSE and MPE familiarity. Thus it is unlikely that the age of the memory was a primary feature driving the differences observed between RSE and MPE familiarity. Possibly related to the age difference inherent in RSE and MPE memories, an analysis of reaction time showed a main effect of memory type. This overall reaction time difference between the RSE and MPE conditions may represent a possible confound of task difficulty when comparing between conditions. However, this is unlikely because contrasts were first run within a condition, and only then were differences compared between conditions. Additionally, and more importantly, the differences seem to stem from the two bins of no interest in this study, the R and FA bins. For the conditions of interest, reaction time is highly similar, and therefore we believe that it is unlikely that reaction time differences confound these results. It is possible, however, that this difference in reaction time for R responses, as well as the differences in d-prime between the MPE and the RSE conditions, could reflect a difference in difficulty between RSE and MPE, which could have led to the adoption of different retrieval strategies for the two conditions. While being a possible alternative interpretation of our finding, we think the differences between RSE and MPE reported here are not likely to reflect different retrieval strategies, primarily because the retrieval states of interest here were the K responses, which did not differ in RT between the two conditions and are relatively strategy-free (compared to R responses, ( Yonelinas, 2002 ). 
 It is possible, however, that this difference in reaction time for R responses could reflect a difference in difficulty, which could have led to the adoption of different retrieval strategies for the two conditions. 
 Our finding raises further questions regarding the eventual integration or transformation of recent-single-exposure-based familiarity into pre-existing familiarity. How different processes influence this change, the contribution of recent-single-exposure-based familiarity to the building blocks of pre-existing familiarity, or the timecourse of the incorporation of recent-single-exposure-based familiarity into pre-existing familiarity all represent fundamental questions that warrant further study. 
 
 
 
 4. Experimental Procedure 
 We first behaviorally verified that people can recognize a famous face without retrieving any additional diagnostic information about it (pre-existing familiarity). We then moved the study to the MRI scanner to examine how recent-single-exposure-based and pre-existing familiarity are supported in the brain. Note that in this study, the type of familiarity is defined by the experimental condition. 
 
 4.1 Experiment 1 – Behavioral validation of pre-existing familiarity 
 
 4.1.1 Participants 
 Fourteen healthy subjects were recruited from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem community (mean age = 24.0 ± 1.70 years, 6 male). Subjects received either course credit or 10 shekels (equivalent of $3) per 20 minutes of participation and gave informed consent. Each subject was tested in front of a computer screen, and participated in 3 runs of a pre-existing memory retrieval experiment. 
 
 
 4.1.2 Stimuli 
 During the course of the experiment participants saw 377 famous faces and 100 novel faces collected from various Internet sources. All faces were displayed in color, and placed on a grey background with just the face, neck, and hair visible. Novel faces were chosen to look as if the person could be famous (using face images that were attractive and similar in other qualities to those of the famous faces), since their purpose was to catch false alarms. 
 
 
 4.1.3 Experimental Procedure 
 During each trial a face appeared on the screen, and subjects were asked to say out loud whether the face was recognized, and if so, what they knew about that person (their name, occupation, etc.). An experimenter recorded both their response and any additional information about each face presented. 
 
 
 
 4.2 Experiment 2 – Functional MRI exploration of recent-single-exposure and pre-existing recollection and familiarity 
 
 4.2.1 Participants 
 Seventeen healthy right-handed subjects were recruited from the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) community and surrounding area (mean age = 25.1 ± 3.01 years, 8 male). Subjects received $40 for their participation and gave informed consent approved by the Institutional Review Board of UCSD. Four subjects were removed due to excessive motion (>3 mm following motion correction). 
 
 
 4.2.2 Stimuli 
 Stimuli were 654 color images of faces, of which 252 were famous faces and 402 were non-famous faces. Stimuli included those used in Study 1, plus additional stimuli collected and prepared in the same way. 
 
 
 4.2.3 Experimental Procedure 
 Prior to scanning, subjects visually studied 252 non-famous faces, each randomly paired with a gender-matched name. They were given 3 seconds to look at the face and make a subjective judgment about if the name presented “matched” the face (yes/no) ( Figure 1 , left). Subjects were instructed that they would later be tested on the faces. During scanning, runs were divided into a recent single exposure (RSE) condition ( Figure 1 , middle) and a multiple previous exposures (MPE) condition ( Figure 1 , right). In RSE runs, subjects saw all 252 studied faces and 102 novel faces and were asked to judge each with a ‘remember,’ ‘know,’ or ‘new’ response. Subjects were instructed to respond ‘remember’ (R) if they saw the image during the study task and could recall specific diagnostic information about its presentation (the name presented with the face or anything they had thought about during its initial presentation), ‘know’ (K) if the image was familiar but they did not recall specific information about seeing it before, or ‘new’ (N) if they thought the image was not presented during the study session (instructions were similar to those used in  Yonelinas, 2001 ). In MPE runs, subjects saw 252 famous faces and 48 novel non-famous faces and made a judgment about each. (Note that in the MPE task we cannot know the exact number of novel faces for each subject since this is idiosyncratic for each participant. While we expect that subjects will not know some of the stimuli that we designate as famous, there is no  a priori  way of knowing how many famous faces will be given a ‘new’ judgment. The addition of non-famous faces to the MPE scans ensures an adequate number of ‘new’ responses for subsequent analysis. In fact, looking at subjects' responses, they judged ∼34% of faces (102/300) in the MPE scans as new, making the total amount of “novel” faces not different than the amount of new faces presented in the RSE condition.) Subjects were instructed to respond ‘remember’ (R) if they recognized the face and had additional diagnostic information about the person (their name, occupation, etc.), ‘know’ (K) if the face was familiar but they did not have diagnostic information about the person, or ‘new’ (N) if they thought they had never seen the face before. For all runs, subjects responded by pressing one of three buttons on an MRI-compatible button box held in their right hand. Each image was presented for 3 seconds. Trials were jittered with 0.5-6 seconds of fixation-cross baseline with an interval of 0.5 seconds to optimize the study design ( Dale, 1999 ). Each subject underwent a single session of three 470-second event-related runs (RSE) and three 400-second event-related runs (MPE). Based on previous experience in the laboratory, RSE and MPE memory trials were presented in separate runs to alleviate the cognitive juggling that accompanies interleaving these types of trials. The selection of studied and foil stimuli for the RSE runs was random and runs were interleaved and counterbalanced across subjects. Following the scan session, subjects completed an episodic memory task on the 300 faces seen during the MPE memory retrieval scans as well as an additional 120 novel faces. Instructions were identical to those given during the RSE memory retrieval scans. 
 
 
 4.2.4 fMRI Parameters 
 Imaging data were acquired using a 3T GE scanner at the Keck Center for Functional MRI at the University of California, San Diego. Functional images were acquired using a gradient echo echo-planar, T2*-weighted pulse sequence (repetition time = 2.5 s, one shot per repetition, echo time = 30, flip angle = 90°, bandwidth = 31.25 MHz). Forty slices covering the brain were acquired perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus with 3.4 × 3.4 × 4 mm voxels, allowing greater summation of activity along the hippocampal axial plane ( Brewer & Moghekar, 2002 ). A T1-weighted high resolution (1 × 1 × 1 mm), three-dimensional fast spoiled gradient-recalled anatomical dataset was collected. 
 
 
 4.2.5 Data Analysis 
 Data from each run were field-map corrected to account for in homogeneities in the magnetic field ( Smith et al., 2004 ). Using AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ), slices were reconstructed to a 3-dimensional volume, temporally aligned, and co-registered. A threshold mask of the functional data was applied to remove voxels outside the brain and functional runs were smoothed with a 4mm FWHM Gaussian blur. Runs were corrected for motion and then RSE and MPE runs were each concatenated. For both RSE and MPE memory conditions, a general linear model was constructed using multiple regression analysis and included six motion regressors as well as regressors for RSE_R/MPE_R (remember) and RSE_K/MPE_K (know) hit and miss responses and RSE_N/MPE_N (new) correct rejections and false alarms. 
 Standard anatomical landmarks (ac-pc) were defined manually, and the anatomical and functional scans were transformed into Talairach space ( Talairach & Tournoux, 1988 ) for whole-brain normalization. Given the  a priori  interest in memory-related medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures, the region of interest large deformation diffeomorphic metric mapping alignment technique (ROI-LDDMM) was then used to improve MTL alignment ( Miller et al., 2005 ). Previously defined landmarks were used to manually draw hippocampus, perirhinal, entorhinal ( Insausti et al., 1998 ), and parahippocampal cortices ( Stark and Okado, 2003 ). These anatomical regions were aligned with a modified model of a previously created template segmentation ( Kirwan, Jones, Miller, & Stark, 2007 ) using ROI-LDDMM. Functional datasets underwent the same transformation to ensure alignment with each subject's anatomical scan. 
 After individual deconvolution analysis, single-subject parameter estimates were entered into group level analyses. Voxel-wise  t -tests (two-tailed) were performed to compare average area under the curve between conditions of interest. Voxel-wise ANOVAs were also performed to look for interactions among clusters of interest. Clusters were defined as including at least 20 voxels with a voxel-center connectivity of 4mm, giving a whole brain/whole region significance of  p  < .05 and a voxel-wise significance of  p  < .001 when corrected for multiple comparisons (using alpha probability simulations calculated with the AFNI plugin, AlphaSim). Clusters were extracted at  p  < .05 (two-tailed, corrected for multiple comparisons) and were displayed as a statistical map overlaid onto an average structural image of all participants. Beta values were extracted for each subject in each cluster of interest and then averaged. Brain activity specific to recollection was explored in RSE_R - RSE_K and MPE_R - MPE_K analyses and brain activity specific to familiarity was explored in RSE_K - RSE_N and MPE_K - MPE_N analyses. In the recollection analysis, a negative t-value indicates more activity in that region for K relative to R and in the familiarity analysis, a negative t-value indicates more activity in that region for N than for K. Throughout the analyses of this study, RSE and MPE memory conditions were only directly examined by comparing the deltas between two retrieval responses (e.g. R vs. K or K vs. N) from each memory condition. By examining activations related to RSE familiarity (compared to novelty) and comparing this delta to its MPE counterpart, these two memory processes could be examined together. While there is a potential for different effects of novelty between the RSE and MPE memory conditions, there was no statistical difference from baseline for RSE or MPE correct rejections in either MTL cluster used in subsequent analyses (all p > .2). This is consistent with previous work finding that the novelty of faces typically modulates activity in the fusiform gyrus ( Wright et al., 2008 ), and not in the medial temporal lobe regions examined in this study. 
 In the anatomically-constrained MTL analysis, R or K trials were collapsed across RSE and MPE conditions to reveal regions where there was a difference in activity between R and K or K and N, regardless of memory condition. In this way, differences found between RSE and MPE conditions could not be attributed to the cluster coming from an analysis of one condition and not the other. Clusters in the MTL were extracted using the same GLM analysis described above for the whole brain, but this analysis was anatomically constrained to the MTL. Once significant clusters were identified, the average beta value across the whole cluster was extracted for each subject, then entered into a second level analysis (two-tailed t-test). All analyses were performed in both directions (ie. K-N and N-K). For all analyses, RSE_N and MPE_N (and collapsed N) bins were the correct rejection (CR) of a novel face. While the analysis of interest for this study is the K vs. N contrast, as a control, whole-brain cortical activations and MTL activations were explored in the RSE_R vs. RSE_K and MPE_R vs. MPE_K contrasts to ensure recollection-related activity consistent with previous findings. 
 A functional-correlation analysis was used to determine regions with correlated activity to an MTL seed region (perirhinal and parahippocampal clusters taken from the K-N analysis) during different memory conditions. Using AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ), the timecourse of the seed region of interest was extracted and contrast regressors for K and N conditions were obtained to construct the interaction regressor ( Heekeren et al., 2004 ). K trials were examined in comparison to N trials because of the  a priori  interest in studying differences in recent-single-exposure- and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity. Correlation coefficients were converted to Z-scores, analyzed with a t-test, and clustered at a whole-brain threshold of  p  < .05 (corrected for multiple comparisons). Cluster maps were displayed using SUMA ( Saad et al., 2004 ) on the white matter surface of the Talairach and Tournoux N27 average brain from Freesurfer ( http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 This work was supported by the Binational Science Foundation (2009377). Additionaly, S. I. Gimbel was supported by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Lady Davis Gold Meir Post-Doctoral Fellowship. The authors would like to thank J. B. Hales, E. T. Reas, E. A. Murphy, O. Bein, and E. Schwartz for their assistance in data collection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aggleton 
 JP 
 
 
 Brown 
 MW 
 
 
 1999 
 Episodic memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal–anterior thalamic axis 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 22 
 425 
 444 
 10.1017/S0140525X99002034 
 11301518 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 Aminoff 
 E 
 
 
 2003 
 Cortical analysis of visual context 
 Neuron 
 38 
 347 
 58 
 12718867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bar 
 M 
 
 
 Aminoff 
 E 
 
 
 Ishai 
 A 
 
 
 2008 
 Famous faces activate contextual associations in the parahippocampal cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 1233 
 8 
 10.1093/cercor/bhm170 
 17934188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bowles 
 B 
 
 
 Duke 
 D 
 
 
 Rosenbaum 
 RS 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Köhler 
 S 
 
 
 2016 
 Impaired assessment of cumulative lifetime familiarity for object concepts after left anterior temporal-lobe resection that includes perirhinal cortex but spares the hippocampus 
 Neuropsychologia 
 90 
 170 
 179 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.06.035 
 27378441 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Moghekar 
 A 
 
 
 2002 
 Imaging the medial temporal lobe: exploring new dimensions 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 6 
 217 
 223 
 11983585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Zhao 
 Z 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 1998 
 Making memories: brain activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered 
 Science 
 281 
 1185 
 7 
 9712581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bridger 
 EK 
 
 
 Bader 
 R 
 
 
 Mecklinger 
 A 
 
 
 2014 
 More ways than one: ERPs reveal multiple familiarity signals in the word frequency mirror effect 
 Neuropsychologia 
 57 
 179 
 190 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.007 
 24675676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 MW 
 
 
 Aggleton 
 JP 
 
 
 2001 
 Recognition memory: what are the roles of the perirhinal cortex and hippocampus? 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 2 
 51 
 61 
 10.1038/35049064 
 11253359 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Goodman 
 J 
 
 
 Burock 
 M 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Schacter 
 D 
 
 
 Rosen 
 B 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 1998 
 Functional-Anatomic Correlates of Object Priming in Humans Revealed by Rapid Presentation Event-Related fMRI 
 Neuron 
 20 
 285 
 296 
 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80456-0 
 9491989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 Nyberg 
 L 
 
 
 2000 
 Imaging cognition II: An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 12 
 1 
 47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coane 
 JH 
 
 
 Balota 
 DA 
 
 
 Dolan 
 PO 
 
 
 Jacoby 
 LL 
 
 
 2011 
 Not all sources of familiarity are created equal: the case of word frequency and repetition in episodic recognition 
 Mem Cognit 
 39 
 791 
 805 
 10.3758/s13421-010-0069-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Comput Biomed Res 
 29 
 162 
 73 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dale 
 A 
 
 
 1999 
 Optimal experimental design for event-related fMRI 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 8 
 109 
 14 
 10524601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 1999 
 Form and Content: Dissociating Syntax and Semantics in Sentence Comprehension 
 Neuron 
 24 
 427 
 432 
 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80855-7 
 10571235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daselaar 
 SM 
 
 
 Rice 
 HJ 
 
 
 Greenberg 
 DL 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Rubin 
 DC 
 
 
 2008 
 The spatiotemporal dynamics of autobiographical memory: neural correlates of recall, emotional intensity, and reliving 
 Cereb Cortex 
 18 
 217 
 29 
 10.1093/cercor/bhm048 
 17548799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davachi 
 L 
 
 
 Mitchell 
 JP 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2003 
 Multiple routes to memory: distinct medial temporal lobe processes build item and source memories 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 100 
 2157 
 62 
 10.1073/pnas.0337195100 
 12578977 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diana 
 RA 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: a three-component model 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 379 
 86 
 10.1016/j.tics.2007.08.001 
 17707683 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 2006 
 The secret life of memories 
 Neuron 
 50 
 350 
 2 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.04.017 
 16675390 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2007 
 The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 30 
 123 
 52 
 10.1146/annurev.neuro.30.051606.094328 
 17417939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fiez 
 JA 
 
 
 1997 
 Phonology, semantics, and the role of the left inferior prefrontal cortex 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 5 
 79 
 83 
 10096412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frankland 
 PW 
 
 
 Bontempi 
 B 
 
 
 2006 
 Fast track to the medial prefrontal cortex 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 509 
 10 
 10.1073/pnas.0510133103 
 16407121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JD 
 
 
 Brewer 
 JB 
 
 
 Desmond 
 J 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 1997 
 Separate Neural Bases of Two Fundamental Memory Processes in the Human Medial Temporal Lobe 
 Science (80-) 
 276 
 264 
 266 
 10.1126/science.276.5310.264 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 Marrett 
 S 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2004 
 A general mechanism for perceptual decision-making in the human brain 
 Nature 
 431 
 859 
 62 
 10.1038/nature02966 
 15483614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 R 
 
 
 2006 
 Forward inference using functional neuroimaging: dissociations versus associations 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 10 
 64 
 9 
 10.1016/j.tics.2005.12.005 
 16406759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Shallice 
 T 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2000 
 Confidence in recognition memory for words: dissociating right prefrontal roles in episodic retrieval 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 12 
 913 
 23 
 11177413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Insausti 
 R 
 
 
 Juottonen 
 K 
 
 
 Soininen 
 H 
 
 
 Insausti 
 AM 
 
 
 Partanen 
 K 
 
 
 Vainio 
 P 
 
 
 Laakso 
 MP 
 
 
 Pitkänen 
 A 
 
 
 1998 
 MR volumetric analysis of the human entorhinal, perirhinal, and temporopolar cortices 
 AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
 19 
 659 
 71 
 9576651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ishai 
 A 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 2002 
 Visual Imagery of Famous Faces: Effects of Memory and Attention Revealed by fMRI 
 Neuroimage 
 17 
 1729 
 1741 
 10.1006/nimg.2002.1330 
 12498747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jacoby 
 LL 
 
 
 Dallas 
 M 
 
 
 1981a 
 On the relationship between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 110 
 306 
 40 
 6457080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jacoby 
 LL 
 
 
 Dallas 
 M 
 
 
 1981b 
 On the relationship between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 110 
 306 
 40 
 6457080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kirwan 
 CB 
 
 
 Jones 
 C 
 
 
 Miller 
 M 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 2007 
 High resolution fMRI investigation of the medial temporal lobe 
 Hum Brain Mapp 
 28 
 959 
 966 
 10.1002/hbm.20331.High-Resolution 
 17133381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kumaran 
 D 
 
 
 Summerfield 
 JJ 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2009 
 Tracking the emergence of conceptual knowledge during human decision making 
 Neuron 
 63 
 889 
 901 
 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.030 
 19778516 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leveroni 
 CL 
 
 
 Seidenberg 
 M 
 
 
 Mayer 
 AR 
 
 
 Mead 
 LA 
 
 
 Binder 
 JR 
 
 
 Rao 
 SM 
 
 
 2000 
 Learned Faces 
 Image (Rochester, N Y) 
 20 
 878 
 886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mandler 
 G 
 
 
 1980 
 Author : Publication Info : Recognizing : The Judgment of Previous Occurrence 
 Psychol Rev 
 87 
 252 
 271 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 Chao 
 LL 
 
 
 2001 
 Semantic memory and the brain: structure and processes 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 11 
 194 
 201 
 10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00196-3 
 11301239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 CB 
 
 
 Cowell 
 RA 
 
 
 Gribble 
 PL 
 
 
 Wright 
 J 
 
 
 Köhler 
 S 
 
 
 2016 
 Distributed category-specific recognition-memory signals in human perirhinal cortex 
 Hippocampus 
 26 
 423 
 36 
 10.1002/hipo.22531 
 26385759 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miller 
 MI 
 
 
 Beg 
 MF 
 
 
 Ceritoglu 
 C 
 
 
 Stark 
 C 
 
 
 2005 
 Increasing the power of functional maps of the medial temporal lobe by using large deformation diffeomorphic metric mapping 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 102 
 9685 
 90 
 10.1073/pnas.0503892102 
 15980148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Montaldi 
 D 
 
 
 Mayes 
 AR 
 
 
 2010 
 The role of recollection and familiarity in the functional differentiation of the medial temporal lobes 
 Hippocampus 
 20 
 1291 
 314 
 10.1002/hipo.20853 
 20928828 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norman 
 KA 
 
 
 O'Reilly 
 RC 
 
 
 2003 
 Modeling hippocampal and neocortical contributions to recognition memory: a complementary-learning-systems approach 
 Psychol Rev 
 110 
 611 
 46 
 10.1037/0033-295X.110.4.611 
 14599236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Poldrack 
 RA 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Prull 
 MW 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 1999 
 Functional Specialization for Semantic and Phonological Processing in the Left Inferior Prefrontal Cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 10 
 15 
 35 
 10.1006/nimg.1999.0441 
 10385578 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Cohen 
 MX 
 
 
 Dy 
 CJ 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Dissociable correlates of recollection and familiarity within the medial temporal lobes 
 Neuropsychologia 
 42 
 2 
 13 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.07.006 
 14615072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reder 
 LM 
 
 
 Nhouyvanisvong 
 A 
 
 
 Schunn 
 CD 
 
 
 Ayers 
 MS 
 
 
 Angstadt 
 P 
 
 
 Hiraki 
 K 
 
 
 2000 
 A mechanistic account of the mirror effect for word frequency: A computational model of remember-know judgments in a continuous recognition paradigm 
 J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 
 26 
 294 
 320 
 10.1037//0278-7393.26.2.294 
 10764098 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rypma 
 B 
 
 
 D'Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 The roles of prefrontal brain regions in components of working memory: effects of memory load and individual differences 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 96 
 6558 
 63 
 10339627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Reynolds 
 RC 
 
 
 Argall 
 B 
 
 
 Japee 
 S 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 2004 
 SUMA: an interface for surface-based intra- and inter-subject analysis with AFNI 
 Proc 2004 IEEE Int Symp Biomed Imaging 
 37 
 1510 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 1999 
 Medial temporal lobe activations in fMRI and PET studies of episodic encoding and retrieval 
 Hippocampus 
 9 
 7 
 24 
 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1999)9:1<7∷AID-HIPO2>3.0.CO;2-K 
 10088896 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Jenkinson 
 M 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Beckmann 
 CF 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Bannister 
 PR 
 
 
 De Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Drobnjak 
 I 
 
 
 Flitney 
 DE 
 
 
 Niazy 
 RK 
 
 
 Saunders 
 J 
 
 
 Vickers 
 J 
 
 
 Zhang 
 Y 
 
 
 De Stefano 
 N 
 
 
 Brady 
 JM 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2004 
 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 1 
 S208 
 19 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051 
 15501092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 Clark 
 RE 
 
 
 2004 
 The medial temporal lobe 
 Annu Rev Neurosci 
 27 
 279 
 306 
 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144130 
 15217334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 Wixted 
 JT 
 
 
 Clark 
 RE 
 
 
 2007 
 Recognition memory and the medial temporal love: a new perspective 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 8 
 872 
 883 
 17948032 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stark 
 CEL 
 
 
 Okado 
 Y 
 
 
 2003 
 Making memories without trying: medial temporal lobe activity associated with incidental memory formation during recognition 
 J Neurosci 
 23 
 6748 
 53 
 12890767 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takashima 
 A 
 
 
 Petersson 
 KM 
 
 
 Rutters 
 F 
 
 
 Tendolkar 
 I 
 
 
 Jensen 
 O 
 
 
 Zwarts 
 MJ 
 
 
 McNaughton 
 BL 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 2006 
 Declarative memory consolidation in humans: a prospective functional magnetic resonance imaging study 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 103 
 756 
 61 
 10.1073/pnas.0507774103 
 16407110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Takehara-Nishiuchi 
 K 
 
 
 McNaughton 
 B 
 
 
 2008 
 Spontaneous changes of neocortical code for associative memory during consolidation 
 Science 
 322 
 960 
 3 
 10.1126/science.1161299 
 18988855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talairach 
 J 
 
 
 Tournoux 
 P 
 
 
 1988 
 A co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain 
 Thieme 
 Stuttgart, Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thompson-Schill 
 S 
 
 
 Aguirre 
 G 
 
 
 Desposito 
 M 
 
 
 Farah 
 M 
 
 
 1999 
 A neural basis for category and modality specificity of semantic knowledge 
 Neuropsychologia 
 37 
 671 
 676 
 10.1016/S0028-3932(98)00126-2 
 10390028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 1989 
 Remembering and knowing the past 
 Am Sci 
 77 
 361 
 367 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 Pearlstone 
 Z 
 
 
 1966 
 Availability versus accessibility of information in memory for words 
 J Verbal Learning Verbal Behav 
 5 
 381 
 391 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Kesteren 
 MTR 
 
 
 Rijpkema 
 M 
 
 
 Ruiter 
 DJ 
 
 
 Fernández 
 G 
 
 
 2010 
 Retrieval of associative information congruent with prior knowledge is related to increased medial prefrontal activity and connectivity 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 15888 
 94 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2674-10.2010 
 21106827 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociation of the neural correlates of recognition memory according to familiarity, recollection, and amount of recollected information 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2216 
 25 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.02.027 
 17449068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Desmond 
 JE 
 
 
 Demb 
 JB 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2008 
 Semantic Repetition Priming for Verbal and Pictorial Knowledge: A Functional MRI Study of Left Inferior Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1997.9.6.714 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2000 
 Task-specific Repetition Priming in Left Inferior Prefrontal Cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 10 
 1176 
 1184 
 10.1093/cercor/10.12.1176 
 11073867 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Rotte 
 M 
 
 
 Koutstaal 
 W 
 
 
 Maril 
 A 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 Rosen 
 BR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 1998 
 Building memories: remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity 
 Science 
 281 
 1188 
 91 
 9712582 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waidergoren 
 S 
 
 
 Segalowicz 
 J 
 
 
 Gilboa 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Semantic memory recognition is supported by intrinsic recollection-like processes: “The butcher on the bus” revisited 
 Neuropsychologia 
 1 
 15 
 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.040 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiggs 
 CL 
 
 
 Martin 
 A 
 
 
 1998 
 Properties and mechanisms of perceptual priming 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 8 
 227 
 233 
 10.1016/S0959-4388(98)80144-X 
 9635206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Williams 
 HL 
 
 
 Conway 
 MA 
 
 
 Moulin 
 CJA 
 
 
 2013 
 Remembering and Knowing: Using another's subjective report to make inferences about memory strength and subjective experience 
 Conscious Cogn 
 22 
 572 
 588 
 10.1016/j.concog.2013.03.009 
 23619311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wright 
 CI 
 
 
 Negreira 
 A 
 
 
 Gold 
 AL 
 
 
 Britton 
 JC 
 
 
 Williams 
 D 
 
 
 Barrett 
 LF 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural correlates of novelty and face-age effects in young and elderly adults 
 Neuroimage 
 42 
 956 
 68 
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.015 
 18586522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Kroll 
 NEA 
 
 
 Quamme 
 JR 
 
 
 Lazzara 
 MM 
 
 
 Sauvé 
 MJ 
 
 
 Widaman 
 KF 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 2002 
 Effects of extensive temporal lobe damage or mild hypoxia on recollection and familiarity 
 Nat Neurosci 
 5 
 1236 
 1241 
 10.1038/nn961 
 12379865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Kroll 
 NE 
 
 
 Dobbins 
 I 
 
 
 Lazzara 
 M 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 1998 
 Recollection and familiarity deficits in amnesia: convergence of remember-know, process dissociation, and receiver operating characteristic data 
 Neuropsychology 
 12 
 323 
 39 
 9673991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 Otten 
 LJ 
 
 
 Shaw 
 KN 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2005 
 Separating the Brain Regions Involved in Recollection and Familiarity in Recognition Memory 
 Neuroscience 
 25 
 3002 
 3008 
 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5295-04.2005 
 15772360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 AP 
 
 
 2002 
 The Nature of Recollection and Familiarity: A Review of 30 Years of Research 
 J Mem Lang 
 46 
 441 
 517 
 10.1006/jmla.2002.2864 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yonelinas 
 aP 
 
 
 2001 
 Components of episodic memory: the contribution of recollection and familiarity 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 356 
 1363 
 74 
 10.1098/rstb.2001.0939 
 11571028 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhu 
 XO 
 
 
 Brown 
 MW 
 
 
 Aggleton 
 JP 
 
 
 1995 
 Neuronal signalling of information important to visual recognition memory in rat rhinal and neighbouring cortices 
 Eur J Neurosci 
 7 
 753 
 65 
 7620624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Task Design 
 Before the scan, subjects studied non-famous faces presented concurrently with a name (Study phase). They were asked to decide if the name “matched” the face by using a yes/no response. During scanning, subjects performed a recent-single-exposure (RSE) retrieval task and a multiple-previous-exposure (MPE) retrieval task. During the RSE task, subjects saw faces that had been studied during the pre-scan session and were asked to identify each with a Remember (R), Know (K), or New (N) response (based on if they remembered seeing the face during study). During the MPE task, subjects saw famous faces or foils and were asked to identify each with an R, K, or N response (based on if they had seen that person before and had any additional information about the person). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Regions of activation for recent-single-exposure-based- and multiple-exposures-based-familiarity 
 Clusters represent regions where A) RSE_K responses are significantly different from RSE_N responses and B) MPE_K responses are significantly different from MPE_N responses. Warm colors represent regions where RSE_K/MPE_K > RSE_N/MPE_N and cool colors represent regions where RSE_N/MPE_N > RSE_K/MPE_K. Clusters are significant at  p  < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons and are displayed on an average anatomical scan of all subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Recent-single-exposure-based and multiple-previous-exposures-based familiarity in the MTL 
 Right perirhinal cortex showed a greater difference between RSE_K and RSE_N than MPE_K and MPE_N. Right parahippocampal cortex showed a greater difference between MPE_K and MPE_N than RSE_K and RSE_N. An interaction exists between these two regions and RSE/MPE retrieval conditions. Clusters represent regions where K > N at  p  < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons and are displayed on an average anatomical scan of all subjects. Bar graphs represent the difference in beta values for judgments of familiarity and novelty. *  p  < .05. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Whole-brain functional-correlations with RSE_K and MPE_K judgments 
 Displayed are regions correlated with A) perirhinal cortex and B) parahippocampal cortex during RSE_K judgments (green) and MPE_K judgments (purple). Functional-correlations are with the right perirhinal and parahippocampal clusters displayed in  Figure 3 . 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Regions of activation for recent-single-exposure-based- and multiple-previous-exposures-based recollection 
 Clusters represent regions where A) RSE_R responses are significantly different from RSE_K responses and B) MPE_R responses are significantly different from MPE_K responses. Warm colors represent regions where RSE_R/MPE_R > RSE_K/MPE_K and cool colors represent regions where RSEK/MPE_K > RSE_R/MPE_R. Clusters are significant at  p  < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons and are displayed on an average anatomical scan of all subjects. C) Right posterior parahippocampus showed a difference in activation between recollection and familiarity collapsed across RSE and MPE retrieval conditions. Cluster represents a region where R > K at  p  < .001, corrected for multiple comparisons and is displayed on an average anatomical scan of all subjects. Bar graphs represent the difference in beta values for judgments of recollection and familiarity. Each bar is different from zero, but the two bars are not different from each other. Beta values were extracted from the voxels in this cluster and averaged across subjects for RSE (green) and MPE (purple) memory retrieval conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Behavioral responses to famous faces and foils from Study 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Famous 
 
 
 
 
 Foil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 K 
 
 
 N 
 
 CR  ( N ) 
 
 FA 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean ± SEM 
 49 ± 3% 
 14 ± 2% 
 36 ± 3% 
 92 ± 2% 
 10 ± 1% 
 
 
 Total Count 
 2588 
 739 
 1898 
 1284 
 108 
 
 
 
 
 
 Percent and raw count of responses that received an R (Remember), K (Know), or N (New) response to famous faces. Also included are responses to non-famous foils that received a correct rejection (CR) or false alarm (FA). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Behavioral responses to studied/famous faces and foils from Study 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R 
 
 
 K 
 
 Miss  ( N ) 
 CR  ( N ) 
 
 FA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSE (354 trials) 
 
 Mean 
 59 ± 9 
 91 ± 8 
 97 ± 8 
 60 ± 4 
 R: 9 ± 2 K: 30 ± 3 
 
 
 
 RT 
 1417 ± 54 
 1647 ± 39 
 1530 ± 68 
 1517 ± 57 
 1509 ± 77 
 
 
 
 MPE (300 trials) 
 
 Mean 
 83 ± 9 
 77 ± 10 
 -- 
 117 ± 6 
 R: 2 ± 1 K: 12 ± 2 
 
 
 
 RT 
 1318 ± 61 
 1625 ± 41 
 -- 
 1534 ± 68 
 1639 ± 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mean number of R (Remember) and K (Know) hit trials (± SEM) for studied (RSE) or famous (MPE) faces. Mean number of N (New) miss trials (± SEM) to studied RSE faces. Also included are foil unstudied or non-famous faces that were either a false alarm (FA) or a correct rejection (CR). Reaction time (RT) for each response type is in milliseconds ± SEM (standard error of the mean). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Regions more active during familiarity than during novelty judgments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volume 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A) Whole Brain RPE_K-RPE_N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 11712 
 -49 
 16 
 25 
 2.89 
 
 
 L. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 10880 
 -36 
 53 
 13 
 3.35 
 
 
 L. Sup Frontal (BA 6) 
 5440 
 -27 
 4 
 66 
 3.02 
 
 
 L. Inf Parietal (BA 40) 
 5312 
 -42 
 -43 
 47 
 2.59 
 
 
 L. Mid Temporal (BA 22) 
 2304 
 -53 
 -35 
 -1 
 2.65 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 1344 
 20 
 -30 
 -35 
 2.98 
 
 
 R. Insula (BA 13) 
 1280 
 42 
 -4 
 2 
 -2.48 
 
 
 L. Post Cingulate (BA 29) 
 896 
 -11 
 -52 
 11 
 -2.47 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 6) 
 832 
 35 
 17 
 55 
 -2.61 
 
 
 R. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 768 
 24 
 57 
 36 
 -2.90 
 
 
 
 MPE_K-MPE_N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R. Paracentral Lobule (BA 31) 
 10176 
 2 
 -28 
 47 
 -2.48 
 
 
 L. Mid Occipital (BA 19) 
 6144 
 -37 
 -87 
 7 
 3.00 
 
 
 L. Caudate 
 2304 
 -24 
 -44 
 13 
 -2.38 
 
 
 L. Declive 
 2176 
 -39 
 -57 
 -19 
 2.72 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 1920 
 44 
 -34 
 27 
 -2.36 
 
 
 L. Ant Cingulate (BA 32) 
 1856 
 -2 
 43 
 11 
 -3.07 
 
 
 L. Pyramis 
 1664 
 -9 
 -82 
 -28 
 3.06 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 46) 
 1024 
 44 
 42 
 27 
 2.64 
 
 
 L. Cingulate (BA 24) 
 1024 
 0 
 3 
 29 
 2.48 
 
 
 R. Mid Occipital (BA 19) 
 960 
 47 
 -74 
 3 
 2.95 
 
 
 L. Med Frontal (BA 6) 
 896 
 -12 
 5 
 62 
 2.43 
 
 
 R. Declive 
 832 
 7 
 -66 
 -15 
 2.52 
 
 
 L. Insula (BA 13) 
 832 
 -43 
 -8 
 2 
 -2.43 
 
 
 L. Precentral (BA 4) 
 832 
 -27 
 -26 
 53 
 -2.27 
 
 
 L. Declive 
 768 
 -9 
 -71 
 -22 
 2.59 
 
 
 R. Lingual (BA 18) 
 768 
 7 
 -91 
 -13 
 3.20 
 
 
 
 B) Medial Temporal Lobe K-N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R. Parahippocampus (BA 35) 
 576 
 25 
 -27 
 -17 
 -2.61 
 
 
 R. Perirhinal Cortex (BA 28) 
 320 
 22 
 -14 
 -24 
 3.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 A) Whole-brain regions showing a difference in activation between RSE_K/MPE_K judgments and RSE_N/MPE_N judgments (negative number in the  t  column indicates increased activity for N judgments relative to K judgments). B) Medial temporal lobe regions showing a difference in activation between K and N judgments, collapsed across RSE and MPE memory conditions (negative number in the  t  column indicates increased activity for N relative to K). BA = Brodmann Area, volume is in ml,  xyz  coordinates represent the center of mass of the cluster in Talairach space. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Regions of correlated activity with perirhinal and parahippocampal seed regions during RSE_K and MPE_K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volume 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSE_K – PRC seed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 11840 
 -37 
 49 
 14 
 2.89 
 
 
 L. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 10688 
 -46 
 17 
 31 
 2.88 
 
 
 L. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 5504 
 -45 
 -44 
 47 
 2.87 
 
 
 L. Sup Frontal (BA 6) 
 4224 
 -17 
 17 
 54 
 2.86 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 2112 
 39 
 -33 
 49 
 2.85 
 
 
 
 MPE_K – PRC seed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. Fusiform (BA 19) 
 26496 
 -32 
 -79 
 -13 
 2.85 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 18432 
 29 
 -65 
 -29 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 8640 
 -34 
 53 
 26 
 2.85 
 
 
 R. Mid Occipital (BA 18) 
 8576 
 21 
 -95 
 5 
 2.86 
 
 
 R. Ant Cingulate (BA 32) 
 6208 
 16 
 42 
 -7 
 2.86 
 
 
 L. Precentral (BA 44) 
 4288 
 -44 
 19 
 7 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Ant Cingulate (BA 32) 
 3520 
 -14 
 45 
 -8 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Caudate 
 2688 
 -13 
 26 
 13 
 2.86 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 2368 
 45 
 -41 
 54 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. Parahippocampus (BA 27) 
 2304 
 12 
 -33 
 -1 
 2.83 
 
 
 L. Mid Frontal (BA 6) 
 1984 
 -32 
 2 
 48 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Precentral (BA 4) 
 1856 
 58 
 -14 
 37 
 2.83 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 1664 
 -16 
 -51 
 -26 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 1536 
 26 
 63 
 26 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Thalamus 
 1472 
 -10 
 -29 
 -1 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Precuneus (BA 7) 
 1280 
 12 
 -62 
 47 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 1216 
 35 
 38 
 25 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Sup Frontal (BA 6) 
 1024 
 19 
 17 
 65 
 2.85 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 960 
 33 
 58 
 8 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Cingulate (BA 23) 
 896 
 -10 
 -12 
 32 
 2.83 
 
 
 
 RSE_K – PHC seed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 50368 
 -35 
 30 
 28 
 2.9 
 
 
 L. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 14400 
 -38 
 -51 
 48 
 2.88 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 5184 
 38 
 -34 
 49 
 2.87 
 
 
 L. Caudate 
 2432 
 -12 
 7 
 12 
 2.85 
 
 
 R. Sup Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 2240 
 19 
 -61 
 55 
 2.86 
 
 
 L. Cingulate Gyrus (BA 23) 
 2176 
 -4 
 -22 
 29 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Mid Temporal Gyrus 
 1856 
 -52 
 -38 
 -5 
 2.84 
 
 
 
 MPE_K – PHC seed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 12352 
 29 
 -64 
 -28 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Inf Occipital (BA 18) 
 10304 
 -29 
 -86 
 -9 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. Cuneus (BA 17) 
 7040 
 21 
 -95 
 5 
 2.86 
 
 
 R. Ant Cingulate (BA 32) 
 5440 
 16 
 42 
 -7 
 2.86 
 
 
 L. Sup Frontal (BA 10) 
 5056 
 -34 
 53 
 27 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Ant Cingulate (BA 24) 
 3008 
 -10 
 26 
 9 
 2.86 
 
 
 L. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 2752 
 -11 
 43 
 -11 
 2.85 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 2304 
 -46 
 -52 
 -31 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. Precentral (BA 4) 
 1664 
 58 
 -14 
 37 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Cerebellum 
 1344 
 -16 
 -51 
 -26 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 1344 
 46 
 -39 
 55 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Inf Frontal (BA 44) 
 1280 
 -45 
 17 
 12 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Precuneus (BA 7) 
 1088 
 12 
 -63 
 46 
 2.83 
 
 
 R. Cerebellus 
 1024 
 52 
 -54 
 -25 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Sup Frontal (BA 10) 
 960 
 -23 
 47 
 0 
 2.84 
 
 
 R. Culmen 
 832 
 13 
 -41 
 -6 
 2.84 
 
 
 L. Thalamus 
 768 
 -11 
 -26 
 -2 
 2.83 
 
 
 
 
 
 BA = Brodmann Area, volume is in ml,  xyz  coordinates represent the center of mass of the cluster in Talairach space. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Regions active during judgments of recollection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volume 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A) Whole Brain RSE_R-RSE_K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. DLPFC (BA 9) 
 15360 
 -8 
 56 
 23 
 3.4 
 
 
 L. Mid Frontal (BA 6) 
 7296 
 -37 
 8 
 44 
 2.74 
 
 
 L. Sup Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 6912 
 -34 
 -62 
 47 
 3.19 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 6208 
 31 
 -68 
 -24 
 3.39 
 
 
 L. Precuneus (BA 7) 
 3840 
 -8 
 -57 
 39 
 2.55 
 
 
 L. Inf Frontal (BA 46) 
 1536 
 -46 
 27 
 13 
 2.57 
 
 
 R. Med Frontal (BA 10) 
 1280 
 10 
 48 
 -7 
 -3.71 
 
 
 L. Lentiform 
 1152 
 -27 
 -5 
 -5 
 2.42 
 
 
 R. Cerebellum 
 1024 
 8 
 -48 
 -33 
 2.47 
 
 
 R. Inf Occipital (BA 18) 
 896 
 24 
 -89 
 -9 
 3.39 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 896 
 35 
 64 
 6 
 -3.51 
 
 
 R. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 7) 
 896 
 33 
 -59 
 45 
 2.50 
 
 
 
 MPE_R-MPE_K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L. Post Cingulate (BA 29) 
 21248 
 -15 
 -43 
 15 
 3.03 
 
 
 L. Sup Frontal (BA 8) 
 12608 
 -17 
 40 
 49 
 3.27 
 
 
 L. Precuneus (BA 19) 
 8000 
 -36 
 -72 
 40 
 2.80 
 
 
 L. Med Frontal (BA 10) 
 4160 
 -3 
 57 
 10 
 3.15 
 
 
 L. Inf Frontal (BA 13) 
 2304 
 -39 
 26 
 5 
 2.70 
 
 
 L. Cuneus (BA 17) 
 1920 
 -9 
 -83 
 6 
 2.62 
 
 
 R. Post Cingulate (BA 30) 
 1408 
 19 
 -49 
 10 
 2.39 
 
 
 L. Inf Parietal Lobule (BA 40) 
 1408 
 -52 
 -45 
 55 
 2.78 
 
 
 L. Inf Frontal (BA 9) 
 1344 
 -46 
 8 
 31 
 2.48 
 
 
 R. Lentiform Nucleus 
 1280 
 22 
 -13 
 -3 
 2.47 
 
 
 R. Mid Frontal (BA 10) 
 1216 
 30 
 38 
 21 
 -2.55 
 
 
 L. Lentiform Nucleus 
 1152 
 -24 
 4 
 -5 
 2.76 
 
 
 R. Cuneus (BA 19) 
 1088 
 22 
 -85 
 38 
 2.81 
 
 
 R. Precuneus (BA 7) 
 1024 
 10 
 -60 
 51 
 -2.55 
 
 
 L. Inf Temporal (BA 20) 
 896 
 -40 
 -7 
 -40 
 2.68 
 
 
 L. Insula (BA 40) 
 832 
 -51 
 -21 
 17 
 -2.45 
 
 
 L. Precentral (BA 4) 
 832 
 -51 
 -7 
 50 
 2.60 
 
 
 L. Mid Occipital (BA 19) 
 768 
 -31 
 -92 
 20 
 2.72 
 
 
 
 B) Medial Temporal Lobe R-K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R. Parahippocampus (BA 35) 
 256 
 23 
 -23 
 -19 
 3.16 
 
 
 
 R-N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R. Perirhinal Cortex (BA 28) 
 448 
 22 
 -15 
 -22 
 2.96 
 
 
 L. Perirhinal Cortex (BA 36) 
 320 
 -26 
 -2 
 -33 
 -2.76 
 
 
 L. Hippocampus 
 320 
 -25 
 -19 
 -8 
 -2.38 
 
 
 L. Hippocampus 
 320 
 -28 
 -34 
 -2 
 -2.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 A) Whole-brain regions showing a difference in activation between RSE_R/MPE_R judgments and RSE_K/MPE_K judgments (negative number in the  t  column indicates increased activity for K judgments relative to R judgments). B) Medial temporal lobe regions showing a difference in activation between R judgments and K and N judgments, respectively (negative number in the  t  column indicates increased activity for K/N relative to R). BA = Brodmann Area, volume is in ml,  xyz  coordinates represent the center of mass of the cluster in Talairach space. 
 
 
 
 
