
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8910747 
 20835 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 
 0898-929X 
 1530-8898 
 
 
 28253082 
 5529037 
 10.1162/jocn_a_01114 
 NIHMS879105 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Multimodal Imaging Evidence for a Frontocortical Modulation of Visual Cortex during the Selective Processing of Conditioned Threat 
 
 
 
 
 Petro 
 Nathan M. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Gruss 
 L. Forest 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Yin 
 Siyang 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Huang 
 Haiqing 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Miskovic 
 Vladimir 
 
 3 
 
 
 
 Ding 
 Mingzhou 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 Andreas 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, University of Florida 
 
 2 J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida 
 
 3 Department of Psychology, SUNY Binghamton 
 
 26 
 5 
 2017 
 
 
 02 
 3 
 2017 
 
 
 6 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 6 
 2018 
 
 29 
 6 
 953 
 967 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Emotionally salient cues are detected more readily, remembered better, and evoke greater visual cortical responses, compared to neutral stimuli. The current study used concurrent EEG-fMRI recordings to identify large-scale network interactions involved in the amplification of visual cortical activity when viewing aversively conditioned cues. To generate a continuous neural signal from peri-calcarine visual cortex, we presented rhythmic (10/sec) phase-reversing gratings, the orientation of which predicted the presence (CS+) or absence (CS-) of a cutaneous electric shock (i.e. the unconditioned stimulus, US). The resulting single trial steady-state visual evoked potential (ssVEP) amplitude was regressed against the whole-brain BOLD signal, resulting in a measure of ssVEP-BOLD coupling. Across all trial types, ssVEP-BOLD coupling was observed in both primary and extended visual cortical regions, the rolandic operculum, as well as the thalamus and bilateral hippocampus. For CS+ relative to CS- trials during the conditioning phase, BOLD-alone analyses showed CS+ enhancement at the occipital pole, superior temporal sulci, and the anterior insula bilaterally, whereas ssVEP-BOLD coupling was greater in the peri-calcarine cortex, inferior parietal cortex, and middle frontal gyrus. Dynamic causal modeling analyses supported connectivity models in which heightened activity in peri-calcarine cortex for threat (CS+) arises from cortico-cortical top-down modulation, specifically from the middle frontal gyrus. No evidence was observed for selective peri-calcarine modulation by deep cortical structures such as the amygdala or anterior insula, suggesting that the heightened engagement of peri-calcarine cortex for threat stimuli is mediated by cortical structures that constitute key nodes of canonical attention networks. 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 An organism’s survival depends on its ability to quickly and adaptively respond to environmental challenges and opportunities. To accomplish this task, the mammalian brain detects and stores the predictive value of recurring environmental signals with respect to dangerous or rewarding outcomes ( Sokolov, 1963 ). This process results in the formation of associative memories, thought to be implemented in distributed brain networks encompassing cortical as well as sub-cortical structures ( Linnman, Rougemont-Bucking, Beucke, Zeffiro, & Milad, 2011 ). In complex and uncertain environments, associative learning depends on the organism’s ability to correctly select the relevant sensory cues from the environmental noise ( Headley & Weinberger, 2011 ;  Mayr, 1974 ). Thus, established associative networks that link specific stimuli to representations of biological significance and motor action are hypothesized to possess strengthened sensory representations ( Gallant, Connor, & Van Essen, 1998 ;  Mirabella et al., 2007 ). Supporting this notion, visual and auditory stimuli representing motivationally relevant contexts, such as pictures of bodily injury or the voice of a crying infant, prompt relatively larger responses in sensory cortical areas of the human brain (reviewed in  Sabatinelli et al., 2011 ). An extensive literature has demonstrated that the neural and hemodynamic amplification of threat, relative to neutral, cues is paralleled by a host of behavioral effects such as facilitated detection ( Öhman & Soares, 1998 ), identification ( Anderson, 2005 ), and greater perceptual vividness ( Todd & Thompson, 2015 ). The question arises regarding the neurophysiological mechanisms mediating such differences in sensory and perceptual processing. Research using rodent models has established many microscopic and molecular mechanisms mediating responses to threat cues in evolutionary old structures such as the amygdala (  Sears, Schiff, & LeDoux, 2014 ;  Amaral, Behniea, & Kelly, 2003 ;  Clugnet & LeDoux, 1990 ). Similarly, previous studies using hemodynamic neuroimaging in humans have highlighted the role of amygdaloid and frontal cortical regions during emotional processing, including responses to aversive stimuli (e.g.,  Furl, Henson, Friston, & Calder, 2013 ). What is not known is how brain regions interact to enable the selectively facilitated visual processing of threat—one of the first stages in the sequence of adaptive behaviors prompted by the onset of an aversive stimulus ( Sokolov, 1963 ). 
 The current study addressed this problem by quantifying the large-scale neurophysiological changes measured by concurrent EEG-fMRI recordings, as observers learned that an initially neutral visual stimulus comes to predict an aversive outcome. In differential aversive conditioning, one of two initially innocuous stimuli (conditioned stimuli, CS) gains motivational relevance through reliably predicting the occurrence (CS+) of a noxious event (the unconditioned stimulus, US), while the other stimulus (CS-) predicts its absence. Previous work in the animal model and in human observers suggests that aversive conditioning with a specific sensory feature results in retuning of sensory cortical receptive fields, amplifying the cortical representation of the CS+, compared to the CS- ( Stolarova, Keil, & Moratti, 2006 ;  Weinberger, 2004 ). One prevalent hypothesis holds that this sensory amplification of threat cues is driven by the amygdaloid complex, thought to provide reentrant bias signals to neurons along the ventral visual stream ( Delgado, Olsson & Phelps, 2006 ;  Amaral, 2003 ). This hypothesis has recently been challenged, for example by the finding that visual amplification of threat cues is seen in participants with amygdala resection ( Edmiston et al., 2013 ). Human neuroimaging research has suggested several further candidate structures that may be involved in the re-entrant modulation of visual cortex during threat processing. Meta-analyses suggest the co-occurrence of selective Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) enhancement not only in the visual cortex but across a set of functionally connected brain regions such as the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), the anterior insular cortex (AIC), and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; see  Fullana et al., 2016  for a recent review). Previous analyses of network activity during aversive conditioning using fMRI have considered voxel-wise correlations across the entire BOLD time series during habituation, acquisition, and extinction. This procedure is robust, intuitive, and valid, but does not allow the separate quantification of connectivity for the CS+ and CS- trials, which are typically intermixed. Comparing acquisition and habituation phases, these studies have reported that functional networks emerge that involve the hippocampus, anterior insula, and anterior cingulate cortex (Linnman, Rougemont-Bucking, Beucke, Zeffiro, & Milad, 2011b), as well as heightened co-variation among primary and extended visual cortices ( Damaraju, Huang, Barrett, & Pessoa, 2009 ). Furthermore, electric and magnetic brain recordings in humans have suggested that cortico-cortical interactions between visual areas and fronto-parietal cortices mediate the heightened visual responses to threat seen at the behavioral and neural levels ( Keil et al., 2009 ; Miskovic & Keil, 2014;  Moratti, Keil, & Stolarova, 2004 ). These studies however were limited by the low spatial specificity of scalp-recorded measures of brain activity. Here, we use multimodal imaging to test the hypothesis that threat cue facilitation in human visual cortex is mediated by selective top-down bias signals originating in anterior cortical structures. 
 The present study leveraged the excellent temporal and spatial resolution of combined EEG-fMRI recordings by evoking a robust visual electro-cortical signal, the steady-state visual evoked potential (ssVEP). The ssVEP is evoked by the periodic modulation of a visual stimulus in terms of luminance or contrast. It can be extracted from scalp-recorded EEG and reflects post-synaptic neural population activity that primarily originates in peri-calcarine regions of the visual cortex ( Di Russo et al., 2007 ). The ssVEP amplitude is enhanced when neutral visual cues acquire aversive value during classical conditioning ( Miskovic & Keil, 2012 ;  McTeague, Gruss, & Keil, 2015 ). For the present set of analyses, a key advantage of ssVEPs is that they can be reliably measured at the level of single trials ( Keil et al., 2008 ) and are therefore well suited for revealing trial-by-trial coupling between the peri-calcarine cortex and whole-brain BOLD signals. The goal of quantifying the co-variation of this spatially specific electrophysiological index with hemodynamic (BOLD) data is to identify brain regions that are temporally coupled with visual cortex over the course of the aversive conditioning paradigm. The rationale is that regions displaying such temporal coupling may be involved in the hypothesized bidirectional interactions mediating facilitated visual processing of conditioned threat cues. 
 In addition to seeking converging evidence of BOLD-alone analyses with the ssVEP-BOLD results, we also tested the connectivity of candidate structures arising from ssVEP-BOLD analyses, using dynamic causal modeling (DCM). DCM enables testing models regarding the modulatory influence of extra-visual signals into peri-calcarine visual cortex that mediate the heightened visual processing of threat cues. Overall, this approach allowed us to test the hypotheses that emerging perceptual biases to learned threat cues – measured by changes in ssVEP amplitude – are accompanied by commensurate BOLD changes in anterior regions of the brain and that these regions are the origin of modulatory top-down signals, selectively amplifying the visual cortical response to threat. 
 
 
 Methods 
 
 Participants 
 Participants consisted of 15 (5 female; age: mean=21.73, std=3.43) students who, after giving written informed consent, participated on a volunteer basis or received course credit for the General Psychology course at the University of Florida. All participants were screened for ferromagnetic implants, claustrophobia, and personal or family history of epilepsy or photic seizures. Female participants self-administered a pregnancy test prior to participation. Data of three additional participants were discarded because of excessive EEG artifact. All procedures were approved by the institutional review board of the University of Florida, and were consistent with the Declaration of Helsinki on studies with human participants. 
 
 Stimuli and experimental design 
 Stimuli consisted of sinusoidal gratings multiplied with a Gaussian envelope (i.e., Gabor patches) oriented at either 15 or 345 degrees relative to the vertical meridian, which reversed their phase every 100 ms to evoke a ssVEP having its second harmonic at 10 Hz. Consistent with previous studies of phase-reversal ssVEP ( Keil et al., 2013 , see  Norcia et al., 2015  for a review), we analyzed the second harmonic response, i.e. 10 Hz. Gabor patches had a maximum Michelson contrast of 95% (maximum = 110 cd/m 2 ; minimum = 2.1 cd/m 2 ) and a spatial frequency of 0.45 cycles per degree. Gratings were presented at a horizontal visual angle of 15.5 ° respectively, on a MR-compatible monitor placed outside the scanner bore, which participants viewed via a mirror placed on the MR head-coil positioned 8.5 cm from eyes. All visual stimuli were presented on a black background (1.2 cd/m 2 ). The gratings were used as conditioned stimuli (CSs) during the classical differential conditioning design in which their orientation predicted the presence (CS+) or absence (CS-) of an unconditioned stimulus (US) in the form of a cutaneous electric shock. The US was administered to the participant’s right ankle for a duration of 0.5 ms beginning at the start of the final phase reversal cycle of the grating, at an intensity determined by a build-up procedure (see below) conducted prior to entering the scanner environment. All stimulus presentation was controlled using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools). Cutaneous shocks were administered using an STMISO Stimulation Isolation Adapter (BIOPAC Systems, Inc.) with MRI compatible skin electrodes. 
 Each trial consisted of one of the two gratings being presented for 5100 ms, during which its phase was alternated every 100 ms. For the CS+ - US paired trials (see below), an additional reversal cycle (200 ms) was appended to the end of the phase-reversal train to account for the US presentation. This ensured overlap of CS+ and US, as is characteristic for classical conditioning. An inter-trial interval (ITI) consisted of an initial gray cross (37.5 cd/m 2 ; 1 degree of visual angle) presented in the middle of the screen for a random duration between 0 – 8 seconds followed by a white cross (149.0 cd/m 2 ) for a duration of 3 seconds, immediately preceding trial onset with Gabor patch presentation. 
 The experiment consisted of 129 trials in total, across three experimental blocks: 40 habituation, 49 acquisition, and 40 extinction trials. For the habituation and extinction blocks, CS+ and CS- trials were presented for 20 trials each in pseudorandom order. For the acquisition block, CS- trials were presented 20 times while CS+ trials occurred 29 times. Among CS+ trials during this acquisition block, the US was presented on 9 trials consisting of 4 initial CS+ trials and 5 of the remaining 25 CS+ trials (following a 25% reinforcement schedule), dispersed pseudo-randomly. These 9 CS+ - US paired trials were discarded from all subsequent BOLD analyses to avoid including BOLD changes related to somatosensory activity in subsequent contrasts, leaving 40 trials for all analyses. 
 
 
 Procedure 
 Two electrodes were placed on the participant’s right ankle for shock administration. Participants then underwent a brief build-up procedure in which the shock was presented in steps of increasing intensity until the intensity reached a level of being “unpleasant, but not painful”. This intensity was used during the experiment. 
 Participants were instructed to remain still while in the scanner and to maintain fixation on the center of the screen during all parts of the experiment. For the habituation block, participants were instructed that they would not feel a shock, but to watch the patterns as they were presented. During the acquisition block, participants were informed they would intermittently feel a shock during the course of the experiment, but were not given indication as to any contingency between Gabor patch orientation and shock administration. The extinction block was also uninstructed, such that participants were given no indication as to whether or not they would feel a shock. 
 
 
 SAM Ratings 
 At the conclusion of the experiment participants rated the CSs and US on valence and arousal using the Self-Assessment Manikin ( Bradley & Lang, 1994 ). These ratings were used to determine whether differences between the CS+ and CS- were seen after the extinction phase of the experiment, in terms of self-reported affect. Ratings of emotional arousal and hedonic valence for the CS+ and CS- visual gratings were compared using a paired-sample t-test. 
 
 
 EEG recording and data reduction 
 EEG data were recorded on a 32-channel MR compatible system (Brain Products) during simultaneous BOLD acquisition (see below). This EEG system consisted of thirty-one Ag/AgCl electrodes placed on the head according to the 10–20 system and one electrocardiogram (EKG) electrode placed on the upper back to record heart-beats. Electrode FCz was used as the reference during recording. Impedances were kept below 20kΩ for all scalp electrodes and below 50kΩ for the EKG electrode, as suggested by the Brain Products manual. EEG data were digitized at 16-bit resolution using a sample rate of 5kHz with a 0.1- 250 Hz (3dB-point) bandpass filter applied online (Butterworth, 18 dB/octave roll off). A fiber-optic cable transferred the digitized data to the computer. The system was synchronized to the internal clock of the scanner. 
 Brain Vision Analyzer 2.0 (Brain Products) Software was used to remove artifacts caused by the magnetic gradients and heart beats. Removal of magnetic gradient artifacts followed a modified version of the algorithm developed in  Allen and colleagues (2000)  in which an artifact template constructed from a sliding window of 41 consecutive volumes is subtracted from the EEG data according to the event markers sent from the scanner’s internal clock. Cardioballistic artifacts were removed using an algorithm developed by  Allen and colleagues (1998) . This method detected  R  peaks in the CB electrode and created a template from 21 consecutive heartbeats, which was subtracted from the continuous EEG data. Data were then down-sampled to 250 Hz for computational efficiency and exported to EEGLab ( Delorme & Makeig, 2004 ). A 5 to 15 Hz band-pass Kaiser filter implemented in EEGLab was applied to the continuous data. Following the filter, the EEG data was segmented from -400 to 5200 ms relative to the onset of the Gabor patch. No additional artifact rejection was performed after this point, however technical failure resulted in the loss of 10 trials for one participant and 2 trials for another participant during the habituation phase only. All remaining EEG data were used in the subsequent data processing pipeline as described below. 
 
 
 Single-trial ssVEP estimation 
 The EEG signal averaged across all participants and trials at sensor Oz is shown in  Figure 1  (bottom), for which the maximum amplitude in the frequency domain matches the ssVEP stimulation frequency of 10 Hz ( Figure 1 , top). Estimates of single-trial 10 Hz evoked oscillatory activity were extracted using a moving window average ( Keil et al., 2008 ). To avoid ERP contamination, a 964–4964 ms post-onset segment of each epoch was used in this process. For each trial, a 400 ms time window was shifted across this time-segment in steps of 100 ms and the contents of the window averaged, resulting in a 400 ms segment containing four cycles of the ssVEP and representing an average of 36 sliding windows. These averages were transformed into the frequency domain using a discrete Fourier transform (DFT). The 400 ms window resulted in a spectrum with a frequency resolution of 2.5 Hz. Following extraction of the amplitude spectrum (by computing the magnitude of the complex Fourier coefficients at each frequency), the spectrum was normalized by the number of frequency bins. The ssVEP amplitude was then extracted as the spectral amplitude at the 10 Hz driving frequency, and amplitude at sensor Oz was used for subsequent statistical analyses. 
 To assess the reliability of single-trial ssVEP amplitude estimates, values at Oz were submitted to a Cronbach’s ( Cronbach, 1947 ) test of internal consistency, using trials as observations. This test yielded a Cronbach’s alpha of > 0.90 across the electrode array, and an alpha of .94 at Oz, indicating a high degree of internal consistency among ssVEP values across participants. 
 
 
 ssVEP analysis 
 For both CS conditions separately, estimates of single-trial ssVEP amplitude at sensor Oz were averaged across 3 experimental phases representative of the learning process implemented in our experimental design, which consisted of (1) pre-conditioning, (2) post-conditioning, and (3) post-extinction. The pre-conditioning phase consisted of the whole habituation block. Based on a body of previous ssVEP and heart rate (HR) studies of classical aversive conditioning (e.g.,  Moratti and Keil, 2005 ; Wieser et al., 2014), the second phase consisted of the whole acquisition block as well as the first half of the extinction block. Including the first half of extinction in the post-acquisition phase ensured accurate representation of ssVEP changes occurring after the full acquisition phase, as observed previously in conditioning paradigms without explicit contingency instruction (Stephan Moratti, Keil, & Miller, 2006). Based on the same rationale, the second half of the extinction block was treated as a separate post-extinction phase, to reflect processes occurring  after  most observers had undergone fear extinction. After averaging, ssVEP amplitude values were log-transformed to reduce the amplification of between-subject differences associated with using spectral power data. For each experimental phase separately, a dependent samples t-test was conducted between CS types. 
 
 
 Heart rate analysis 
 The EKG channel was used to calculate heart rate reactivity as the change from baseline in beats per minute (BPM). To this end, data was segmented from -3000 to 7000ms relative to the onset of the CS stimulus. R-waves were detected within each segment, allowing computation of inter-beat (R–R) intervals, and beats per minute were determined by calculating weighted inverse values of inter-beat intervals for 1 second bins, as described by  Graham (1978) . Single-trial BPM waveforms were averaged together into the same 3 phases as described for the analysis of ssVEP amplitudes. Participant-averaged BPM time series were then baseline corrected from -2000 to 1000 ms relative to stimulus onset. To assess heart rate deceleration the minimum value from 0 to 3000 ms after stimulus onset was extracted for each participant, CS-type, and experimental phase. For each experimental phase separately, both CS-types were submitted to a dependent samples t-test. 
 
 
 BOLD recording and preprocessing 
 MRI data was collected on a 3T Philips Achieva scanner. Functional volumes varied between 202 and 468 per experimental block and were acquired during gradient-echo echo-planar imaging sequence [echo time (TE), 30 ms; Repetition Time (TR), 1.98 s; flip angle, 80°; slice number, 36; field of view, 224 mm; voxel size, 3.5 × 3.5 × 3.5 mm; matrix size 64 × 64]. The first 4 functional scans were discarded to allow for scanner stabilization. Slices were acquired in ascending order oriented parallel to the plane connecting the anterior and posterior commissure during a 1850 ms interval with 130 ms between each TR, during which no images were collected and which allowed for visual inspection of the EEG data during recording when the MR gradient artifact was absent. Structural scans were acquired from T1-weighted images acquired during a magnetization-prepared 180 degrees radio-frequency pulse and rapid gradientecho (MP RAGE) sampling sequence [echo time (TE), 3.1 ms; Repetition Time (TR), 8.1 ms; flip angle, 8°; slice number, 36; field of view, 240 mm; voxel size, 1 × 1 × 1 mm; matrix size 240 × 240]. 
 Preprocessing of MRI data was completed using SPM8. For each participant, head movements were estimated by realigning each scan to match the first scan in the scanning sequence. Images were normalized and registered to a standard template within SPM [the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space] during which functional volume images were resampled to a spatial resolution of 3 × 3 × 3 mm. Low-frequency temporal drifts were removed from the BOLD data using a 1/128 Hz high-pass filter. The global signal was removed by dividing each voxel with the mean value across slices. Images were smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full-width at half-maximum of 6mm. 
 
 
 BOLD analysis 
 Two separate GLMs with parametric modulation were constructed. The first GLM aimed to model the ssVEP-BOLD coupling over the entire experiment. Thus, all trials were modeled in each experimental block separately using a GLM which consisted of a sequence of boxcar functions in which the start was synchronized with the onset of each stimulus and width equal to the duration of each trial. Each boxcar function was then convolved with a canonical hemodynamic boxcar function. For the second regressor, the height of the boxcar function varied according to the normalized single-trial ssVEP amplitudes. Six additional regressors describing participants’ head movements, as determined during preprocessing, were added to this design matrix to account for head movements during the scanning process. This process was repeated for each experimental block, resulting in 6 task-related regressors, three of which modeled ssVEP-BOLD coupling. 
 The second model aimed to investigate differences between CS-types for both BOLD alone and ssVEP-BOLD coupling across the duration of all experimental blocks. Construction of this model followed the same steps as in the first model, but constructed separate regressors for each condition and half within in each block. A CS+ versus CS- contrast was conducted using regressors modeling only the stimulus onsets and durations, resulting in three t-maps for each participant representing the extent to which the BOLD activity alone differed between CS-types. Whereas the EEG and HR condition differences were assessed by binning trials based on the 3 experimental phases described above, the BOLD analysis compared CS+ and CS-conditions specifically during the acquisition block, to reduce design complexity, to replicate the contrasts available from most previous studies of fear-conditioning, and enable comparison with extant meta-analyses ( Fullana et al., 2016 ). The same CS+ versus CS- contrast was conducted using ssVEP informed regressors to determine whether ssVEP-BOLD coupling differed between the stimulus conditions. 
 Single subject statistical t-maps were submitted to a second-level analysis using random-effects models which examines the extent to which effects reproduce across subjects. Determining significant activation while protecting against false positives was achieved using cluster-extent based thresholding according to guidelines outlined by  Woo and colleagues, (2014) . Here, a threshold for statistical significance was determined using a cluster-based approach in a two-step procedure: First a minimum voxel-wise threshold (P < 0.001 uncorrected) was applied to identify candidate voxels and then a second cluster-wise (extent) threshold (FWE P < 0.05) was calculated based on Gaussian Random Field theory ( Friston, Worsley, Frackowiak, Mazziotta, & Evans, 1994 ;  Hayasaka & Nichols, 2003 ). Note that this procedure led to an expected rate of about 5% false positives in a recent analysis of potentially problematic fMRI analysis methods ( Eklund, Nichols, & Knutsson, 2016 ). Here, a cluster-wise threshold of k = 14 was determined. The threshold for the ssVEP-BOLD coupling analyses followed the same steps, but used a lower initial voxel-wise threshold (p < 0.01) to account for the reduced variability involved in modeling the residual BOLD activity, which is in line with previous studies using EEG-informed BOLD analyses ( Liu, Huang, McGinnis-Deweese, Keil, & Ding, 2012 ;  Scheeringa, Mazaheri, Bojak, Norris, & Kleinschmidt, 2011 ,  Bénar et al., 2007 ;  Debener et al., 2005 ;  Eichele et al., 2005 ), and led to a cluster extent threshold of k=23 voxels. Note that the ssVEP-BOLD analysis sought convergent validity with BOLD-alone and BOLD connectivity analyses, thus providing additional protection against false positives. 
 Labeling of significant clusters was conducted using the probabilistic cytoarchitectonic labeling system ( Eickhoff et al., 2005 ) SPM toolbox. The atlas included in this toolbox is constructed based on histological labeling from ten post-mortem brains, and includes probabilistic labeling based on inter-individual variability of spatial locations, including several areas within visual cortical, hippocampal, and thalamic regions. Visual structures included areas V1, V2, the dorsal and ventral portions of V3 (V3d, V3v) and V4 (V4d, V4v), V5/MT+ (hOC5), four sub-regions in the fusiform gyrus (FG1, FG2, FG3, FG4), anterior and posterior portions of the lateral occipital cortex (hOC4la, hOC4lp), as well as dorsal and ventral portions of visual extrastriate cortices (hOC3d, hOC4vd, hOC3v, hOC4v). Additionally, this atlas includes sub-regions within the superior parietal cortex (5L, 5M, 5Ci, 7A, 7PC, 7M, 7P), inferior parietal (PFop, PFt, PF, PFm, PFcm, PGa, PGp), intra-parietal sulcus (hlP1, hlP2, hlP3), and parietal operculum (OP1, OP2, OP3, OP4). All hippocampal regions are included in this atlas (DG, CA1, CA2, CA3, CA4, subiculum), and thalamic regions are divided into separate regions based on cortical connectivity as determined by  Behrens and colleagues (2003) . Because the histological labeling atlas does not include many anterior cortical structures, clusters located outside of the visual cortical, hippocampal, and thalamic regions were labeled using a macroscopic level atlas included in this same toolbox. 
 
 
 
 HR-BOLD coupling 
 One note of caution regarding the use of parametric modulation analyses with BOLD data includes the possibility of spurious results in cases where the parametric modulator systematically reflects pronounced physiological changes such as heart rate or respiration, which directly impact cerebral blood flow and the BOLD signal ( de Munck et al., 2008 ;  Liu, 2016 ;  Wise, Ide, Poulin, & Tracey, 2004 ). The simultaneous collection of heart rate allowed us to explore the extent to which ssVEP-BOLD coupling was a mere epiphenomenon of the known co-variation of ssVEPs with heart rate orienting and cardiac fear acceleration responses (e.g., Keil et al., 2010). Towards this goal, we calculated the maximum change in BPM from baseline 1000 to 4000 ms following stimulus onset for each single trial. These values were used to construct a predictive model for the BOLD activity according to the same methods described in the ssVEP-BOLD coupling analysis methods, included identical voxel-wise (t=2.62) and cluster-extent (k=14) thresholding to guard against false-positives. 
 
 Dynamic Causal Modeling 
 Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM;  Friston, Harrison, & Penny, 2003 ) uses Bayesian modeling to compare possible directional connectivity configurations among brain regions for individual stimulus conditions interleaved within a BOLD time-series, and was conducted in the current study as a follow-up analysis to explore networks of brain structures that may give rise to enhanced CS+ activity in visual cortical regions. Specifically, this analysis aimed at characterizing the direction of CS+ BOLD increases relative to visual cortex: Whether visual cortical activity enhances activity of extra-visual regions (Feedforward), whether any extra-visual regions enhance visual cortical activity (Feedback), or if the enhancement is reciprocal in nature (Reciprocal). Toward this aim we included all regions that demonstrated CS+ relative to CS- BOLD enhancement for both the BOLD-alone and ssVEP-BOLD coupling analyses in a set of connectivity architectures which modeled all possible directions of CS+ enhanced influence between visual and extra-visual regions and tested whether feedback, feedforward, or reciprocal models best described CS+ enhancement. In addition, the bilateral amygdaloid complexes were included as possible structures. Since this analysis was focused on the mechanisms underlying CS+ enhancement, only BOLD data from the acquisition block was submitted to this analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Heart Rate 
 Heart rate deceleration between 0 and 3000 ms following stimulus onset for both CS+ and CS- in each of the three conditioning phases are illustrated in  Figure 2  (bottom) As expected, follow-up t-tests between CS types for each of the three phases (pre-conditioning, post-conditioning, post-extinction) separately indicated heart rate deceleration was larger for CS+ relative to CS- stimuli during the second phase (post-conditioning) only (t 1,14 =2.569, p<0.05). 
 
 
 SAM Ratings 
 Statistical analysis (paired t-test) of the emotional hedonic and arousal ratings obtained at the conclusion of all three experimental sessions revealed no difference between CSs on both arousal (Means: CS+=5.73, CS-=5.46; t 14 =0.638, p>0.05) and valence (Means: CS+=4.40, CS-=4.80; t 14 =-.764, p>0.05). 
 
 
 EEG-ssVEP 
 Mean values of ssVEP amplitudes by bins are shown in  Figure 2 . This figure illustrates a sustained increase in ssVEP amplitude for CS+ relative to CS- trials beginning in the first half of the acquisition block and lasting through the first half of extinction, which is followed by an increase in CS- relative to CS+ amplitude for the last half of extinction. As expected, t-tests comparing CS-types for each phase separately showed larger CS+ relative to CS- amplitudes (t 1,14 =2.208, p<0.05), only during the post-conditioning phase, when contingencies were established. 
 
 
 Hemodynamic data 
 
 CS+ vs CS- 
 Cluster locations for all BOLD-alone analyses are shown in  Table 1 . BOLD activity was greater for CS+ relative to CS- trials during the acquisition block in four separate voxel clusters ( Figure 3 , red). For one cluster (k=14), significant voxels spanned areas V1, V2, V3v, and V4v. The maximum t-value (t=4.61) was also located in the right lingual gyrus. According to the probabilistic labeling atlas, this voxel had the largest probability (37%) of being located in V1, followed by V2 (21%) or V3v (18%). Altogether, significant voxels in this cluster spanned areas V1, V2, V3v, and V4v. 
 Three additional clusters were located outside the visual cortex and not within the cytoarchitectonic atlas. Two of these clusters were each located in the left (k=32; t=4.01) and right (k=21; t=3.66) insula. Another cluster was located in the right superior temporal gyrus (t=6.73; k=23). The same CS+ vs CS- comparisons during habituation and extinction yielded no significant clusters. 
 
 
 
 ssVEP-BOLD coupling 
 
 Effects of CS onset 
 When all trials across all three experimental blocks were considered, single-trial ssVEP amplitude positively related to BOLD activity in six clusters ( Figure 4 ). Three of these clusters consisted of occipital cortical areas. For one of these occipital clusters, significant voxels spanned right lateralized areas V1, V2, and the ventral portion of area V3 (V3v). The peak t-value (5.26) was located in the right lingual gyrus, with maximum probability of being located in V2 (48%) followed by V1 (43%). Two additional visual cortical clusters emerged: One cluster (k=37) spanned the left lateralized areas of V1, V2, V3v, V3d, and posterior lateral extra-striate visual cortex (hOC4lp). The maximum t-value (4.42) was located in the left middle occipital gyrus, with highest probability of being located in area V1 (58%). Another cluster (k=31) had a maximum t-value (4.41) in the defined left inferior occipital gyrus with highest probability of being located in FG2 (31%). This cluster spanned areas FG2, FG4, and the anterior lateral extra-striate visual cortex (hOC4la). 
 Three clusters were located in thalamic and hippocampal areas. For the hippocampal cluster (k=38), the maximum t-value (3.11) was located in the left hippocampus, with highest probability of being located in the dentate gyrus (38%). This cluster spanned areas DG, CA1, CA2, the subiculum, CA3, and FG3. Finally, one large cluster of voxels related to ssVEP amplitude (k=295) spanned extended aspects of the thalamus and hippocampal regions DG, CA1, CA2, and CA3. The maximum t-value (4.81) for this cluster had the highest probability of being located in the right temporal thalamic region (38%). One additional clusters existed outside the purview of the Jülich probabilistic atlas in cortical and midbrain areas, in the right rolandic operculum (k=46; t=3.94). 
 
 
 Effects of CS+ compared to CS- 
 Four clusters of voxels yielded greater ssVEP-BOLD coupling for CS+ relative to CS-trials during acquisition ( Figure 3 , green;  Figure 5 ). In one cluster (k=54) the maximum t-value (5.11) was located in the right calcarine gyrus. The Jülich Probabilistic atlas indicated that this voxel was most likely located in area V1 (46%), but also may be located in area V2 (45%). This cluster spanned area V1 and V2 bilaterally, as well as the right lateralized V3A and V3d. 
 A second cluster (k=27) had a maximum t-value (3.44) located in the left inferior parietal lobule. This voxel had the highest probability (44%) of being located in the left PFm, spanning the PF, PFcm, hIP2, and PFm. 
 Two additional clusters were located in frontal regions and outside the regions defined by the cytoarchitectonic atlas. These clusters contained maximum t-values the left (k=43; t=5.37) and right (k=40; t=3.73) middle frontal gyri. 
 
 
 
 HR-BOLD coupling 
 The complete results of the HR-BOLD coupling analysis can be seen in  Figure 6 . Two clusters showed significant negative HR-BOLD coupling such that the BOLD signal increased with a larger deceleration (orienting response) of heart rate in response to the conditioned stimuli. One cluster contained a maximum t-value (k=75; t=-4.29) located in the left anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). The second cluster contained a maximum t-value (k=40; t=-4.34) in the left putamen. 
 Three clusters showed a positive HR-BOLD coupling, such that the BOLD signal showed greater increase with relative acceleration of the heart. One cluster (k=53; t=4.12) was located in the left middle frontal gyrus. Two clusters were located in the left (k=37; t=4.52) and right (k=27; t=3.90) postcentral gyrus. For the right post-central gyrus cluster, the probabilistic atlas indicated a 37% probability of this cluster being located in area OP4 of the rolandic operculum. The left post-central gyrus cluster was assigned a 16.8% likelihood of being located in area 3a of the primary somatosensory cortex and a 12.3% likelihood of being located in area 44 of Broca’s region. 
 
 
 Dynamic Causal Modeling 
 The previous analyses showed an enhanced CS+ BOLD response and ssVEP-BOLD coupling in the occipital pole and calcarine fissure, respectively, as well as multiple structures outside visual areas. An additional question arising from these analyses concerns the dynamics and directionality of communication among these structures during CS+ trials, specifically whether any or all of these extra-visual structures 1) modulate the activity in visual cortical clusters (Feedback), 2) are modulated by visual cortical clusters (Feedforward), or 3) share reciprocal modulation with visual cortical clusters (Reciprocal). Toward this aim, the BOLD activity from these regions during the acquisition block was submitted to Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM), which tested the likelihood of multiple possible connection models, between the structures identified by BOLD-alone and ssVEP-BOLD analyses. To test whether extra-visual regions sent feedback signals to modulate visual cortex, a family of connectivity architectures were constructed to model CS+ influence on the regions in the calcarine fissure and the occipital pole, shown above to be sensitive to conditioned threat. This family of models tested feedback from all extra-visual structures together as well as for each region each individually. This process was repeated twice, modeling the connections as feedforward and reciprocal. To test whether these CS+ modulations were exclusive to the occipital pole or calcarine fissure, as opposed to their combination, two additional families of models were constructed as outlined above to model the connection(s) between the occipital pole and calcarine fissure separately. As a result, a total of 63 models were separated into 9 families (see  Table 2 ). 
 The comparison of these 9 families revealed that feedback to both the occipital pole and calcarine fissure provided the best characterization of CS+ modulation, yielding a posterior likelihood of 0.77. Models including feedback to the occipital pole alone yielded a posterior likelihood of 0.23. All other model families showed a posterior likelihood of <2.16*10 −8 . A second family comparison was conducted to determine if any specific structures explained CS+ modulation to the occipital pole and calcarine fissure together, as well as the occipital pole alone. Here, each of the 7 models (see  Table 2 ) in the occipital pole and calcarine fissure feedback family and the occipital pole feedback family were treated as separate families. This analysis revealed that the right middle frontal gyrus explained this CS+ modulation for both the occipital pole and calcarine fissure, with this model yielding a posterior likelihood of 0.77. The same structure also provided some evidence of CS+ modulation in the occipital pole alone, with a posterior likelihood of 0.23. 
 Following this analysis, a control was added, comparing connectivity patterns when the effect of safety (CS-) was considered. Thus, an identical set of connectivity architectures was constructed, but modeling CS- related modulation instead of modulation related to the CS+. The new (CS-) models were then compared familywise against the CS+ models described above. As expected given that no visuo-cortical amplification was seen for the CS-, all CS- models displayed a posterior likelihood below 0.05, indicating that CS+ better explained BOLD modulation when compared with CS-. 
 The amygdala has been widely considered a source of visual cortical feedback, as discussed in the Introduction. However, the BOLD activity in this region did not discriminate between CS-type in either the BOLD-alone or ssVEP-BOLD analysis. It has been suggested however that CS type affects amygdala connectivity patterns differently than the local BOLD-activity, and that both BOLD level and connectivity may change through the course of contingency learning ( Bassett, Yang, Wymbs, & Grafton, 2015 ). Thus, given the prominence of amygdala-fugal connections in many models of emotional perception, an exploration of models testing the feedback, feedforward, and reciprocal connections between the occipital pole and calcarine fissure and the amygdaloid bodies was conducted. Again, connectivity models including the amygdalae were tested for both CS+ and CS- modulation. These models were submitted to family-based comparisons which tested (1) whether amygdalo-fugal connections better explained CS+ modulation compared to the original set of connectivity architectures based on brain regions with significant contrasts (above), and (2) whether CS+ or CS- stimuli differentially modulated these connections. These analyses indicated that amygdalo-fugal connections (posterior likelihood = 1.00) better explained CS+ modulation compared to the original set of models (posterior likelihood = 5.42*10 −303 ) but re-entrant modulation of visual cortex during CS- (posterior likelihood = 0.99) was more strongly supported compared to CS+ trials (posterior likelihood = 5.14*10 −5 ). A follow-up family comparison revealed that CS-(safety) related amygdalo-fugal feedback to the occipital pole was the most strongly supported connectivity pattern among the models including the bilateral amygdala, in which the posterior likelihood was 1.00 whereas all other models did not exceed 0.0003. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 The current study investigated the large-scale coupling between whole-brain BOLD data and electrophysiologically recorded visual responses (ssVEPs) during classical aversive conditioning. As expected, the ssVEP amplitude, generated in early visual peri-calcarine cortical areas, increased for CS+ relative to CS- trials, as participants acquired the CS+ and US contingencies ( Gruss et al., 2016 ;  Keil et al., 2013 ;  Miskovic & Keil, 2012 ;  Moratti & Keil, 2009 ;  Moratti, Keil, & Miller, 2006 ). Consistent with a large body of hemodynamic neuroimaging research, these differences in visual cortical electrophysiology were accompanied by CS+ specific BOLD activation in visual cortical areas ( Carter, O’Doherty, Seymour, Koch, & Dolan, 2006 ; Cheng,  Knight, Smith, Stein, & Helmstetter, 2003 ;  Klucken et al., 2009 ;  Knight, Cheng, Smith, Stein, & Helmstetter, 2004 ;  Tabbert, Stark, Kirsch, & Vaitl, 2005 ). Importantly, heightened co-variation of occipital ssVEP amplitude with BOLD signals was observed in the calcarine cortex, inferior parietal lobule (IPL), angular gyrus, and the bilateral middle frontal gyrus (MFG), showing greater ssVEP-BOLD coupling when viewing the CS+. No regions displayed greater coupling when viewing the CS-. The robust differential ssVEP-BOLD coupling in the calcarine fissure likely indexes the—well established—heightened blood flow (e.g.  Fullana et al., 2016 ) and heightened electrocortical responses ( Keil et al., 2013 ) for the CS+ in this same region, thus supporting the validity of the combined ssVEP-BOLD analysis used here. 
 The temporal co-variation among these fronto-parietal and occipital structures suggests functional coupling, which may underlie the experience-dependent modulation of activity in the visual cortex. To further examine this question, Dynamic Causal Modeling analyses were conducted. These analyses strongly supported connectivity models in which the selective amplification of visual cortex during threat resulted from cortico-cortical top-down modulation, specifically from the MFG. Evidence for communication between the MFG and visual cortex has long been established as an important component in visual perception and selective attention. For example, frontal lesion studies combined with ERPs (e.g.,  Barcelo, Suwazono, & Knight, 2000 ) and neuroimaging studies of selective attention (e.g.,  Kastner et al., 1999 ) have provided strong evidence that frontal cortex including the MFG are involved in selective attention as reflected in changes of visuo-cortical activity. Large-scale fronto-occipital interactions have also been postulated based on neuroanatomy, with well-known dense white matter tracts connecting MFG to the occipital cortex. Specifically, the bilateral inferior fronto-occipital fasciculi (IFOF) as well as the anterior thalamic radiations may serve as an anatomical means of efficient communication between frontal and occipital structures, either through thalamic relays or directly via the IFOF ( Forkel et al., 2014 ). Future work may examine characteristics of these white matter tracts in relation to aversive conditioning. 
 In a similar vein, it has been extensively demonstrated that BOLD activity in the IPL also found to selectively co-vary with the ssVEP modulation during threat is sensitive to numerous visual tasks, including changes in directed attention ( Corbetta, Kincade, Ollinger, McAvoy, & Shulman, 2000 ), anticipation of to-be-attended stimuli ( Kastner, Pinsk, De Weerd, Desimone, & Ungerleider, 1999 ), maintenance of sustained attention ( Hopfinger, Buonocore, & Mangun, 2000 ), and processing of saliency ( Clark, Fannon, Lai, Benson, & Bauer, 2000 ). Deficits in sustained visual attention performance and disrupted visual evoked components follow lesions to these fronto-parietal regions ( Angelelli, de Luca, & Spinelli, 1996 ;  Lhermitte, Turell, LeBrigand, & Chain, 1985 ;  Malhotra, Coulthard, & Husain, 2009 ;  Mizuno et al., 2013 ) as well as their inhibition by means of TMS ( Lee et al., 2013 ). Together, the present analyses strongly support a view in which fronto-parietal attention networks are the sources of top-down signals, which amplify visual cortical activity during threat perception. 
 No evidence was observed for a selective influence of deep cortical structures such as the amygdala or anterior insula on visuo-cortical changes, in any of the analyses. Consistent with recent meta-analyses ( Fullana et al. 2016 ), the amygdaloid body did not appear in the BOLD contrast comparing CS+ and CS-. Only about 30% of human fear conditioning studies have reported significant BOLD modulation of the human amygdala ( Sehlmeyer et al., 2009 ). Previous studies have found activation of the amygdala only during the early time course of initial aversive conditioning after which activation reaches a baseline level, ultimately leading to an insignificant activation over the entire time course ( LaBar, Gatenby, Gore, LeDoux, & Phelps, 1998 ). Amygdala activity in the current study also did not co-vary with the ssVEP amplitude, or with modulation of the ssVEP by CS-type. Importantly however, connectivity models that included the amygdala showed substantial evidence for re-entrant modulation of visual cortex when viewing both CS+ and CS-, with the safety (CS-) condition characterized by greater amygdalo-fugal connectivity, compared to the threat condition. This finding is in line with recent trends in the published literature that de-emphasize the selective role of the amygdala in human threat processing ( Edmiston et al., 2013 ), with mounting evidence supporting a view of the amygdala as involved in a flexible network involved in salience processing ( e.g.,  Markovic, Anderson, & Todd, 2014 ) and in forming associations of conditioned cues with both threat and safety outcomes ( Likhtik & Paz, 2015 ). Conceptual work has begun to reconcile these findings with a well-documented history of focus on this structure’s involvement in fear conditioning in the animal model ( LaBar et al., 1998 ;  LeDoux, 2003 ;  Maren & Fanselow, 1996 ;  Phelps & LeDoux, 2005 ;  Singer, Critchley, & Preuschoff, 2009 ;  Stein, Simmons, Feinstein, & Paulus, 2007 ;  Davis, 1997 ). 
 When considering all trials across the three experimental blocks, irrespective of CS type, the ssVEP amplitude co-varied with BOLD activity in primary visual cortical areas bilaterally, and in extended visual occipital, parietal, and anterior cortical sites as well as the thalamus and the hippocampus. These regions are dissociable from MFG and the inferior parietal sites observed in the CS+ > CS- ssVEP-BOLD coupling analysis discussed above. 
 As mentioned in the methods, one concern regarding parametric modulation analyses of BOLD and autonomic measures has been the susceptibility of these analyses to spurious effects of co-variation reflecting overall blood flow, rather than brain-specific activity. Previous studies have addressed this potential physiological contamination by using HR measurements as a nuisance regressor ( de Munck et al., 2008 ). However, in light of the known systematic sensitivity of HR, BOLD, and ssVEP to threat processing ( Bradley, 2009 ;  Keil et al., 2008 ), this approach was not implemented here. Instead, we provided a separate analysis of HR-BOLD coupling, which allows to consider the overlap between ssVEP-BOLD and HR-BOLD. This analysis revealed ACC and putamen co-variation with greater decreases in HR, another marker of a threat-cue orienting response. This control analysis suggests that the ACC and putamen—also observed in the ssVEP-BOLD coupling analysis—may be involved in modulating heart-rate or in coordinating a broader cascade of defensive physiological responses, which may include visuocortical tuning and heart-rate changes. The remaining ssVEP-BOLD clusters not shared with the HR-BOLD coupling analysis are likely more uniquely involved in modulating visual cortical responses. This potential dissociable nature of multiple brain region functions in regards to threat-cue orienting response warrant further exploration, and is ideally suited to be studied using multimodal approaches similar to the present study. 
 The ssVEP-BOLD coupling analyses suggest that distinct brain regions communicate with visual cortex at different times, depending on the experimental task, the context, and the significance of the stimulus. This interpretation is consistent with theoretical notions suggesting that visual biases towards threat cues are driven by a subset of the complex, parallel circuits mediating visual processing in distributed brain regions ( Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010 ). Supporting this notion, the present data are inconsistent with a mechanism in which bias signaling is mediated by an isolated brain region such as the amygdala and/or insula. 
 In addition to visual cortex, the hemodynamic analyses comparing BOLD for CS+ and CS- revealed activation in the bilateral anterior insulae and the right superior temporal cortex. The superior temporal cortex has been reported in several previous neuroimaging studies on aversive conditioning ( Knight, Nguyen, & Bandettini, 2005 ;  LaBar et al., 1998 ;  Straube, Weiss, Mentzel, & Miltner, 2007 ), and a recent meta-analysis found the anterior insulae to be consistently active across the contemporary neuroimaging literature ( Fullana et al., 2016 ). The CS-type difference in these regions did not appear in the ssVEP-BOLD coupling analysis, indicating that electro-cortical fluctuations in visual areas did not explain BOLD variance within the aforementioned brain regions. These results suggest that the role of the anterior insula and the superior temporal cortex in aversive conditioning does not involve communication with primary visual cortical regions, at least not on a trial-by-trial basis. Either or both of these regions may be involved in more general visual associative processes, however, or in signaling another defensive physiological response associated with aversive conditioning. Such defensive reactivity was reflected in the present study by greater heart rate deceleration for the CS+, compared to the CS- after conditioning ( Hamm & Vaitl, 1996 ;  Hodes, Cook, & Lang, 1985 ;  Moratti & Keil, 2005 ). 
 A typical finding in delayed classical aversive conditioning is that association formation does not depend on awareness of the CS-US contingency ( Clark, Manns, & Squire, 2002 ). Specifically, metrics of visual cortical engagement ( Moratti, Keil, & Miller, 2006 ) and the startle response ( Sevenster, Beckers, & Kindt, 2014 ) show reliable discrimination across a wide range of delayed classical conditioning paradigms in participants with and without reportable insight into the pairing between conditioned and unconditioned stimuli. It has also been commonly found that—despite showing conditioning effects—less than half of the participants tend to show measurable evidence of contingency awareness in most classical aversive conditioning studies ( Clark, Manns, & Squire, 2002 ). In the present study we used SAM ratings to assess the extent to which participants showed reportable contingency awareness, which perhaps not surprisingly indicated that, as a group, there was no evidence of awareness. The present sample was also limited in size, preventing us from comparing sub-groups with and without awareness, which may be a productive avenue for future research. 
 To conclude, the present study combined the temporally sensitive EEG recordings of evoked oscillations generated in peri-calcarine cortex with concurrently recorded fMRI. It was found that activity in fronto-parietal regions was functionally related to electrocortical activity in peri-calcarine areas of the brain, and that this coupling was greater when viewing conditioned threat signals. Analyses of directional influence suggest that frontal cortical regions prompt the selective CS+ amplification in visual cortical areas following CS-US pairing, which serves the function of signaling visual danger cues. Our findings deviate from some of the dominant hypotheses in the field, and provide strong evidence that a major component of selective threat amplification occurs via cortico-cortical feedback mechanisms. Future studies may investigate more precisely the spatial and temporal dynamics of the interactions among these regions, and whether additional structures not captured by BOLD may mediate their interaction, including whether visual cortical feedback is re-entrant or perhaps exist prior to stimulus onset, reflective of prediction signals acquired over the course of the learning regimen. 
 
 
 
 This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01MH097320) and the Office of Naval Research (N00014-14-1-0542). The authors are grateful to Hong Ji for her assistance with exploring approaches to data analysis. 
 
 
 Citations 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Josephs 
 O 
 
 
 Turner 
 R 
 
 
 2000 
 A Method for Removing Imaging Artifact from Continuous EEG Recorded during Functional MRI 
 NeuroImage 
 12 
 2 
 230 
 239 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2000.0599 
 
 10913328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allen 
 PJ 
 
 
 Polizzi 
 G 
 
 
 Krakow 
 K 
 
 
 Fish 
 DR 
 
 
 Lemieux 
 L 
 
 
 1998 
 Identification of EEG Events in the MR Scanner: The Problem of Pulse Artifact and a Method for Its Subtraction 
 NeuroImage 
 8 
 3 
 229 
 239 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.1998.0361 
 
 9758737 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amaral 
 DG 
 
 
 2003 
 The Amygdala, Social Behavior, and Danger Detection 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1000 
 1 
 337 
 347 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1280.015 
 
 14766647 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amaral 
 DG 
 
 
 Behniea 
 H 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JL 
 
 
 2003 
 Topographic organization of projections from the amygdala to the visual cortex in the macaque monkey 
 Neuroscience 
 118 
 4 
 1099 
 1120 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4522(02)01001-1 
 
 12732254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 2005 
 Affective influences on the attentional dynamics supporting awareness 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 134 
 2 
 258 
 81 
 15869349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Angelelli 
 P 
 
 
 de Luca 
 M 
 
 
 Spinelli 
 D 
 
 
 1996 
 Early visual processing in neglect patients: A study with steady-state VEPs 
 Neuropsychologia 
 34 
 12 
 1151 
 1157 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(96)00036-X 
 
 8951825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barcelo 
 F 
 
 
 Suwazono 
 S 
 
 
 Knight 
 RT 
 
 
 2000 
 Prefrontal modulation of visual processing in humans 
 Nat Neurosci 
 3 
 4 
 399 
 403 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/73975 
 
 10725931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bassett 
 DS 
 
 
 Yang 
 M 
 
 
 Wymbs 
 NF 
 
 
 Grafton 
 ST 
 
 
 2015 
 Learning-induced autonomy of sensorimotor systems 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 18 
 5 
 744 
 751 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3993 
 
 25849989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Behrens 
 TEJ 
 
 
 Johansen-Berg 
 H 
 
 
 Woolrich 
 MW 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Wheeler-Kingshott 
 CaM 
 
 
 Boulby 
 PA 
 
 
 Matthews 
 PM 
 
 
 2003 
 Non-invasive mapping of connections between human thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 6 
 7 
 750 
 757 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1075 
 
 12808459 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bénar 
 C-G 
 
 
 Schön 
 D 
 
 
 Grimault 
 S 
 
 
 Nazarian 
 B 
 
 
 Burle 
 B 
 
 
 Roth 
 M 
 
 
 Anton 
 J-L 
 
 
 2007 
 Single-trial analysis of oddball event-related potentials in simultaneous EEG-fMRI 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 28 
 7 
 602 
 613 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20289 
 
 17295312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 2009 
 Natural selective attention: orienting and emotion 
 Psychophysiology 
 46 
 1 
 11 
 18778317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 1994 
 Measuring emotion: The self-assessment manikin and the semantic differential 
 Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 
 25 
 1 
 49 
 59 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-7916(94)90063-9 
 
 7962581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carter 
 RM 
 
 
 O’Doherty 
 JP 
 
 
 Seymour 
 B 
 
 
 Koch 
 C 
 
 
 Dolan 
 RJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Contingency awareness in human aversive conditioning involves the middle frontal gyrus 
 NeuroImage 
 29 
 3 
 1007 
 1012 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.09.011 
 
 16246595 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cheng 
 DT 
 
 
 Knight 
 DC 
 
 
 Smith 
 CN 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 Helmstetter 
 FJ 
 
 
 2003 
 Functional MRI of human amygdala activity during Pavlovian fear conditioning: Stimulus processing versus response expression 
 Behavioral Neuroscience 
 117 
 1 
 3 
 10 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7044.117.1.3 
 
 12619902 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 RE 
 
 
 Manns 
 JR 
 
 
 Squire 
 LR 
 
 
 2002 
 Classical conditioning, awareness, and brain systems 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 6 
 12 
 524 
 531 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(02)02041-7 
 
 12475713 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clark 
 VP 
 
 
 Fannon 
 S 
 
 
 Lai 
 S 
 
 
 Benson 
 R 
 
 
 Bauer 
 L 
 
 
 2000 
 Responses to rare visual target and distractor stimuli using event-related fMRI 
 Journal of Neurophysiology 
 83 
 5 
 3133 
 3139 
 10805707 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clugnet 
 MC 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 1990 
 Synaptic plasticity in fear conditioning circuits: induction of LTP in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala by stimulation of the medial geniculate body 
 J Neurosci 
 10 
 8 
 2818 
 24 
 2388089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corbetta 
 M 
 
 
 Kincade 
 JM 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 Shulman 
 GL 
 
 
 2000 
 Voluntary orienting is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 3 
 3 
 292 
 297 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/73009 
 
 10700263 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cronbach 
 LJ 
 
 
 1947 
 Test “reliability”: Its meaning and determination 
 Psychometrika 
 12 
 1 
 1 
 16 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289289 
 
 20293842 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Damaraju 
 E 
 
 
 Huang 
 Y-M 
 
 
 Barrett 
 LF 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 2009 
 Affective learning enhances activity and functional connectivity in early visual cortex 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 12 
 2480 
 2487 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.04.023 
 
 19410587 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 1997 
 Neurobiology of fear responses: the role of the amygdala 
 J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 
 9 
 3 
 382 
 402 
 9276841 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Debener 
 S 
 
 
 Ullsperger 
 M 
 
 
 Siegel 
 M 
 
 
 Fiehler 
 K 
 
 
 Cramon 
 DY 
 
 
 von Engel 
 AK 
 
 
 2005 
 Trial-by-Trial Coupling of Concurrent Electroencephalogram and Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Identifies the Dynamics of Performance Monitoring 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 25 
 50 
 11730 
 11737 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3286-05.2005 
 
 16354931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delgado 
 MR 
 
 
 Olsson 
 A 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 2006 
 Extending animal models of fear conditioning to humans 
 Biol Psychol 
 73 
 1 
 39 
 48 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2006.01.006 
 
 16472906 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Delorme 
 A 
 
 
 Makeig 
 S 
 
 
 2004 
 EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis 
 Journal of Neuroscience Methods 
 134 
 1 
 9 
 21 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009 
 
 15102499 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 de Munck 
 JC 
 
 
 Gonçalves 
 SI 
 
 
 Faes 
 TJC 
 
 
 Kuijer 
 JPA 
 
 
 Pouwels 
 PJW 
 
 
 Heethaar 
 RM 
 
 
 Lopes 
 da 
 
 
 Silva 
 FH 
 
 
 2008 
 A study of the brain’s resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 42 
 1 
 112 
 121 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.244 
 
 18539049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Di Russo 
 F 
 
 
 Pitzalis 
 S 
 
 
 Aprile 
 T 
 
 
 Spitoni 
 G 
 
 
 Patria 
 F 
 
 
 Stella 
 A 
 
 
 Hillyard 
 SA 
 
 
 2007 
 Spatiotemporal analysis of the cortical sources of the steady-state visual evoked potential 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 28 
 4 
 323 
 334 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20276 
 
 16779799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Edmiston 
 EK 
 
 
 McHugo 
 M 
 
 
 Dukic 
 MS 
 
 
 Smith 
 SD 
 
 
 Abou-Khalil 
 B 
 
 
 Eggers 
 E 
 
 
 Zald 
 DH 
 
 
 2013 
 Enhanced Visual Cortical Activation for Emotional Stimuli is Preserved in Patients with Unilateral Amygdala Resection 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 27 
 11023 
 31 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0401-13.2013 
 
 23825407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichele 
 T 
 
 
 Specht 
 K 
 
 
 Moosmann 
 M 
 
 
 Jongsma 
 MLA 
 
 
 Quiroga 
 RQ 
 
 
 Nordby 
 H 
 
 
 Hugdahl 
 K 
 
 
 2005 
 Assessing the spatiotemporal evolution of neuronal activation with single-trial event-related potentials and functional MRI 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 102 
 49 
 17798 
 17803 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0505508102 
 
 16314575 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 Stephan 
 KE 
 
 
 Mohlberg 
 H 
 
 
 Grefkes 
 C 
 
 
 Fink 
 GR 
 
 
 Amunts 
 K 
 
 
 Zilles 
 K 
 
 
 2005 
 A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data 
 NeuroImage 
 25 
 4 
 1325 
 1335 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.034 
 
 15850749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eklund 
 A 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Knutsson 
 H 
 
 
 2016 
 Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 113 
 28 
 7900 
 7905 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1602413113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forkel 
 SJ 
 
 
 Thiebaut 
 de 
 
 
 Schotten 
 M 
 
 
 Kawadler 
 JM 
 
 
 Dell’Acqua 
 F 
 
 
 Danek 
 A 
 
 
 Catani 
 M 
 
 
 2014 
 The anatomy of fronto-occipital connections from early blunt dissections to contemporary tractography 
 Cortex 
 56 
 73 
 84 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2012.09.005 
 
 23137651 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Harrison 
 L 
 
 
 Penny 
 W 
 
 
 2003 
 Dynamic causal modelling 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 4 
 1273 
 1302 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00202-7 
 
 12948688 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Worsley 
 KJ 
 
 
 Frackowiak 
 RSJ 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Evans 
 AC 
 
 
 1994 
 Assessing the significance of focal activations using their spatial extent 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 1 
 3 
 210 
 220 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.460010306 
 
 24578041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fullana 
 MA 
 
 
 Harrison 
 BJ 
 
 
 Soriano-Mas 
 C 
 
 
 Vervliet 
 B 
 
 
 Cardoner 
 N 
 
 
 Àvila-Parcet 
 A 
 
 
 Radua 
 J 
 
 
 2016 
 Neural signatures of human fear conditioning: an updated and extended meta-analysis of fMRI studies 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 21 
 4 
 500 
 508 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2015.88 
 
 26122585 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Furl 
 N 
 
 
 Henson 
 RN 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Calder 
 AJ 
 
 
 2013 
 Top-Down Control of Visual Responses to Fear by the Amygdala 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 33 
 44 
 17435 
 17443 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2992-13.2013 
 
 24174677 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gallant 
 JL 
 
 
 Connor 
 CE 
 
 
 Van Essen 
 DC 
 
 
 1998 
 Neural activity in areas V1, V2 and V4 during free viewing of natural scenes compared to controlled viewing 
 Neuroreport 
 9 
 1 
 85 
 90 
 9592053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Graham 
 FK 
 
 
 1978 
 Constraints on measuring heart rate and period sequentially through real and cardiac time 
 Psychophysiology 
 15 
 5 
 492 
 5 
 693763 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gruss 
 LF 
 
 
 Langaee 
 T 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2016 
 The role of the COMT val158met polymorphism in mediating aversive learning in visual cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 125 
 633 
 642 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.003 
 
 26549298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hamm 
 AO 
 
 
 Vaitl 
 D 
 
 
 1996 
 Affective learning: Awareness and aversion 
 Psychophysiology 
 33 
 6 
 698 
 710 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1996.tb02366.x 
 
 8961792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hayasaka 
 S 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 2003 
 Validating cluster size inference: random field and permutation methods 
 NeuroImage 
 20 
 4 
 2343 
 2356 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.08.003 
 
 14683734 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Headley 
 DB 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 NM 
 
 
 2011 
 Gamma-band activation predicts both associative memory and cortical plasticity 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 36 
 12748 
 58 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2528-11.2011 
 
 21900554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hodes 
 RL 
 
 
 Cook 
 EW 
 3rd 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 1985 
 Individual differences in autonomic response: conditioned association or conditioned fear? 
 Psychophysiology 
 22 
 5 
 545 
 60 
 4048355 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopfinger 
 JB 
 
 
 Buonocore 
 MH 
 
 
 Mangun 
 GR 
 
 
 2000 
 The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 3 
 3 
 284 
 291 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/72999 
 
 10700262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kastner 
 S 
 
 
 Pinsk 
 MA 
 
 
 De Weerd 
 P 
 
 
 Desimone 
 R 
 
 
 Ungerleider 
 LG 
 
 
 1999 
 Increased Activity in Human Visual Cortex during Directed Attention in the Absence of Visual Stimulation 
 Neuron 
 22 
 4 
 751 
 761 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80734-5 
 
 10230795 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Miskovic 
 V 
 
 
 Gray 
 MJ 
 
 
 Martinovic 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 Luminance, but not chromatic visual pathways, mediate amplification of conditioned danger signals in human visual cortex 
 The European Journal of Neuroscience 
 38 
 9 
 3356 
 3362 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.12316 
 
 23889165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Ding 
 M 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 Ihssen 
 N 
 
 
 Heim 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 Re-entrant Projections Modulate Visual Cortex in Affective Perception: Directional Evidence from Granger Causality Analysis 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 30 
 532 
 540 
 18095279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Smith 
 JC 
 
 
 Wangelin 
 BC 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Electrocortical and electrodermal responses covary as a function of emotional arousal: A single-trial analysis 
 Psychophysiology 
 45 
 4 
 516 
 523 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2008.00667.x 
 
 18513365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Smith 
 JC 
 
 
 Wangelin 
 B 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Bradley 
 MM 
 
 
 Lang 
 PJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Electrocortical and Electrodermal Responses Co-Vary as a Function of Emotional Arousal: A Single-Trial Analysis 
 Psychophysiology 
 45 
 4 
 511 
 515 
 18282197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Klucken 
 T 
 
 
 Kagerer 
 S 
 
 
 Schweckendiek 
 J 
 
 
 Tabbert 
 K 
 
 
 Vaitl 
 D 
 
 
 Stark 
 R 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural, electrodermal and behavioral response patterns in contingency aware and unaware subjects during a picture-picture conditioning paradigm 
 Neuroscience 
 158 
 2 
 721 
 731 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.09.049 
 
 18976695 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knight 
 DC 
 
 
 Cheng 
 DT 
 
 
 Smith 
 CN 
 
 
 Stein 
 EA 
 
 
 Helmstetter 
 FJ 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural Substrates Mediating Human Delay and Trace Fear Conditioning 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 24 
 1 
 218 
 228 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0433-03.2004 
 
 14715954 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knight 
 DC 
 
 
 Nguyen 
 HT 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 2005 
 The role of the human amygdala in the production of conditioned fear responses 
 Neuroimage 
 26 
 4 
 1193 
 200 
 15961053 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaBar 
 KS 
 
 
 Gatenby 
 JC 
 
 
 Gore 
 JC 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 1998 
 Human Amygdala Activation during Conditioned Fear Acquisition and Extinction: a Mixed-Trial fMRI Study 
 Neuron 
 20 
 5 
 937 
 945 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80475-4 
 
 9620698 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 The emotional brain, fear, and the amygdala 
 Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology 
 23 
 4–5 
 727 
 738 
 14514027 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lee 
 J 
 
 
 Ku 
 J 
 
 
 Han 
 K 
 
 
 Park 
 J 
 
 
 Lee 
 H 
 
 
 Kim 
 KR 
 
 
 Kim 
 SI 
 
 
 2013 
 rTMS over bilateral inferior parietal cortex induces decrement of spatial sustained attention 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 7 
 26 
 
 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00026 
 
 23403477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lhermitte 
 F 
 
 
 Turell 
 E 
 
 
 LeBrigand 
 D 
 
 
 Chain 
 F 
 
 
 1985 
 Unilateral visual neglect and wave p 300: A study of nine cases with unilateral lesions of the parietal lobes 
 Archives of Neurology 
 42 
 6 
 567 
 573 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1985.04060060069011 
 
 4004599 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Likhtik 
 E 
 
 
 Paz 
 R 
 
 
 2015 
 Amygdala-prefrontal interactions in (mal)adaptive learning 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 38 
 3 
 158 
 166 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2014.12.007 
 
 25583269 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Linnman 
 C 
 
 
 Rougemont-Bucking 
 A 
 
 
 Beucke 
 JC 
 
 
 Zeffiro 
 TA 
 
 
 Milad 
 MR 
 
 
 2011 
 Unconditioned responses and functional fear networks in human classical conditioning 
 Behav Brain Res 
 221 
 1 
 237 
 45 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2011.02.045 
 
 21377494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 TT 
 
 
 2016 
 Noise contributions to the fMRI signal: An overview 
 NeuroImage 
 143 
 141 
 151 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.09.008 
 
 27612646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu 
 Y 
 
 
 Huang 
 H 
 
 
 McGinnis-Deweese 
 M 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Ding 
 M 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural Substrate of the Late Positive Potential in Emotional Processing 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 32 
 42 
 14563 
 14572 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3109-12.2012 
 
 23077042 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Malhotra 
 P 
 
 
 Coulthard 
 EJ 
 
 
 Husain 
 M 
 
 
 2009 
 Role of right posterior parietal cortex in maintaining attention to spatial locations over time 
 Brain 
 132 
 3 
 645 
 660 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awn350 
 
 19158107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maren 
 S 
 
 
 Fanselow 
 MS 
 
 
 1996 
 The Amygdala and Fear Conditioning: Has the Nut Been Cracked? 
 Neuron 
 16 
 2 
 237 
 240 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80041-0 
 
 8789938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Markovic 
 J 
 
 
 Anderson 
 AK 
 
 
 Todd 
 RM 
 
 
 2014 
 Tuning to the significant: Neural and genetic processes underlying affective enhancement of visual perception and memory 
 Behavioural Brain Research 
 259 
 229 
 241 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2013.11.018 
 
 24269973 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mayr 
 E 
 
 
 1974 
 Behavior programs and evolutionary strategies 
 Am Sci 
 62 
 6 
 650 
 9 
 4440939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McTeague 
 LM 
 
 
 Gruss 
 LF 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2015 
 Aversive learning shapes neuronal orientation tuning in human visual cortex 
 Nature Communications 
 6 
 7823 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8823 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mirabella 
 G 
 
 
 Bertini 
 G 
 
 
 Samengo 
 I 
 
 
 Kilavik 
 BE 
 
 
 Frilli 
 D 
 
 
 Della Libera 
 C 
 
 
 Chelazzi 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Neurons in area V4 of the macaque translate attended visual features into behaviorally relevant categories 
 Neuron 
 54 
 2 
 303 
 18 
 17442250 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Miskovic 
 V 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2012 
 Acquired fears reflected in cortical sensory processing: A review of electrophysiological studies of human classical conditioning 
 Psychophysiology 
 49 
 9 
 1230 
 1241 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.01398.x 
 
 22891639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mizuno 
 K 
 
 
 Tsuji 
 T 
 
 
 Rossetti 
 Y 
 
 
 Pisella 
 L 
 
 
 Ohde 
 H 
 
 
 Liu 
 M 
 
 
 2013 
 Early visual processing is affected by clinical subtype in patients with unilateral spatial neglect: a magnetoencephalography study 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 7 
 432 
 
 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00432 
 
 23914171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2005 
 Cortical activation during Pavlovian fear conditioning depends on heart rate response patterns: An MEG study 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 25 
 2 
 459 
 471 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.07.006 
 
 16140512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 2009 
 Not What You Expect: Experience but not Expectancy Predicts Conditioned Responses in Human Visual and Supplementary Cortex 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 19 
 12 
 2803 
 2809 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp052 
 
 19304914 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2006 
 Fear but not awareness predicts enhanced sensory processing in fear conditioning 
 Psychophysiology 
 43 
 2 
 216 
 226 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-8986.2006.00386.x 
 
 16712592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Miller 
 GA 
 
 
 2006 
 Fear but not awareness predicts enhanced sensory processing in fear conditioning 
 Psychophysiology 
 43 
 2 
 216 
 26 
 16712592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Stolarova 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Motivated attention in emotional picture processing is reflected by activity modulation in cortical attention networks 
 Neuroimage 
 21 
 3 
 954 
 64 
 15006662 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Norcia 
 AM 
 
 
 Appelbaum 
 LG 
 
 
 Ales 
 JM 
 
 
 Cottereau 
 BR 
 
 
 Rossion 
 B 
 
 
 2015 
 The steady-state visual evoked potential in vision research: A review 
 Journal of Vision 
 15 
 6 
 4 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1167/15.6.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Öhman 
 A 
 
 
 Soares 
 JJ 
 
 
 1998 
 Emotional conditioning to masked stimuli: expectancies for aversive outcomes following nonrecognized fear-relevant stimuli 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 127 
 1 
 69 
 82 
 9503652 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pessoa 
 L 
 
 
 Adolphs 
 R 
 
 
 2010 
 Emotion processing and the amygdala: from a “low road” to “many roads” of evaluating biological significance 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 11 
 11 
 773 
 783 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2920 
 
 20959860 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Phelps 
 EA 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 2005 
 Contributions of the Amygdala to Emotion Processing: From Animal Models to Human Behavior 
 Neuron 
 48 
 2 
 175 
 187 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.025 
 
 16242399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Fortune 
 EE 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Siddiqui 
 A 
 
 
 Krafft 
 C 
 
 
 Oliver 
 WT 
 
 
 Jeffries 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 Emotional perception: meta-analyses of face and natural scene processing 
 Neuroimage 
 54 
 3 
 2524 
 33 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.011 
 
 20951215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scheeringa 
 R 
 
 
 Mazaheri 
 A 
 
 
 Bojak 
 I 
 
 
 Norris 
 DG 
 
 
 Kleinschmidt 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Modulation of Visually Evoked Cortical fMRI Responses by Phase of Ongoing Occipital Alpha Oscillations 
 The Journal of Neuroscience 
 31 
 10 
 3813 
 3820 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4697-10.2011 
 
 21389236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sears 
 RM 
 
 
 Schiff 
 HC 
 
 
 LeDoux 
 JE 
 
 
 2014 
 Molecular mechanisms of threat learning in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala 
 Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 
 122 
 1 
 263 
 304 
 24484705 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sehlmeyer 
 C 
 
 
 Schöning 
 S 
 
 
 Zwitserlood 
 P 
 
 
 Pfleiderer 
 B 
 
 
 Kircher 
 T 
 
 
 Arolt 
 V 
 
 
 Konrad 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 Human Fear Conditioning and Extinction in Neuroimaging: A Systematic Review 
 PLoS ONE 
 4 
 6 
 e5865 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005865 
 
 19517024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sevenster 
 D 
 
 
 Beckers 
 T 
 
 
 Kindt 
 M 
 
 
 2014 
 Fear conditioning of SCR but not the startle reflex requires conscious discrimination of threat and safety 
 Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 
 8 
 32 
 
 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00032 
 
 24616672 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Singer 
 T 
 
 
 Critchley 
 HD 
 
 
 Preuschoff 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 A common role of insula in feelings, empathy and uncertainty 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 13 
 8 
 334 
 340 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.05.001 
 
 19643659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sokolov 
 EN 
 
 
 1963 
 Perception the conditioned reflex 
 New York 
 Macmillan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stein 
 MB 
 
 
 Simmons 
 AN 
 
 
 Feinstein 
 JS 
 
 
 Paulus 
 MP 
 
 
 2007 
 Increased amygdala and insula activation during emotion processing in anxiety-prone subjects 
 The American Journal of Psychiatry 
 164 
 2 
 318 
 327 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.164.2.318 
 
 17267796 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stolarova 
 M 
 
 
 Keil 
 A 
 
 
 Moratti 
 S 
 
 
 2006 
 Modulation of the C1 Visual Event-related Component by Conditioned Stimuli: Evidence for Sensory Plasticity in Early Affective Perception 
 Cereb Cortex 
 16 
 6 
 876 
 87 
 16151178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Straube 
 T 
 
 
 Weiss 
 T 
 
 
 Mentzel 
 H-J 
 
 
 Miltner 
 WHR 
 
 
 2007 
 Time course of amygdale activation during aversive conditioning depends on attention 
 NeuroImage 
 34 
 1 
 462 
 469 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.08.021 
 
 17070072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tabbert 
 K 
 
 
 Stark 
 R 
 
 
 Kirsch 
 P 
 
 
 Vaitl 
 D 
 
 
 2005 
 Hemodynamic responses of the amygdala, the orbitofrontal cortex and the visual cortex during a fear conditioning paradigm 
 International Journal of Psychophysiology 
 57 
 1 
 15 
 23 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.01.007 
 
 15935259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Todd 
 R 
 
 
 Thompson 
 E 
 
 
 2015 
 Strengthening emotion-cognition integration 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 38 
 n/a.  https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525×14001022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weinberger 
 NM 
 
 
 2004 
 Specific long-term memory traces in primary auditory cortex 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 5 
 4 
 279 
 90 
 15034553 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wise 
 RG 
 
 
 Ide 
 K 
 
 
 Poulin 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tracey 
 I 
 
 
 2004 
 Resting fluctuations in arterial carbon dioxide induce significant low frequency variations in BOLD signal 
 NeuroImage 
 21 
 4 
 1652 
 1664 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.11.025 
 
 15050588 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Woo 
 C-W 
 
 
 Krishnan 
 A 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 2014 
 Cluster-extent based thresholding in fMRI analyses: Pitfalls and recommendations 
 NeuroImage 
 91 
 412 
 419 
 
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.058 
 
 24412399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Time series of the filtered (5–15 Hz) EEG for one representative subject, averaged over all trials and segmented relative to onset of the Gabor patch which alternated at 10 Hz, evoking the ssVEP (bottom). This 10-Hz oscillation is the dominant signal as illustrated by the frequency domain data (top right) and is strongest over sensor Oz (top left), achieved by a Fourier transformation on a 4000-msec segment of EEG data (bottom, gray box). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Mean values of both ssVEP amplitudes from sensors Oz (top) and changes in heart rate reactivity (BPM; bottom), for all three phases of the experiment separately. CS+ relative to CS- stimuli showed both greater ssVEP amplitudes and greater deceleration in BPMs during the second phase. For ssVEP amplitudes, a CS × Phase interaction and a CS × Phase quadratic effect were observed. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Voxel clusters showing a CS+ > CS- effect in the acquisition block for the BOLD-only (red) and the ssVEP-BOLD coupling (green) analyses. Clusters reported in  Table 1  passed are significant when exceeding both a voxel-wise threshold of t = 3.43 and cluster-extent threshold of k = 14 for the BOLD-only analysis, whereas the ssVEP-BOLD analysis used a voxel-wise threshold of t = 2.62 and a cluster extent threshold of k = 23. Clusters illustrated in this figure used less stringent thresholds of t = 2.62 and k = 14 to best illustrate the noise level. MNI coordinates are noted above each corresponding slice. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Group level BOLD clusters across 15 participants for ssVEP-BOLD coupling across all trials. To appropriately illustrate the level of noise, clusters shown here pass a voxel-wise threshold of t = 2.62 and a cluster-extent threshold of k = 14, whereas the clusters reported in  Table 1  pass more stringent cluster-extent threshold of k = 23. MNI coordinates are noted above each corresponding slice. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Contrast values for the CS+ minus CS- comparison for ssVEP-BOLD coupling beta values for each of the five significant anatomical clusters, separately for each participant. Data points right of the centerline indicate greater ssVEP-BOLD coupling for CS+ relative to CS- trials. Error bars depict the standard error across all voxels in each ROI. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Group level analysis (N = 15) for HR-BOLD coupling across all trials. As in previous figures, clusters shown here pass a voxel-wise threshold of t = 2.62 and a cluster-extent threshold of k = 14. MNI coordinates are noted above each corresponding slice. One cluster near the thalamus shown in this figure largely overlapped with aspects of the third ventricle and thus is not reported here. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Anatomical labels of clusters which pass significance thresholds. All analyses used a cluster-extent threshold of k=14. The BOLD-Alone analysis used a voxel-wise threshold of t=3.42 while both ssVEP-BOLD and HR-BOLD analyses used t=2.62, as described in the methods section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BOLD-Alone CS+>CS- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 MNI 
 peak-t 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R S Temporal Sulcus 
 60, -25, -2 
 4.43 
 23 
 
 
 L Insula 
 -36, 20, 4 
 4.01 
 32 
 
 
 R Insula 
 30, 26, -2 
 3.66 
 21 
 
 
 R Lingual 
 18, -88, -5 
 3.52 
 14 
 
 
 ssVEP-BOLD CS+>CS - 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 MNI 
 peak-t 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L M F Gyrus 
 -45, 41, 16 
 5.37 
 43 
 
 
 R Calcarine 
 6, -91, 7 
 5.11 
 54 
 
 
 R M F Gyrus 
 48, 44, 16 
 3.73 
 40 
 
 
 L I Parietal 
 -54, -46, 37 
 3.44 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 SSVEP-BOLD ALL TRIALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 MNI 
 peak-t 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R Lingual 
 12, -88, -8 
 5.26 
 92 
 
 
 L M Occipital Gyrus 
 -15, -97, 1 
 4.42 
 37 
 
 
 L I Occipital 
 -45, -67, -11 
 4.41 
 31 
 
 
 R Rolandic Operculum 
 39, -4, 16 
 3.94 
 46 
 
 
 R Thalamus a 
 9, -16, -19 
 4.81 
 293 
 
 
 L Hippocampus 
 -33, -34, -8 
 3.10 
 38 
 
 
 
 
 HR-BOLD ALL TRIALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 MNI 
 peak-t 
 K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L Putamen 
 -15, 4, -3 
 -4.34 
 40 
 
 
 L ACC 
 -9, 37, 0 
 -4.29 
 75 
 
 
 L Postcentral Gyrus 
 -60, -8, 24 
 4.52 
 37 
 
 
 L M F Gyrus 
 -39, 49, 18 
 4.12 
 53 
 
 
 R Postcentral Gyrus 
 57, -8, 27 
 3.90 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 Cluster located in the right thalamus includes coverage of right hippocampus. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Detail of structures submitted to the DCM analysis, in which modulation of CS+ stimuli between visual cortical structures (italic text) and extra-visual structures (non-italic text) was tested. Specifically, connections were modeled between each of the visual cortical cluster sites and each extra-visual region individually as well as all extra-visual regions together. These connections were treated as either 1) feedback (visual cortical modulated by extra-visual), 2) feedforward (extra-visual modulated by visual cortical), or 3) reciprocal (mutual modulation between visual cortical and extra-visual). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modeled Connectivity Architectures 
 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital Pole  (21 Models) 
 
 
     L Insula 
 
 
     R Insula 
 
 
     L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
     R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
     L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 
 
     Calcarine Fissure 
 
 
 Calcarine Fissure  (21 Models) 
 
 
     L Insula 
 
 
     R Insula 
 
 
     L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
     R Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
     L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 
 
     Occipital Pole 
 
 
 
 Occipital Pole 
 
 
 
 + Calcarine Fissure  (21 Models) 
 
 
     L Insula 
 
 
     R Insula 
 
 
     L Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
     R Middle Frontal Gyrus a 
 
 
     L Inferior Parietal Lobule 
 
 
 
 
 
 a 
 The DCM analysis indicated that the optimal model was feedback from right middle frontal gyrus to both the Occipital Pole and Calcarine Fissure. 
 
 
 
 
