
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 101541838 
 38415 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 Dev Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Developmental cognitive neuroscience 
 
 1878-9293 
 1878-9307 
 
 
 28262423 
 5764159 
 10.1016/j.dcn.2017.02.003 
 NIHMS857919 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Neurodevelopmental Changes Across Adolescence in Viewing and Labeling Dynamic Peer Emotions 
 
 
 
 
 Flannery 
 Jessica E. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Giuliani 
 Nicole R. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Flournoy 
 John C. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 Jennifer H. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, University of Oregon 
 
 Corresponding author: Jessica E. Flannery, 1227 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, 97403, 541-346-4921,  jflanner@uoregon.edu 
 
 
 20 
 3 
 2017 
 
 
 10 
 2 
 2017 
 
 
 6 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 6 
 2018 
 
 25 
 113 
 127 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Adolescence is a sensitive period of social-affective development, characterized by biological, neurological, and social changes. The field currently conceptualizes these changes in terms of an imbalance between systems supporting reactivity and regulation, specifically nonlinear changes in reactivity networks and linear changes in regulatory networks. Previous research suggests that the labeling or reappraisal of emotion increases activity in lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC), and decreases activity in amygdala relative to passive viewing of affective stimuli. However, past work in this area has relied heavily on paradigms using static, adult faces, as well as explicit regulation. In the current study, we assessed cross-sectional trends in neural responses to viewing and labeling dynamic peer emotional expressions in adolescent girls 10–23 years old. Our dynamic adolescent stimuli set reliably and robustly recruited key brain regions involved in emotion reactivity (MOFC/vMPFC, bilateral amygdala) and regulation (bilateral dorsal and ventral LPFC). However, contrary to the age-trends predicted by the dominant models in studies of risk/reward, the LPFC showed a nonlinear age trend across adolescence to labeling dynamic peer faces, whereas the MOFC/vMPFC showed a linear decrease with age to viewing dynamic peer faces. There were no significant age trends observed in the amygdala. 
 
 
 
 
 1 Introduction 
 Adolescence is often perceived to be a sensitive period for social and emotional development. Indeed, compared to children, adolescents spend more time interacting with peers, and exhibit greater concern with social status, friendships, and romantic relationships ( Brown & Larson, 2009 ;  Furman, Low, & Ho, 2009 ;  Suleiman & Harden, 2016 ). The behaviors, beliefs, or mere presence of peers have also been shown to influence adolescents at various behavioral and neurobiological levels ( Doom, Doyle, & Gunnar, 2016 ;  Peake, Dishion, Stormshak, Moore, & Pfeifer, 2013 ;  Shulman et al., 2016 ). In addition to this period of heightened sensitivity to peers, adolescents display greater emotional variability than adults (Larson, Csikszentmihalyi, & Graef, 1980), heightened intensity of emotion, regardless of valence (Silk et al., 2009), and particular difficulty regulating emotions elicited by social stimuli (versus nonsocial;  Silvers et al., 2012 ). Taken together, these concurrent changes during adolescence highlight a significant need to better understand the developmental trajectories of affective processing elicited by peer faces. 
 For the past decade and a half, there has been growing research interest in understanding how these social and affective changes are related to neural development, given that adolescence is also a period of remarkable neural plasticity ( Kadosh, Linden, & Lau, 2013 ;  Zelazo & Carlson, 2012 ). Indeed, it is now widely accepted that key regions and networks involved in social cognition, emotional reactivity, and emotion regulation all undergo significant functional development during adolescence ( Casey, Jones, & Hare, 2008 ;  Pfeifer & Blakemore, 2012 ;  Somerville, Fani, & McClure-Tone, 2011 ). However, the field’s existing models of socio-affective neurodevelopment in adolescence ( Nelson, Jarcho, & Guyer, 2016 ;  Nelson, Leibenluft, McClure, & Pine, 2005 ) largely describe which brain regions are implicated in these tasks, rather than more precisely proposing when and how the functioning in these regions change ( Pfeifer & Allen, 2016 ). In comparison, dual systems and imbalance models have been used extensively to explain sensitive periods in adolescent risk behavior, and propose age-based trajectories for sensitivity to rewards and regulatory capacities, as well as describe the relationships between these trajectories ( Blakemore & Robbins, 2012 ;  Casey, Galván, & Somerville, 2016 ;  Shulman et al., 2016 ). These models have sometimes been applied to understanding affective changes in adolescence ( Crone & Dahl, 2012 ;  Pfeifer & Allen, 2012 ;  Somerville, Fani, et al., 2011 ), but have been less extensively tested in this domain. Therefore, one aim of this study was to explore whether brain functioning elicited by socio-affective stimuli reveals a similar sensitive period of imbalance in our cross-sectional sample (following  Giuliani & Pfeifer, 2015 ;  Hare et al., 2008 ;  Somerville et al., 2013 ); such that neural indices of socio-affective reactivity would exhibit nonlinear developmental trajectories, with activity peaking by middle adolescence, and that regulation-related responses would display roughly linear patterns of change across the duration of adolescence. In order to acknowledge the importance of peers for affective and regulatory neurodevelopment in adolescence, the current study used a novel set of dynamic adolescent facial expressions. 
 
 1.1 Brain regions and networks implicated in the regulation of emotion processing 
 The adult neuroimaging literature provides a solid roadmap for beginning to understand adolescent affective reactivity and regulation. Passive viewing of facial affective stimuli by adults is associated with increased activity in key neural regions such as the amygdala ( Fitzgerald, Angstadt, Jelsone, Nathan, & Phan, 2006 ;  Fusar-Poli et al., 2009 ;  Sabatinelli et al., 2011 ), medial orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC; ( Liang, Zebrowitz, & Aharon, 2009 ;  Monk et al., 2003 ;  Ochsner, Bunge, Gross, & Gabrieli, 2002 ) and ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC; ( Ebner, Johnson, & Fischer, 2012 ). When further cognitive processes are layered onto viewing affective stimuli, such as reappraisal or labeling of the emotional content of the stimulus, additional regions are recruited by adults to modulate the response to the affective stimuli, particularly the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC; ( Buhle et al., 2014 ;  Lieberman et al., 2007 ;  Wager, Davidson, Hughes, Lindquist, & Ochsner, 2008 ). 
 Across adolescence, these key regions from networks supporting reactivity and regulation show varied nonlinear and linear age-related patterns of functional activity, respectively, to affective stimuli. For example, some studies show an adolescent peak in amygdala activity to affective facial stimuli ( Guyer et al., 2008 ;  Hare et al., 2008 ;  Monk et al., 2003 ), although others have not observed this non-linear pattern ( Gee et al., 2012 ;  Pfeifer et al., 2011 ); for a similar finding with non-facial affective stimuli, see ( Vink, Derks, Hoogendam, Hillegers, & Kahn, 2014 ). Meanwhile, functional recruitment of the LPFC often shows a linear pattern across adolescence, although the direction of change can vary. In affect regulation tasks using facial stimuli, increases have been observed ( Gee et al., 2012 ), while regulation of non-facial affect has shown both increases ( McRae et al., 2012 ) and decreases ( Vink et al., 2014 ). In broader assessments of LPFC engagement across a variety of regulatory and executive function tasks, findings have likewise been mixed (for review, see  Crone & Dahl, 2012 ). Finally, contrary to adult studies using affective paradigms, adolescent studies do not show the same MOFC activity to facial affective stimuli; however, MOFC is frequently observed in studies of adolescent reward sensitivity and non-facial emotion processing ( Galvan et al., 2006 ;  Rothkirch, Schmack, Schlagenhauf, & Sterzer, 2012 ;  Vink et al., 2014 ). One possibility for the absence of MOFC activity in adolescent studies of facial affective processing is that adult faces are less rewarding or motivationally salient to adolescents. This suggests that aspects of task design including stimuli selection may critically influence the degree or kind of neurodevelopmental changes in cortical and subcortical recruitment that are observed in adolescence, and thus our inferences about whether adolescence is a sensitive period with respect to particular processes ( Blakemore & Robbins, 2012 ;  Crone & Dahl, 2012 ;  Pfeifer & Allen, 2012 ). 
 
 
 1.2 Developmentally Salient Stimuli 
 As adolescents increasingly build autonomy from their parents, more time is spent with peers and a greater value is placed on peer and romantic relationships ( Brown & Larson, 2009 ;  Furman et al., 2009 ;  Suleiman & Harden, 2016 ), making the ability to identify peers’ emotions particularly important for successful social functioning. However, prior research examining changes in reactivity and regulatory regions across adolescence has been limited by primarily relying on adult facial expressions to probe emotion processing (Ekman faces;  Ekman & Friesen, 1976 ;  Tottenham et al., 2009 ), or other adult-oriented affective stimuli, such as the International Affective Picture System (IAPS;  Britton, Taylor, Sudheimer, & Liberzon, 2006 ;  Vink et al., 2014 ), with a few notable exceptions (child stimuli sets: CAFE;  LoBue & Thrasher, 2015 ; NIMH-chEFS;  Egger et al., 2011 ). 
 There is evidence to suggest that child and adult faces may elicit different patterns of brain activity ( Leibenluft, Gobbini, Harrison, & Haxby, 2004 ). In fact, studies that have directly compared peer and adult facial expressions found both children and adolescents recruit largely similar brain regions to peer and adult faces, but exhibit increased amygdala activity to positive peer faces and angry adult faces, which may represent an age-appropriate response to the stimuli (8–16 year olds:  Marusak, Carré, & Thomason, 2013 ; 5–6 year olds: ( Hoehl, Brauer, Brasse, Striano, & Friederici, 2010 ). In addition, when adolescents were asked to rate and receive feedback from peers (based on viewing peer faces), females showed increased nucleus accumbens activity across age (8–17 years old;  Guyer, McClure-Tone, Shiffrin, Pine, & Nelson, 2009 ). These data suggest that peer faces, particularly in adolescence, may modulate the affective response elicited and/or the observed neural correlates. Despite the importance of peers during this sensitive period of facial affective processing, however, there is still a relative dearth of studies examining adolescent development of neural responses elicited by peer facial expressions or other adolescent-oriented affective stimuli. 
 Additionally, the stimuli used in the extant literature are largely static images, and are of relatively more extreme expressions or situations than the emotional content individuals experience on a daily basis. Neuroimaging studies in adults suggest that relative to static emotional expressions, neural responses to dynamic emotional expressions are more robust ( Pitcher, Dilks, Saxe, Triantafyllou, & Kanwisher, 2011 ;  Sato, Kochiyama, Yoshikawa, Naito, & Matsumura, 2004 ). Taken together, this research suggests that dynamic emotional expressions made by peers, rather than adults, may be particularly salient to adolescents and an important option to pursue in the attempt to enhance the ecological validity of fMRI tasks. 
 
 
 1.3 Implicit Regulation 
 In addition to the use of adult, static faces, previous paradigms used to assess adolescent brain function associated with emotion processing have ranged from implicit, non-instructed passive viewing ( Pfeifer et al., 2011 ) to explicit, instructed regulation or reappraisal tasks ( Crowley, Hill, Kuklinski, & Jones, 2014 ;  McRae et al., 2012 ;  Pitskel, Bolling, Kaiser, Pelphrey, & Crowley, 2014 ;  Silvers et al., 2012 ), with some paradigms falling in between, such as behavioral inhibition tasks that utilize affective stimuli ( Somerville, Hare, & Casey, 2011 ). The literature on emotion regulation in adolescence has predominantly focused on explicit (e.g., instructed to regulate) or partially explicit emotion regulation strategies, (e.g, instructed to inhibit response, such as go/no-go tasks) ( Mauss, Bunge, & Gross, 2007 ). However, implicit emotion regulation, or regulation without intention, awareness, or insight, is an equally important strategy that is not mutually exclusive from explicit emotion regulation ( Gyurak, Gross, & Etkin, 2011 ). Research suggests that these strategies recruit the same key reactivity and regulatory brain regions as explicit emotion regulation paradigms in adults ( Gyurak et al., 2011 ;  Lieberman et al., 2007 ), but may additionally serve as a more ecologically valid assessment of real-world tendencies to regulate emotions ( Berkman & Lieberman, 2009 ;  Mauss et al., 2007 ). 
 One experimental paradigm that assesses implicit emotion regulation is affect labeling, which asks participants to label the emotion expressed by a facial stimulus ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ;  Torrisi, Lieberman, Bookheimer, & Altshuler, 2013 ). Affect labeling has been shown to recruit regulatory regions associated with explicit regulation (e.g., LPFC), as well as down-regulate reactivity regions (e.g., the amygdala; ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ). This assessment of implicit regulation may be particularly valuable for real world translation of automatic, or implicit regulation that occurs on a daily basis ( Berkman & Lieberman, 2009 ). However, to our knowledge, only a few studies have assessed affect labeling in some fashion in adolescents (9–17 years old;  Monk et al., 2003 ), including assessing impairments in facial processing for male children and adolescents (8–23 years old) with autism spectrum disorder ( Wang, Dapretto, Hariri, Sigman, & Bookheimer, 2004 ); impairments in adolescents (15–23 years old) at risk for psychosis ( Gee et al., 2012 ); and parental contributions to adolescent (17 years old) emotional processing ( Telzer et al., 2014 ). These studies suggest that labeling static adult faces engages similar brain regions during adolescence as in adulthood, although  Telzer et al. (2014)  additionally showed adolescents displayed increased right vLPFC and right amygdala during affect labeling (compared to patterns displayed by their parents). Therefore, affect labeling may similarly function as a proxy for implicit regulation in adolescence, although there may be some notable differences, and normative developmental trajectories would benefit from further exploration and characterization. 
 
 
 1.4 Current study 
 In the current study, we assessed cross-sectional trends in neural responses to viewing and labeling dynamic emotional expressions in adolescent girls across a broad age range (10–23 years old). To decrease heterogeneity in the sample due the influence of sex on pubertal onset, emotion processing, and brain structural and functional development, we used an all female sample ( Lenroot & Giedd, 2010 ;  McClure, 2000 ). We implemented an affect labeling paradigm that reliably recruits key brain regions in emotion reactivity and regulation (amygdala, MOFC/vMPFC, and LPFC), and can be easily performed across a wide age range. Importantly, we used new stimuli characterized by dynamic adolescent affective expressions, to reflect the importance of peers during adolescence. Dominant neurobiological models of adolescent brain maturation applied to the affective domain would predict nonlinear developmental trends in amygdala activity when viewing emotional faces (with responses peaking by middle adolescence), and a linear developmental trend in LPFC when labeling emotional faces. Due to increased peer influence during this sensitive period of development, it is particularly important to understand how adolescents process affect expressed by peers. Based on the literature review above, we hypothesized that utilizing socially relevant (peer) faces and dynamic emotional expressions would maximize our ecological validity and ability to demonstrate the neurodevelopmental trends predicted by application of imbalance models to the affective domain: nonlinear age trend in amygdala and MOFC/vMPFC activity (adolescent peak), and linear LPFC activity across age. However, if the data demonstrated different developmental trends, this would provide evidence that the models’ utility may be restricted to a more limited set of stimuli, paradigms, and constructs. The stimulus set included positive, neutral, and negative expressions, but we did not have specific  a priori  hypotheses about whether the affective valence would interact with the developmental patterns of brain activity during viewing or labeling of dynamic adolescent affective stimuli. 
 
 
 
 2 Methods 
 
 2.1 Participants 
 Sixty-one female adolescents between the ages of 10 and 23 years (M = 16.66, SD = 3.68, range 10.16–22.89 years) were recruited from the Eugene/Springfield, OR metropolitan area. Two participants were excluded prior to completing the task due to recognition of peers used in stimulus set, and one participant was excluded from analyses due to movement resulting in incomplete images, resulting in a total of 58 participants (M = 16.70, SD = 3.77, range 10.16–22.89 years). Participants were evenly distributed across the age range (M = 4.62, SD = .77, range 3–6 participants per age-year). Participants were predominantly middle to upper class (income Median = $40,000–$75,000, maternal education Median = bachelor’s degree), and self-identified as 84.5% non-Hispanic/White, 10% mixed race, 1.72% Hispanic/Latino, 1.72% Asian, 1.72% not listed. Individuals were excluded if they were left-handed, non-native English speakers, possessed MRI contraindications (e.g., orthodontia), or reported a history of neurological or psychological disorders, head trauma, or current psychoactive medication. Parents and participants over 18 years of age provided informed consent, and minors under 18 years of age provided informed assent in accordance with the University of Oregon Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
 2.2 Task Description 
 The stimuli used in the dynamic affect labeling task consisted of 60 videos of children and adolescents, ages 8–18 years old, making a range of emotional expressions. Videos were created by utilizing adolescents enrolled in a local theatrical performance camp, so demographics were representative of the Eugene area (approximately 85% Caucasian). Videos were externally validated using the same procedure as other widely used facial stimuli sets (e.g., those with > 70% agreement with intended expression were retained, as in  Tottenham et al., 2009 ). Complete details on validation are outlined in another manuscript (Giuliani et al., in press). The videos selected from the stimulus set consisted of an equal number of males and females (N = 20). 
 From the participants’ perspective, there were only two types of instructions: Label or View. Participants saw each video for 1.1 seconds and then it froze on the last frame of the video, which displayed the prototypic emotion, for 3.4 seconds (viewing the stimuli for a total of 4.5 seconds). During Label trials (N = 60 across two runs, indicated by the presence of two emotion words above the video), participants were instructed to watch the video and press the button corresponding with the label that best matched the expression displayed in the video. During View trials (N = 60 across two runs, indicated by the presence of two nonsense words consisting of punctuation symbols above the video), participants were instructed to watch the video and press a button if the video got blurry at any point. Most videos in the View condition did not blur, but 25% of the time the videos were blurry, either from the beginning of the stimulus presentation period or at the very end of the stimulus presentation period. These blurred trials were used as our control condition (N = 20 across two runs) to account for the visual features represented in both Label and View conditions besides facial expressions and to ensure sustained attention during the View condition, but participants were unaware of the role of control trials. Finally, there were fixation trials (N = 20 across two runs) consisting of rest with fixation, as required for an event-related design. Facial expressions were equally distributed between valence and task across two runs: 40 positive (20 View, 20 Label), 40 negative (20 View, 20 Label), and 40 neutral (20 View, 20 Label). A genetic algorithm (GA;  Wager & Nichols, 2003 ) was used to determine stimulus order, with four conditions (Fixation, Blur, View, Label), optimized for the following contrasts: Label > Blur, View > Blur, and View > Label. Valence was randomized within condition (View, Label). 
 
 
 2.3 Functional MRI Data Acquisition 
 Data were acquired using a 3.0 Tesla Siemens Skyra scanner at the University of Oregon’s Robert and Beverly Lewis Center for Neuroimaging. Blood oxygen-level dependent echo-planar images (BOLD-EPI) were acquired with a T2*-weighted gradient echo sequence (TR = 2000ms, TE = 30ms, flip angle = 90, matrix size = 64 × 64, 33 contiguous axial slices with interleaved acquisition, field of view = 200mm, slice thickness = 4mm; total time = 7min 50sec per run x 2 runs). For each participant, a high-resolution structural T1-weighted 3D MPRAGE pulse sequence (TR = 2300ms, TE = 2.1ms, matrix size = 192 × 192, 160 contiguous axial slices, voxel size = 1mm, slice thickness = 1mm; total time = 5min 59sec) was acquired coplanar with the functional images. 
 
 
 2.4 Functional MRI Data Analysis 
 DICOM images were converted to NIfTI format via MRIConvert ( http://lcni.uoregon.edu/~jolinda/MRIConvert/ ). Before preprocessing, non-brain tissue was removed from the brain images using robust skull stripping with the Brain Extraction Tool (BET) in FMRIB’s Software Library (FSL;  http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/ ). Image preprocessing was implemented in SPM12 (Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK;  http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ), which included realignment and co-registration of each subject’s own high-resolution structural image to a mean of the functional images using a six-parameter rigid body transformation model, reorientation of all images to the plane containing the anterior and posterior commissures, segmentation of the structural image into three tissue priors, spatial normalization of all images into Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template space using the deformations resulting from segmentation, and smoothing using an 8mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian kernel. 
 Statistical analyses were implemented in SPM12. For each subject, event-related condition effects were estimated according to the general linear model, using a canonical hemodynamic response function, high-pass filtering (200s) to fit the task design and a first-order autoregressive error structure. At the subject level, BOLD signal was modeled in a fixed effects analysis with separate regressors modeling each condition of interest during the picture presentation period (4.5s); because response times were only available for the label condition, all durations were set to 4.5s (onset of video to end of freeze frame). Six-parameter motion regressors were calculated as deviations from the origin, and entered into single-subject models as covariates of no-interest. The average mean functional optimal threshold explicit mask was used for both fixed and random effects models. No voxels were excluded at the subject level to allow all individuals to contribute to the random effects level mask. No implicit mask or global normalization was applied. Relative differences in BOLD signal between contrasts were measured as an approximation of neural activity; for simplicity, BOLD signal will be referred to as neural activity. 
 Primary contrasts, collapsed across valence included: Label > Blur, View > Blur, and Label > View. Individual contrasts were entered into subsequent group level random effects analyses. We ran one-sample t-tests for the main effects of task (Label > Blur, View > Blur, and Label > View). A combined voxel-height and cluster-extent correction was applied for multiple comparisons to control type 1 error at alpha = .05, calculated in AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ) by 3dClustSim software version AFNI_16.1.06 (Mar 6 2016). This version is updated to account for recently identified software bugs ( Eklund, Nichols, & Knutsson, 2016 ). Smoothness estimates entered into 3dClustSim were an average of subject level spatial autocorrelation function (acf) parameters based on individual subjects’ residuals from each group level model, as calculated by 3dFWHMxyz using the -acf flag. 3dClustSim takes into account the size of the search space and the estimated smoothness of the data to generate probability estimates (using Monte-Carlo simulations) of a random field of noise producing a cluster of voxels of a given size for a set of voxels passing a given voxel-wise p-value threshold. In our data set, these simulations determined that a voxel-wise threshold of  p  < .0001 combined with a spatial extent threshold of 14 voxels corresponded to a  p  < .05 family wise error (FWE) correction. The results observed at this threshold were consistent with results observed at whole-brain voxel-wise FWE correction ( t  = 5.11). In addition, confirmatory permutation thresholding using Statistical Non-Parametric Mapping (SnPM) toolbox ( http://warwick.ac.uk/snpm ) revealed substantively identical results. Due to the robustness of results even at voxel-level FWE correction in the whole-brain Label > View contrast, we were unable to fully break down expansive (15,000+ voxel) clusters in SPM, precluding a comprehensive table of results for this contrast. Instead, un-thresholded group level statistical parameter maps for this contrast and all other contrasts reported on in the manuscript can be accessed at  http://neurovault.org/collections/1302 ,  http://neurovault.org/collections/1303 ,  http://neurovault.org/collections/1304 ,  http://neurovault.org/collections/1305 ,  http://neurovault.org/collections/2093 , and  http://neurovault.org/collections/2094 . 
 
 
 2.5 ROI Analyses and Correlations with Age and Performance 
 To decompose the direction of effects and interactions, we extracted parameter estimates of activity in  a priori  regions of interest (ROIs; amygdala, MOFC, dLPFC, and vLPFC) for every subject using MarsBaR ( http://marsbar.sourceforge.net/ ) for each condition of interest (i.e., Label > Blur, View > Blur, Label > View, Label Positive (LPos) > Blur, Label Negative (LNeg) > Blur, Label Neutral (LNeut)> Blur, View Positive (VPos) > Blur, View Negative (VNeg) > Blur, View Neutral (VNeut) > Blur). This allowed us to statistically compare brain activity across various contrasts and correlate activation with age or behavioral performance (accuracy and reaction time) in SPSS. ROIs were defined as spheres with a radius of 8mm, centered at regional peak voxels in clusters resulting from the whole-brain analysis at the group level. We chose this method in order to examine more ROIs (e.g., by allowing separation of dorsal and ventral LPFC, as well as identification of bilateral amygdala, all of which were activated as part of expansive clusters). The contrast of Label > Blur was used to define bilateral dorsal and ventral LPFC. The contrast of View > Blur was used to define MOFC (which in the present study, extended slightly into vMPFC) and bilateral amygdala (which was robustly engaged in both task conditions). However, for confirmation, we also compared these sphere-defined ROIs results with results from ROIs defined anatomically where possible (i.e., bilateral amygdala), as well as from ROIs defined as the entire cluster resulting from the whole-brain analysis at the group level (i.e., both MOFC and bilateral amygdala from the View > Blur contrast). Post-hoc paired-sample  t -tests were performed to statistically compare differential activation in these ROIs. Developmental trends in significant clusters of activity observed in these ROIs were investigated using hierarchical linear regressions with linear age (step 1) and quadratic age (step 2). Age was mean-centered in all analyses, and mean-centered linear age was included in all mean-centered quadratic age analyses. To further explore developmental trends in neural correlates of viewing and labeling dynamic emotional expressions, we also entered mean-centered linear age, and mean-centered quadratic age (respectively), as whole-brain regressors to predict our main effect contrasts. Finally, Pearson’s correlations were run to investigate whether accuracy and/or reaction times were associated with age. 
 
 
 2.6 Functional Connectivity Analyses 
 To further interrogate our amygdala activation during affective viewing and labeling dynamic peer faces, we conducted task-dependent psychophysiological interaction (PPI; e.g., context-dependent connectivity) analyses with our left amygdala seed (a sphere defined as equivalent to the left amygdala ROI described above) using the generalized PPI toolbox in SPM (gPPI: Mclaren et al., 2012). Subject level gPPI models included physiological and psychological regressors, as well as the PPI interaction terms, for each condition: Lpos, Lneg, Lneut, Vpos, Vneg, Vneut, and Blur. At the group level, we ran one-sample  t -tests to characterize left amygdala functional connectivity during our two tasks independently (Label > Blur, View > Blur) and for our task by valence interaction for left amygdala (Label Emotions (LEmo) > Labeling Neutral (LNeut). For PPI analyses, 3dClustSim determined that a voxel-wise threshold of  p  < .001 combined with a spatial extent threshold of 40 voxels corresponded to a  p  < .05 family wise error (FWE) correction. Developmental trends in left amygdala during LEmo > LNeut were assessed by enterings mean-centered linear age, and mean-centered quadratic age, as whole-brain regressors. 
 
 
 
 3 Results 
 
 3.1 Task Behavior 
 To confirm task comprehension, accuracy and reaction times in the Label condition were assessed across the sample. Total accuracy was high (M = 96%), and neither it nor reaction time (M = 1.66s) significantly correlated with age,  r (57) = −.07,  p  = 0.62 and,  r (57) = −.15,  p  = 0.25, respectively). Total accuracy by valence was not significantly correlated with age for positive (M = 94%), negative (M = 96%), or neutral (M = 98%) expressions ( r (57) = −.14,  p  = 0.31;  r (57) = .01,  p  = 0.92; and  r (57) = −.03,  p  = 0.84, respectively). Total reaction time by valence was not significantly correlated with age for positive (M = 1.63s), negative (M = 1.71s) or neutral (M = 1.64s) expressions, ( r (57) = −.18,  p  = 0.17;  r (57) = −.77,  p  = 0.57,  r (57) = −.15,  p  = 0.25, respectively), but there was a significant decrease in mean reaction time with age to neutral expressions ( r (57) = −.30,  p  = 0.02). However, there were no significant correlations between activity in our ROIs and neutral valence mean reaction time ( ps  > 0.05); therefore, it was not controlled for in subsequent analyses. 
 
 
 3.2 fMRI: Main Effects of Task (View and Label) 
 In support of our hypotheses, the View > Blur whole-brain one-sample t-test revealed robust activity in the MOFC (extending slightly into vMPFC) and bilateral amygdala, along with significant activity in the right posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), bilateral anterior inferior temporal sulcus, and bilateral dorsal LPFC (see  Figure 1 ,  Table 1 , and  http://neurovault.org/collections/1304/ ). In the Label > Blur whole-brain one-sample t-test, we found significant activity in the MOFC/vMPFC, bilateral amygdala, bilateral dorsal LPFC, as well as robust activation in the bilateral ventral LPFC, dMPFC, bilateral pSTS, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and primary motor cortex (see  Figure 1 ,  Table 2 , and  http://neurovault.org/collections/1302/ ). Whole-brain analyses of the Label > View one-sample t-test revealed significant activity in the bilateral inferior frontal cortex, including pars opercularis, triangularis, and orbitalis extending into premotor cortex and insular cortex; cerebellum; large swaths of visual cortex including cuneus, lingual, and fusiform gyri; bilateral rostal inferior parietal lobule; bilateral thalamus; dorsal and rostral anterior cingulate cortex; bilateral caudate extending into bilateral amygdala; bilateral hippocampus and parahippocampal gyri; dorsal medial prefrontal cortex; midbrain (see  Table 3  and  http://neurovault.org/collections/1303  for un-thresholded whole-brain group level statistical parameter maps). Whole-brain analyses of the View > Label one-sample t-test revealed significant activity extending from subgenual ACC into MOFC/vMPFC, as well as in the posterior cingulate cortex, posterior precuneus, and middle temporal gyrus (see  Table 3  for full list and  http://neurovault.org/collections/1303 ). In a direct comparison of parameter estimates extracted from sphere-defined ROIs, Label > View revealed greater bilateral dorsal and ventral LPFC activity (see  Figure 2A and 2b ), while View > Label revealed greater MOFC/vMPFC activity (see  Figure 3A ). However, a direct comparison of parameter estimates extracted from sphere-defined ROIs revealed greater left amygdala activation during Label > View, and no difference in right amygdala activation between Label and View (see  Figure 3B  and  Table 4 ). 
 
 
 3.3 fMRI: Moderation of Task Effects by Valence 
 Next, we assessed how the valence of stimulus expression moderated the main task level effects, via parameter estimates of activity from sphere-defined ROIs in a 2×3 repeated measures ANOVA. Significant task by valence interactions revealed increased bilateral ventral LPFC and left amygdala activity to labeling both positive and negative expressions, relative to labeling neutral expressions (i.e., LPos > LNeut, LNeg > LNeut; see  Table 5 ), and significantly increased bilateral dorsal LPFC activity to labeling negative expressions, relative to positive or neutral expressions (i.e., LNeg > LPos, LNeg > LNeut; see  Table 5 ). Significant task by valence interactions also revealed increased MOFC/vMPFC activity to viewing positive and neutral expressions relative to viewing negative expressions (i.e., VPos > VNeg, VNeut > VNeg; see  Table 5 ). For interested readers, we note that whole-brain main effects of valence were observed in pSTS, left lateral orbitofrontal cortex, and fusiform gyrus (see  http://neurovault.org/collections/1305 ). 
 
 
 3.4 fMRI: Developmental Trends 
 Next, to investigate developmental trends in our  a priori  ROIs, we ran hierarchical linear regressions (step 1: linear age, step 2: quadratic age) for the sphere-defined ventral and dorsal LPFC (Label > Blur), bilateral amygdala (Label > Blur), and MOFC/vMPFC (View > Blur). Responses in all ROIs were relative to our high level control (Blur) to assess age trends in both processes (i.e., labeling and viewing) independently. These analyses revealed a significant positive quadratic age trend in right ventral LPFC activity while labeling peer expressions, such that right ventral LPFC activity to labeling peer expressions was lowest in mid-adolescence (see  Figure 4A  and  Table 6 ). Left ventral LPFC and bilateral dorsal LPFC showed no significant linear or quadratic age trends (see  Table 5 ). There were no significant developmental trends in the amygdala, such that left and right amygdala activity while labeling peer expressions remained consistently high across all ages studied (see  Table 6 ). Sensitivity analyses using bilateral amygdala ROIs defined by the entire cluster resulting from the whole-brain analysis at the group level View > Blur contrast, as well as using the Harvard-Oxford probabilistic atlas (set at 75% probability of being in the amygdala) likewise revealed no significant developmental trend in left or right amygdala to viewing peer expressions. Finally, MOFC/vMPFC revealed a significant linear decrease in activity across age to viewing peer expressions (see  Figure 4B  and  Table 6 ). At our conservative threshold, no age trends were observed in the whole-brain regression; however, when we relaxed the threshold to  p  <.005,  k  = 20, right dorsal LPFC (Label > Blur) showed a nonlinear trend, MOFC (View > Blur) showed a linear trend, and no age trends (linear or quadratic) with amygdala activity were observed in either contrast. Importantly, opposite trends were not observed in either region in these contrasts at this relaxed threshold, providing consistent evidence for the direction of the age trends. 
 We reran 2×3 repeated measures ANOVAs with age as a covariate to assess if there was a significant difference in the age effect depending on factor level (task or valence). There was not a significant interaction between age and task or valence factor levels (label/view or positive/negative/neutral). For completeness, however, we provide the estimated age effects across all factor levels. There was a significant positive quadratic age trend in right ventral LPFC activity to labeling positive emotions (R = .30,  t (55) = 2.29,  p  = .03). There were no significant age related changes in left amygdala activity to labeling faces between expressions ( p s > .05). The linear age trend in MOFC/vMPFC activity during view, however, was significant across all valence conditions (R = −.32,  t (56) = −2.51,  p  = .02; R = −.31,  t (55) = −2.46,  p  = .02; and R = −.30,  t (56) = −2.31,  p  = .03, for positive, negative, and neutral expressions, respectively). Sensitivity analyses using bilateral amygdala ROIs defined by the entire cluster resulting from the whole-brain analysis at the group level View > Blur contrast, as well as using the Harvard-Oxford probabilistic atlas (set at 75% probability of being in the amygdala) likewise revealed no significant developmental trend in left or right amygdala to labeling positive, negative, or neutral expressions. 
 Differences in the effect of age on brain activity between our regions of interest (right vLPFC (Label > Blur), and MOFC (View>Blur)) were tested using a linear model (specifically, the “lm” function) in R 3.3.0 (R Core Team, 2016). The average BOLD response within each ROI was regressed on age, age 2 , and an ROI factor (with a level for each ROI: right vLPFC, sphere extracted from Label > Blur, and MOFC, sphere extracted from View > Blur), and the interaction of ROI with age and age 2 . The presence of a significant interaction would indicate that the effect of age or age 2  differs between the ROIs. The best fitting model included an interaction between ROI and the linear effect of age. Although only right vLPFC had a quadratic effect significantly different from 0, we cannot reject the null that there is no difference in their quadratic effects. However, at mean centered age, the linear slopes significantly differ ( b  = −2.54,  t  (54)= −2.46,  p  = .017). 
 
 
 3.5 fMRI: Functional Connectivity with Left Amygdala 
 We explored patterns of functional connectivity by focusing on the left amygdala, a region which was robustly activated during both Label and View. Relative to our high-level visual control (Blur), during View, the left amygdala showed positive functional connectivity with posterior cingulate cortex, extending into precuneus; however, it showed negative functional connectivity (i.e., decoupling) with dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, premotor cortex, bilateral inferior parietal lobule and secondary somatosensory cortex, posterior insula, middle frontal gyrus, and precuneus (see Sup  Table 1  and  http://neurovault.org/collections/2093/ ). Relative to our high-level visual control (Blur), during Label the left amygdala exhibited no significant positive functional connectivity, but revealed similar patterns of negative functional connectivity with dACC, bilateral inferior parietal lobule, secondary somatosensory cortex, posterior insula, middle frontal gyrus, and precuneus, as well as portions of occipital cortex (see Sup  Table 2  and  http://neurovault.org/collections/2094/ ). Direct contrasts between Label and View produced no significant differences in functional connectivity at our statistical thresholds, and whole-brain regressions with linear and quadratic age likewise produced no significant developmental effects at our statistical thresholds. 
 
 
 
 4 Discussion 
 The aim of this study was to examine the neural correlates of facial affect processing across this sensitive period of adolescent socioemotional development by using a highly ecologically valid stimulus set and paradigm (assessing implicit regulation of dynamic adolescent expressions) in a healthy sample of 10–23 year-old females. Consistent with prior studies that employed various emotion regulation paradigms ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ;  McRae et al., 2012 ;  Ochsner, Hughes, Robertson, Cooper, & Gabrieli, 2009 ;  Pitskel, Bolling, Kaiser, Crowley, & Pelphrey, 2011 ;  Silvers, Weber, Wager, & Ochsner, 2015 ), our novel peer dynamic stimulus set reliably and robustly recruited key neural regions involved in the network of emotion reactivity (MOFC/vMPFC, bilateral amygdala) and regulation (bilateral dorsal and ventral LPFC). These data suggest that viewing peer faces (compared to labeling) was associated with heightened MOFC/vMPFC activity, while labeling peer faces (compared to viewing) was associated with heightened activity in bilateral ventral LPFC and bilateral dorsal LPFC as well as left amygdala. However, in our cross-sectional study spanning most of adolescence, none of our  a priori  regions of interest (MOFC/vMPFC, amygdala, dLPFC, and vLPFC) demonstrated the age-related trends in activity to dynamic peer faces that could be expected by extending imbalance models to the affective domain. These findings suggest that the field’s characterization of sensitive periods in socio-affective neurodevelopment may be highly influenced by the particular stimuli and paradigms used. In particular, when using stimuli and paradigms that may be more socially salient (peer faces) and ecologically valid (dynamic expressions and implicit regulation), the neurodevelopmental trends in emotional reactivity and regulation may vary from commonly assumed patterns derived from applying dual systems or imbalance models to the affective domain. 
 
 4.1 Neural correlates of affective reactivity and implicit regulation elicited by dynamic peer expressions 
 While viewing dynamic emotional expressions made by other adolescents, participants engaged the MOFC/vMPFC and amygdala as predicted: key regions associated with encoding emotional information, emotional memory formation, and mentalization ( Davis & Whalen, 2001 ;  Krueger, Barbey, & Grafman, 2009 ;  Viviani, 2014 ). These regions involved in emotion processing help encode both the positive and negative affective salience of the environment ( Davis & Whalen, 2001 ;  Gallagher & Chiba, 1996 ) to modulate implicit and explicit memory, heighten attention and awareness of the affective stimuli, aid in mentalizing, and facilitate encoding the rewarding and social value of the affective stimuli ( Krueger et al., 2009 ;  Viviani, 2014 ). 
 Labeling these expressions continued to engage the reactivity regions, but additionally recruited bilateral LPFC (both dorsal and ventral aspects), which is involved in linguistic and regulatory processes ( Buhle et al., 2014 ;  Silvers et al., 2015 ;  Leah H. Somerville, Hare, et al., 2011 ;  Wager et al., 2008 ). Direct comparison between conditions confirmed greater MOFC/vMPFC activity during viewing compared to labeling as well as greater bilateral dorsal and ventral LPFC activity during labeling compared to viewing. The dorsal LPFC (dLPFC) and ventral LPFC (vLPFC) differentially modulate affective reactivity. The dLPFC, which has strong connections with the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dMPFC), is centrally involved in selective attention, working memory, and affective regulation during emotion processing ( Morawetz, Bode, Baudewig, Kirilina, & Heekeren, 2016 ;  Petrides, 2005 ). The vLPFC, however, has stronger connections with the vMPFC and amygdala, and is more centrally involved in response inhibition as well as modification of emotional arousal intensity ( Morawetz et al., 2016 ;  Petrides, 2005 ). 
 Unexpectedly, there was greater left amygdala during labeling than during viewing, and no significant difference between conditions for right amygdala. These results are different than adult studies of affect labeling ( Lieberman et al., 2007 ), suggesting that labeling dynamic emotional expressions made by other adolescents may not decrease affective reactivity during this stage. Instead, these data may be seen as consistent with  Telzer et al. (2014) , in which 17 year olds exhibited greater amygdala and right vLPFC than adults during affect labeling. However, a pattern of increased amygdala activity to peer faces is also consistent with prior studies directly comparing peer and adult faces, particularly to positive peer faces ( Hoehl et al., 2010 ;  Marusak et al., 2013 ). Exploratory analyses suggested that while viewing dynamic peer expressions, left amygdala showed positive connectivity with the posterior cingulate cortex, a region associated with emotional stimuli and self-referential processing ( Bzdok et al., 2015 ;  Maddock, 1999 ). While both labeling and viewing, the left amygdala also showed negative connectivity with regions associated with regulation (e.g., dACC, and lateral prefrontal cortex) and social cognition (e.g., inferior parietal lobule, and precuneus). The amygdala activity may thus have remained relatively similar between labeling and viewing due to unexpected implicit efforts to decode and regulate affect during viewing (for a similar effect, see  Pfeifer et al., 2011 ). These data provide further evidence of the complexity of patterns and contextual influences, particularly socially salient influences, on amygdala activation across adolescence ( Crone & Dahl, 2012 ;  Pfeifer & Allen, 2012 ;  Silvers et al., 2012 ). 
 Finally, task by valence interactions revealed greater MOFC/vMPFC activity during the viewing of positive and neutral emotional expressions (versus negative); greater left amygdala and bilateral vLPFC activity during the labeling of both positive and negative emotional expressions (versus labeling neutral); and greater bilateral dLPFC during the labeling of negative emotional expressions (versus labeling positive and neutral). As noted above, these valence specific findings are consistent with the functions typically associated with these brain regions, namely the central involvement of MOFC in valuation and reward processes ( Rothkirch et al., 2012 ); the robust engagement of amygdala during emotion processing ( Davis & Whalen, 2001 ); and vLPFC activity during emotion recognition and modification of emotional arousal as well as dLPFC activity during affective reappraisal ( Morawetz et al., 2016 ). 
 
 
 4.2 Age-related changes in neural patterns of affective reactivity and implicit regulation 
 Dominant models of adolescent neurodevelopment predict non-linear trends in reactivity regions associated with socioemotional, motivational, and affective processing and linear trends in lateral frontal and parietal regions associated with cognitive control ( Shulman et al., 2016 ), creating a sensitive period of imbalance between systems in adolescence. However, due to significantly less evidence for this in the affective domain, we sought to evaluate these predictions using a highly ecologically valid stimulus set and paradigm, to maximize the opportunity to observe a sensitive period in adolescence. In contrast to the expected nonlinear adolescent-specific increase in reactivity, we observed that MOFC/vMPFC activity (regardless of valence) showed a significant  linear  trend, as its activity during viewing was highest among the youngest participants (pre/early adolescence) but steadily declined as the age of the participant increased. Additionally, despite robust amygdala activity across the full sample, there were  no significant  age-related changes in its response during either viewing or labeling. Although the linear decrease with age in MOFC/vMPFC activity may represent some degree of diminished valuation or motivational significance of the peer expressions to the older adolescents, the sustained engagement of amygdala across age suggests the affective stimuli remained highly salient for participants of all ages included in the sample; together, these results provide mixed evidence about an adolescent-specific sensitive period for socioemotional reactivity. Finally, in contrast to the expected linear trend during implicit regulation, the right vLPFC showed a positive  non-linear  (quadratic) trend across age. Although there were no task by valence interactions with age, analysis of simple effects suggest this non-linear pattern was driven primarily by changes in right vLPFC activity during the labeling of positive emotional expressions, compared to negative or neutral expressions. It may be worth noting that there was no age trend in dLPFC during labeling of negative emotional expressions, suggesting both that emotional valence may moderate neurodevelopmental trends and that the mid-adolescent participants did not simply disengage from the task. Though these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that adolescents demonstrate different patterns of affective reactivity and implicit regulatory responses to peer faces, the specific age-related trajectories observed were unexpected based on prior literature suggesting adolescence is a sensitive period of heightened socioemotional reactivity and diminished regulatory capacity. 
 
 
 4.3 Implications of diversifying the stimuli and tasks 
 The current study implemented several modifications to paradigms commonly used to assess adolescent emotion processing that may account for the results described above. First, using adolescent faces may have increased the salience of the stimuli, which is consistent with prior studies indicating heightened impulsivity and reactivity in the presence of peers ( Chein, Albert, O’Brien, Uckert, & Steinberg, 2011 ). Additionally, the familiarity of an emotional expression may produce differences in amygdala activity ( Somerville & Whalen, 2006 ), therefore it is possible that these stimuli recruited unexpected age-related pattern of activation because they depicted more familiar expressions and targets for adolescents (i.e., both non-exaggerated facial expressions as well as adolescent faces). Second, the dynamic nature of the stimuli may elicit different patterns of activity across age, as well as account for the robust amygdala activation across our participants. This explanation would suggest a need to prioritize dynamic stimuli presentation in future studies of emotion processing for enhanced ecological validity. Third, despite recruiting the same key regions implicated in explicit or partially explicit emotion regulation, it is possible that labeling serves a different implicit regulatory function in adolescence, particularly in response to peer faces. This explanation would also suggest the need to incorporate implicit regulatory tasks for greater understanding of real-world tendencies to use regulatory strategies. These considerations may provide further evidence of the need to diversify our stimuli and tasks used in testing hypotheses derived from our current neurobiological models, to identify when effects are robust or sensitive to such paradigm modifications ( Pfeifer & Allen, 2016 ). 
 
 
 4.4 Limitations and Future Directions 
 There were several limitations to the present study that lend themselves directly to suggestions for future research. First, due to sex differences in emotion regulation, pubertal onset and brain development, we limited our sample to females. Future work should investigate whether and how labeling dynamic emotional expressions made by peers differs between males and females across adolescence. Second, similar to all previous cross-sectional developmental studies utilizing adult faces across all ages, our participants were not individually age- or sex- matched with the stimulus set. Therefore all participants saw all stimuli, consisting of male and female adolescents ranging in age from 8 to 18. This was done to ensure all participants saw the same stimuli, while preventing participant fatigue (i.e., increased task length). While the stimuli used in the present study were closer in age to the age of the participants than previous child and adolescent studies using adult face stimuli, future studies should investigate differences in emotion processing using stimuli individually-matched to the participant, in order to better understand how neurodevelopmental trends may vary in response to affect displayed by age-matched peers versus other kinds of social partners. These data did not directly compare adult and peer stimuli, but strongly suggest that diversifying our stimuli constructs to assess these processes is important when trying to characterize developmental patterns of neural activity during affective reactivity and implicit regulation. Future studies should seek to directly compare neural responses to affective displays by younger, older, and age-matched adolescents within subjects. 
 An important possibility to consider is that some developmental changes in affective processing may be better characterized by relative changes in connectivity, representing varied contributions of neural activity across regions within a network ( Casey et al., 2016 ;  Gabard-Durnam et al., 2014 ;  Gee et al., 2013 ;  Perlman & Pelphrey, 2011 ;  Todd, Evans, Morris, Lewis, & Taylor, 2011 ;  Wu et al., 2016 ). Future work should therefore assess connectivity more comprehensively to better characterize the relative activation of brain regions implicated in emotion processing, as well as identify longitudinal patterns in associated neural activity to identify changes in intensity of neural responses across development. 
 
 
 4.5 Conclusions 
 Taken together, these data suggest that when using dynamic peer facial expressions, there may still be an age-related imbalance in cortical and subcortical regions involved in emotion processing. However, the patterns of activity and the observed developmental trends are different than the dominant models would predict in key regions associated with affective reactivity and regulation. Studies on this topic are particularly relevant due to the increased influence of peers on adolescent behavior, particularly given that peer presence is shown to heighten impulsivity and reactivity ( Albert, Chein, & Steinberg, 2013 ;  Blakemore & Robbins, 2012 ;  Chein et al., 2011 ). More broadly, this study suggests that we should consider how experimental design choices may constrain our assessments of whether adolescence is a period of increased sensitivity to emotions and peers, and the underlying associated neurodevelopmental processes. Although adolescence is typically emphasized as a sensitive period in socioemotional development, these data suggest neural sensitivity to affective stimuli that are highly socially relevant may already be pronounced by late childhood in some regions (e.g., MOFC/vMPFC), and may not decline in late adolescence in other regions (e.g., amygdala). These findings reveal important new directions for future research to help researchers understand how developing brains process and are influenced by peer affect, dynamic expressions, and implicit regulation during adolescence. 
 
 
 
 
 Funding for this project was provided by the Oregon Medical Research Foundation (New Investigator Grant to J. H. P.). J. E. F. was supported by the National Science Foundation under Graduate Research Fellowship 2015172132. J. H. P. was also supported by P50 DA034763, NIDA, U.S. PHS (PIs: Chamberlain & Fisher), and R01 MH107418, NIMH, U.S. PHS (PI: Pfeifer). We would like to thank the staff of the Lewis Center for Neuroimaging at the University of Oregon, the members of the Developmental Social Neuroscience Laboratory, as well as all of our participants and their families. 
 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2013 
 The Teenage Brain: Peer Influences on Adolescent Decision Making 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science 
 22 
 2 
 114 
 120 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412471347 
 
 25544805 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berkman 
 ET 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2009 
 Using Neuroscience to Broaden Emotion Regulation: Theoretical and Methodological Considerations: Emotion Regulation 
 Social and Personality Psychology Compass 
 3 
 4 
 475 
 493 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2009.00186.x 
 
 24052803 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 Robbins 
 TW 
 
 
 2012 
 Decision-making in the adolescent brain 
 Nature Neuroscience 
 15 
 9 
 1184 
 1191 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3177 
 
 22929913 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Britton 
 JC 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SF 
 
 
 Sudheimer 
 KD 
 
 
 Liberzon 
 I 
 
 
 2006 
 Facial expressions and complex IAPS pictures: Common and differential networks 
 NeuroImage 
 31 
 2 
 906 
 919 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.050 
 
 16488159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 BB 
 
 
 Larson 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 Peer Relationships in Adolescence 
 
 
 Lerner 
 RM 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 Handbook of Adolescent Psychology 
 Hoboken, NJ, USA 
 John Wiley & Sons, Inc 
 Retrieved from  http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/9780470479193.adlpsy002004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buhle 
 JT 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Lopez 
 R 
 
 
 Onyemekwu 
 C 
 
 
 Kober 
 H 
 
 
 … Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2014 
 Cognitive Reappraisal of Emotion: A Meta-Analysis of Human Neuroimaging Studies 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 24 
 11 
 2981 
 2990 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bht154 
 
 23765157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bzdok 
 D 
 
 
 Heeger 
 A 
 
 
 Langner 
 R 
 
 
 Laird 
 AR 
 
 
 Fox 
 PT 
 
 
 Palomero-Gallagher 
 N 
 
 
 … Eickhoff 
 SB 
 
 
 2015 
 Subspecialization in the human posterior medial cortex 
 Neuroimage 
 106 
 55 
 71 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.009 
 
 25462801 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 B 
 
 
 Galván 
 A 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 2016 
 Beyond simple models of adolescence to an integrated circuit-based account: A commentary 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 128 
 130 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.006 
 
 26739434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 Jones 
 RM 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 2008 
 The Adolescent Brain 
 Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
 1124 
 1 
 111 
 126 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1440.010 
 
 18400927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Albert 
 D 
 
 
 O’Brien 
 L 
 
 
 Uckert 
 K 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2011 
 Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the brain’s reward circuitry: Peer influence on risk taking 
 Developmental Science 
 14 
 2 
 F1 
 F10 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x 
 
 21499511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for Analysis and Visualization of Functional Magnetic Resonance Neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 3 
 162 
 173 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1006/cbmr.1996.0014 
 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crone 
 EA 
 
 
 Dahl 
 RE 
 
 
 2012 
 Understanding adolescence as a period of social–affective engagement and goal flexibility 
 Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
 13 
 9 
 636 
 650 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3313 
 
 22903221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crowley 
 DM 
 
 
 Hill 
 LG 
 
 
 Kuklinski 
 MR 
 
 
 Jones 
 DE 
 
 
 2014 
 Research Priorities for Economic Analyses of Prevention: Current Issues and Future Directions 
 Prevention Science 
 15 
 6 
 789 
 798 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-013-0429-z 
 
 23963624 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Davis 
 M 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2001 
 The amygdala: vigilance and emotion 
 Molecular Psychiatry 
 6 
 1 
 13 
 34 
 11244481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Doom 
 JR 
 
 
 Doyle 
 CM 
 
 
 Gunnar 
 MR 
 
 
 2016 
 Social stress buffering by friends in childhood and adolescence: Effects on HPA and oxytocin activity 
 Social Neuroscience 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 14 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2016.1149095 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ebner 
 NC 
 
 
 Johnson 
 MK 
 
 
 Fischer 
 H 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural Mechanisms of Reading Facial Emotions in Young and Older Adults 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 3 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00223 
 
 22291676 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Egger 
 HL 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Nelson 
 E 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 Towbin 
 KE 
 
 
 Angold 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 The NIMH Child Emotional Faces Picture Set (NIMH-ChEFS): a new set of children’s facial emotion stimuli: Child emotional faces stimuli 
 International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 
 20 
 3 
 145 
 156 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/mpr.343 
 
 22547297 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eklund 
 A 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 Knutsson 
 H 
 
 
 2016 
 Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
 113 
 28 
 7900 
 7905 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1602413113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ekman 
 P 
 
 
 Friesen 
 WV 
 
 
 1976 
 Measuring facial movement 
 Environmental Psychology and Nonverbal Behavior 
 1 
 1 
 56 
 75 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01115465 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Angstadt 
 M 
 
 
 Jelsone 
 LM 
 
 
 Nathan 
 PJ 
 
 
 Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 2006 
 Beyond threat: Amygdala reactivity across multiple expressions of facial affect 
 NeuroImage 
 30 
 4 
 1441 
 1448 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.11.003 
 
 16368249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Furman 
 W 
 
 
 Low 
 S 
 
 
 Ho 
 MJ 
 
 
 2009 
 Romantic Experience and Psychosocial Adjustment in Middle Adolescence 
 Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology 
 38 
 1 
 75 
 90 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/15374410802575347 
 
 19130359 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fusar-Poli 
 P 
 
 
 Placentino 
 A 
 
 
 Carletti 
 F 
 
 
 Landi 
 P 
 
 
 Allen 
 P 
 
 
 Surguladze 
 S 
 
 
 … Politi 
 P 
 
 
 2009 
 Functional atlas of emotional faces processing: a voxel-based meta-analysis of 105 functional magnetic resonance imaging studies 
 Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience: JPN 
 34 
 6 
 418 
 432 
 19949718 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gabard-Durnam 
 LJ 
 
 
 Flannery 
 J 
 
 
 Goff 
 B 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 Telzer 
 E 
 
 
 … Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2014 
 The development of human amygdala functional connectivity at rest from 4 to 23years: A cross-sectional study 
 NeuroImage 
 95 
 193 
 207 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.038 
 
 24662579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gallagher 
 M 
 
 
 Chiba 
 AA 
 
 
 1996 
 The amygdala and emotion 
 Current Opinion in Neurobiology 
 6 
 2 
 221 
 227 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(96)80076-6 
 
 8725964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Parra 
 CE 
 
 
 Penn 
 J 
 
 
 Voss 
 H 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Earlier Development of the Accumbens Relative to Orbitofrontal Cortex Might Underlie Risk-Taking Behavior in Adolescents 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 26 
 25 
 6885 
 6892 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-06.2006 
 
 16793895 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 KL 
 
 
 Flannery 
 J 
 
 
 Goff 
 B 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Shapiro 
 M 
 
 
 … Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 2013 
 A Developmental Shift from Positive to Negative Connectivity in Human Amygdala-Prefrontal Circuitry 
 Journal of Neuroscience 
 33 
 10 
 4584 
 4593 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3446-12.2013 
 
 23467374 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gee 
 DG 
 
 
 Karlsgodt 
 KH 
 
 
 van Erp 
 TGM 
 
 
 Bearden 
 CE 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Belger 
 A 
 
 
 … Cannon 
 TD 
 
 
 2012 
 Altered age-related trajectories of amygdala-prefrontal circuitry in adolescents at clinical high risk for psychosis: A preliminary study 
 Schizophrenia Research 
 134 
 1 
 1 
 9 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2011.10.005 
 
 22056201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Giuliani 
 NR 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 2015 
 Age-related changes in reappraisal of appetitive cravings during adolescence 
 NeuroImage 
 108 
 173 
 181 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.037 
 
 25536500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 McClure-Tone 
 EB 
 
 
 Shiffrin 
 ND 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 2009 
 Probing the Neural Correlates of Anticipated Peer Evaluation in Adolescence 
 Child Development 
 80 
 4 
 1000 
 1015 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01313.x 
 
 19630890 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 McClure-Tone 
 EB 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Roberson-Nay 
 R 
 
 
 Adler 
 AD 
 
 
 … Ernst 
 M 
 
 
 2008 
 A Developmental Examination of Amygdala Response to Facial Expressions 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 20 
 9 
 1565 
 1582 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20114 
 
 18345988 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gyurak 
 A 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Etkin 
 A 
 
 
 2011 
 Explicit and implicit emotion regulation: A dual-process framework 
 Cognition & Emotion 
 25 
 3 
 400 
 412 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2010.544160 
 
 21432682 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Voss 
 HU 
 
 
 Glover 
 GH 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2008 
 Biological Substrates of Emotional Reactivity and Regulation in Adolescence During an Emotional Go-Nogo Task 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 63 
 10 
 927 
 934 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.03.015 
 
 18452757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoehl 
 S 
 
 
 Brauer 
 J 
 
 
 Brasse 
 G 
 
 
 Striano 
 T 
 
 
 Friederici 
 AD 
 
 
 2010 
 Children’s processing of emotions expressed by peers and adults: An fMRI study 
 Social Neuroscience 
 5 
 5–6 
 543 
 559 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17470911003708206 
 
 20486013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kadosh 
 KC 
 
 
 Linden 
 DEJ 
 
 
 Lau 
 JYF 
 
 
 2013 
 Plasticity during childhood and adolescence: innovative approaches to investigating neurocognitive development 
 Developmental Science 
 16 
 4 
 574 
 583 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12054 
 
 23786475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Krueger 
 F 
 
 
 Barbey 
 AK 
 
 
 Grafman 
 J 
 
 
 2009 
 The medial prefrontal cortex mediates social event knowledge 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 13 
 3 
 103 
 109 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.12.005 
 
 19223228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larson 
 R 
 
 
 Csikszentmihalyi 
 M 
 
 
 Graef 
 R 
 
 
 2014 
 Mood Variability and the Psycho-social Adjustment of Adolescents 
 
 
 Csikszentmihalyi 
 M 
 
 
 Applications of Flow in Human Development and Education 
 285 
 304 
 Dordrecht 
 Springer Netherlands 
 Retrieved from  http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-94-017-9094-9_15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 Gobbini 
 MI 
 
 
 Harrison 
 T 
 
 
 Haxby 
 JV 
 
 
 2004 
 Mothers’ neural activation in response to pictures of their children and other children 
 Biological Psychiatry 
 56 
 4 
 225 
 232 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.05.017 
 
 15312809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lenroot 
 RK 
 
 
 Giedd 
 JN 
 
 
 2010 
 Sex differences in the adolescent brain 
 Brain and Cognition 
 72 
 1 
 46 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2009.10.008 
 
 19913969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liang 
 X 
 
 
 Zebrowitz 
 LA 
 
 
 Aharon 
 I 
 
 
 2009 
 Effective connectivity between amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex differentiates the perception of facial expressions 
 Social Neuroscience 
 4 
 2 
 185 
 196 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/17470910802453105 
 
 18982530 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Eisenberger 
 NI 
 
 
 Crockett 
 MJ 
 
 
 Tom 
 SM 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Way 
 BM 
 
 
 2007 
 Putting Feelings Into Words: Affect Labeling Disrupts Amygdala Activity in Response to Affective Stimuli 
 Psychological Science 
 18 
 5 
 421 
 428 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01916.x 
 
 17576282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LoBue 
 V 
 
 
 Thrasher 
 C 
 
 
 2015 
 The Child Affective Facial Expression (CAFE) set: validity and reliability from untrained adults 
 Frontiers in Psychology 
 5 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01532 
 
 25653636 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maddock 
 RJ 
 
 
 1999 
 The retrosplenial cortex and emotion: new insights from functional neuroimaging of the human brain 
 Trends in Neurosciences 
 22 
 7 
 310 
 316 
 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0166-2236(98)01374-5 
 
 10370255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marusak 
 HA 
 
 
 Carré 
 JM 
 
 
 Thomason 
 ME 
 
 
 2013 
 The stimuli drive the response: An fMRI study of youth processing adult or child emotional face stimuli 
 NeuroImage 
 83 
 679 
 689 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.002 
 
 23851324 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mauss 
 IB 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 2007 
 Automatic Emotion Regulation 
 Social and Personality Psychology Compass 
 1 
 1 
 146 
 167 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2007.00005.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 2000 
 A meta-analytic review of sex differences in facial expression processing and their development in infants, children, and adolescents 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 126 
 3 
 424 
 453 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.126.3.424 
 
 10825784 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Weber 
 J 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Sokol-Hessner 
 P 
 
 
 Ray 
 RD 
 
 
 … Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2012 
 The development of emotion regulation: an fMRI study of cognitive reappraisal in children, adolescents and young adults 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 7 
 1 
 11 
 22 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsr093 
 
 22228751 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monk 
 CS 
 
 
 McClure 
 EB 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Zarahn 
 E 
 
 
 Bilder 
 RM 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 … Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 2003 
 Adolescent immaturity in attention-related brain engagement to emotional facial expressions 
 NeuroImage 
 20 
 1 
 420 
 428 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00355-0 
 
 14527602 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Morawetz 
 C 
 
 
 Bode 
 S 
 
 
 Baudewig 
 J 
 
 
 Kirilina 
 E 
 
 
 Heekeren 
 HR 
 
 
 2016 
 Changes in Effective Connectivity Between Dorsal and Ventral Prefrontal Regions Moderate Emotion Regulation 
 Cerebral Cortex 
 26 
 5 
 1923 
 1937 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv005 
 
 25631055 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Jarcho 
 JM 
 
 
 Guyer 
 AE 
 
 
 2016 
 Social re-orientation and brain development: An expanded and updated view 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 118 
 127 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.008 
 
 26777136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 EE 
 
 
 Leibenluft 
 E 
 
 
 McCLURE 
 EB 
 
 
 Pine 
 DS 
 
 
 2005 
 The social re-orientation of adolescence: a neuroscience perspective on the process and its relation to psychopathology 
 Psychological Medicine 
 35 
 2 
 163 
 174 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291704003915 
 
 15841674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Bunge 
 SA 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2002 
 Rethinking Feelings: An fMRI Study of the Cognitive Regulation of Emotion 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 14 
 8 
 1215 
 1229 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/089892902760807212 
 
 12495527 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 Hughes 
 B 
 
 
 Robertson 
 ER 
 
 
 Cooper 
 JC 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 2009 
 Neural Systems Supporting the Control of Affective and Cognitive Conflicts 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 21 
 9 
 1841 
 1854 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peake 
 SJ 
 
 
 Dishion 
 TJ 
 
 
 Stormshak 
 EA 
 
 
 Moore 
 WE 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 2013 
 Risk-taking and social exclusion in adolescence: Neural mechanisms underlying peer influences on decision-making 
 NeuroImage 
 82 
 23 
 34 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.061 
 
 23707590 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perlman 
 SB 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2011 
 Developing connections for affective regulation: Age-related changes in emotional brain connectivity 
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 
 108 
 3 
 607 
 620 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2010.08.006 
 
 20971474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Petrides 
 M 
 
 
 2005 
 Lateral prefrontal cortex: architectonic and functional organization 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 
 360 
 1456 
 781 
 795 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1631 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 2012 
 Arrested development? Reconsidering dual-systems models of brain function in adolescence and disorders 
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
 16 
 6 
 322 
 329 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.04.011 
 
 22613872 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Allen 
 NB 
 
 
 2016 
 The audacity of specificity: Moving adolescent developmental neuroscience towards more powerful scientific paradigms and translatable models 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 131 
 137 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.012 
 
 26754460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Blakemore 
 SJ 
 
 
 2012 
 Adolescent social cognitive and affective neuroscience: past, present, and future 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 7 
 1 
 1 
 10 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsr099 
 
 22228750 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pfeifer 
 JH 
 
 
 Masten 
 CL 
 
 
 Moore 
 WE 
 
 
 Oswald 
 TM 
 
 
 Mazziotta 
 JC 
 
 
 Iacoboni 
 M 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 2011 
 Entering Adolescence: Resistance to Peer Influence, Risky Behavior, and Neural Changes in Emotion Reactivity 
 Neuron 
 69 
 5 
 1029 
 1036 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.02.019 
 
 21382560 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pitcher 
 D 
 
 
 Dilks 
 DD 
 
 
 Saxe 
 RR 
 
 
 Triantafyllou 
 C 
 
 
 Kanwisher 
 N 
 
 
 2011 
 Differential selectivity for dynamic versus static information in face-selective cortical regions 
 NeuroImage 
 56 
 4 
 2356 
 2363 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.067 
 
 21473921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pitskel 
 NB 
 
 
 Bolling 
 DZ 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 MD 
 
 
 Crowley 
 MJ 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 2011 
 How grossed out are you? The neural bases of emotion regulation from childhood to adolescence 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 1 
 3 
 324 
 337 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2011.03.004 
 
 21686071 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pitskel 
 NB 
 
 
 Bolling 
 DZ 
 
 
 Kaiser 
 MD 
 
 
 Pelphrey 
 KA 
 
 
 Crowley 
 MJ 
 
 
 2014 
 Neural systems for cognitive reappraisal in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 10 
 117 
 128 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2014.08.007 
 
 25198094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rothkirch 
 M 
 
 
 Schmack 
 K 
 
 
 Schlagenhauf 
 F 
 
 
 Sterzer 
 P 
 
 
 2012 
 Implicit motivational value and salience are processed in distinct areas of orbitofrontal cortex 
 NeuroImage 
 62 
 3 
 1717 
 1725 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.016 
 
 22728149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sabatinelli 
 D 
 
 
 Fortune 
 EE 
 
 
 Li 
 Q 
 
 
 Siddiqui 
 A 
 
 
 Krafft 
 C 
 
 
 Oliver 
 WT 
 
 
 … Jeffries 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 Emotional perception: Meta-analyses of face and natural scene processing 
 NeuroImage 
 54 
 3 
 2524 
 2533 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.011 
 
 20951215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sato 
 W 
 
 
 Kochiyama 
 T 
 
 
 Yoshikawa 
 S 
 
 
 Naito 
 E 
 
 
 Matsumura 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Enhanced neural activity in response to dynamic facial expressions of emotion: an fMRI study 
 Cognitive Brain Research 
 20 
 1 
 81 
 91 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.01.008 
 
 15130592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shulman 
 EP 
 
 
 Smith 
 AR 
 
 
 Silva 
 K 
 
 
 Icenogle 
 G 
 
 
 Duell 
 N 
 
 
 Chein 
 J 
 
 
 Steinberg 
 L 
 
 
 2016 
 The dual systems model: Review, reappraisal, and reaffirmation 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 103 
 117 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.010 
 
 26774291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 McRae 
 K 
 
 
 Gabrieli 
 JDE 
 
 
 Gross 
 JJ 
 
 
 Remy 
 KA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2012 
 Age-related differences in emotional reactivity, regulation, and rejection sensitivity in adolescence 
 Emotion 
 12 
 6 
 1235 
 1247 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0028297 
 
 22642356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Silvers 
 JA 
 
 
 Weber 
 J 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2015 
 Bad and worse: neural systems underlying reappraisal of high- and low-intensity negative emotions 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 10 
 2 
 172 
 179 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsu043 
 
 24603024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Fani 
 N 
 
 
 McClure-Tone 
 EB 
 
 
 2011 
 Behavioral and Neural Representation of Emotional Facial Expressions Across the Lifespan 
 Developmental Neuropsychology 
 36 
 4 
 408 
 428 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1080/87565641.2010.549865 
 
 21516541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Hare 
 T 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Frontostriatal Maturation Predicts Cognitive Control Failure to Appetitive Cues in Adolescents 
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 
 23 
 9 
 2123 
 2134 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21572 
 
 20809855 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Jones 
 RM 
 
 
 Ruberry 
 EJ 
 
 
 Dyke 
 JP 
 
 
 Glover 
 G 
 
 
 Casey 
 BJ 
 
 
 2013 
 The Medial Prefrontal Cortex and the Emergence of Self-Conscious Emotion in Adolescence 
 Psychological Science 
 24 
 8 
 1554 
 1562 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613475633 
 
 23804962 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Somerville 
 LH 
 
 
 Whalen 
 PJ 
 
 
 2006 
 Prior experience as a stimulus category confound: an example using facial expressions of emotion 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 1 
 3 
 271 
 274 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsl040 
 
 18985113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suleiman 
 AB 
 
 
 Harden 
 KP 
 
 
 2016 
 The importance of sexual and romantic development in understanding the developmental neuroscience of adolescence 
 Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 
 17 
 145 
 147 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.007 
 
 26778337 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Telzer 
 EH 
 
 
 Qu 
 Y 
 
 
 Goldenberg 
 D 
 
 
 Fuligni 
 AJ 
 
 
 Galván 
 A 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 2014 
 Adolescents’ emotional competence is associated with parents’ neural sensitivity to emotions 
 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 
 8 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00558 
 
 24478674 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Todd 
 RM 
 
 
 Evans 
 JW 
 
 
 Morris 
 D 
 
 
 Lewis 
 MD 
 
 
 Taylor 
 MJ 
 
 
 2011 
 The changing face of emotion: age-related patterns of amygdala activation to salient faces 
 Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 
 6 
 1 
 12 
 23 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsq007 
 
 20194512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Torrisi 
 SJ 
 
 
 Lieberman 
 MD 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 Altshuler 
 LL 
 
 
 2013 
 Advancing understanding of affect labeling with dynamic causal modeling 
 NeuroImage 
 0 
 481 
 488 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tottenham 
 N 
 
 
 Tanaka 
 JW 
 
 
 Leon 
 AC 
 
 
 McCarry 
 T 
 
 
 Nurse 
 M 
 
 
 Hare 
 TA 
 
 
 … Nelson 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 The NimStim set of facial expressions: Judgments from untrained research participants 
 Psychiatry Research 
 168 
 3 
 242 
 249 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2008.05.006 
 
 19564050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vink 
 M 
 
 
 Derks 
 JM 
 
 
 Hoogendam 
 JM 
 
 
 Hillegers 
 M 
 
 
 Kahn 
 RS 
 
 
 2014 
 Functional differences in emotion processing during adolescence and early adulthood 
 NeuroImage 
 91 
 70 
 76 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.01.035 
 
 24468408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viviani 
 R 
 
 
 2014 
 Neural Correlates of Emotion Regulation in the Ventral Prefrontal Cortex and the Encoding of Subjective Value and Economic Utility 
 Frontiers in Psychiatry 
 5 
 
 http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00123 
 
 24478733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Davidson 
 ML 
 
 
 Hughes 
 BL 
 
 
 Lindquist 
 MA 
 
 
 Ochsner 
 KN 
 
 
 2008 
 Neural mechanisms of emotion regulation: Evidence for two independent prefrontal-subcortical pathways 
 Neuron 
 59 
 6 
 1037 
 1050 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.006 
 
 18817740 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Nichols 
 TE 
 
 
 2003 
 Optimization of experimental design in fMRI: a general framework using a genetic algorithm 
 NeuroImage 
 18 
 2 
 293 
 309 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(02)00046-0 
 
 12595184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 AT 
 
 
 Dapretto 
 M 
 
 
 Hariri 
 AR 
 
 
 Sigman 
 M 
 
 
 Bookheimer 
 SY 
 
 
 2004 
 Neural Correlates of Facial Affect Processing in Children and Adolescents With Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 
 43 
 4 
 481 
 490 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200404000-00015 
 
 15187809 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wu 
 M 
 
 
 Kujawa 
 A 
 
 
 Lu 
 LH 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 DA 
 
 
 Klumpp 
 H 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 KD 
 
 
 … Phan 
 KL 
 
 
 2016 
 Age-related changes in amygdala-frontal connectivity during emotional face processing from childhood into young adulthood: Amygdala-Frontal Connectivity Development 
 Human Brain Mapping 
 37 
 5 
 1684 
 1695 
 
 http://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23129 
 
 26931629 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zelazo 
 PD 
 
 
 Carlson 
 SM 
 
 
 2012 
 Hot and Cool Executive Function in Childhood and Adolescence: Development and Plasticity 
 Child Development Perspectives 
 n/a–n/a.  http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2012.00246.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Label > Blur and View > Blur Overlay of Neural Activity. Label > Blur contrast activity is depicted in blue. View > Blur contrast activity is depicted in red. Overlap is depicted in purple. A combined voxel-height and cluster-extent correction was applied as calculated by 3dClustSim ( p  <.0001,  k  ≥ 14). View > Blur revealed activity in medial orbital frontal cortex (extending slightly into ventral medial prefrontal cortex) and bilateral amygdala, along with significant activity in the right posterior superior temporal sulcus, bilateral anterior inferior temporal sulcus, and bilateral dorsal LPFC. Label > Blur also revealed medial orbital frontal cortex (extending into ventral medial prefrontal cortex), bilateral amygdala, bilateral dorsal LPFC, right posterior superior temporal sulcus, as well as robust activation in the bilateral ventral LPFC, dMPFC, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and primary motor cortex. Data Availability: Data are available via NeuroVault, a public repository of unthresholded brain activation maps. Complete group-level statistics for View > Blur and Label > Blur are available at  http://neurovault.org/collections/1302/  and  http://neurovault.org/collections/1304/ , respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Neural activity in lateral prefrontal cortex by task. Panel A depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in bilateral ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (vLPFC) by task. Panel B depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in bilateral dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dLPFC) by task. Bilateral ventral and dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the Label > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Neural activity in medial orbital frontal cortex and amygdala by task. Panel A depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in bilateral amygdala (Amyg) across task. Panel B depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in medial orbital frontal cortex/ventral medial prefrontal cortex (MOFC/vMPFC) across task. Medial orbital frontal cortex and bilateral amygdala regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the View > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Neural Activity Across Age. Panel A depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (vLPFC) by age (10–23 years) across participants. Panel B depicts mean parameter estimates of activity in medial orbital frontal cortex/ventral medial prefrontal cortex (MOFC/vMPFC) by age (10–23 years) across participants. Right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex region of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the Label > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). Medial orbital frontal cortex region of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the View > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 View > Blur. Whole brain parameter estimates of activity in contrast View > Blur. A combined voxel-height and cluster-extent correction was applied as calculated by 3dClustSim ( p  <.0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 27 
 −94 
 −7 
 11.76 
 107 
 
 
 Occipital Cortex 
 L 
 −21 
 −100 
 −7 
 11.15 
 127 
 
 
 MOFC (Orbital Gyrus/Medial Frontal Gyrus) 
 
 0 
 50 
 −19 
 8.94 
 165 
 
 
 Amygdala/Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 R 
 21 
 −7 
 −19 
 7.64 
 120 
 
 
 Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 R 
 48 
 −37 
 5 
 7.59 
 88 
 
 
 Amygdala/Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 L 
 −24 
 −10 
 −19 
 6.91 
 72 
 
 
 Anterior Temporal Cortex (Inferior/Middle Temporal Gyrus) 
 R 
 54 
 −7 
 −19 
 6.62 
 96 
 
 
 dLPFC (Middle/Inferior Frontal Gyrus) 
 R 
 45 
 20 
 20 
 6.54 
 70 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 R 
 42 
 −43 
 −16 
 5.89 
 14 
 
 
 Anterior Temporal Cortex (Inferior/Middle Temporal Gyrus) 
 L 
 −57 
 −10 
 −19 
 5.78 
 55 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Cortex/Precuneus 
 
 6 
 −52 
 20 
 5.17 
 44 
 
 
 Paracentral Gyrus/Supplementary Motor Area 
 
 9 
 −25 
 65 
 4.86 
 19 
 
 
 dLPFC (Inferior Frontal Gyrus) 
 L 
 −42 
 17 
 23 
 4.64 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 MOFC = medial orbital frontal cortex; dLPFC = dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Label > Blur. Whole brain parameter estimates of activity in contrast Label > Blur. A combined voxel-height and cluster-extent correction was applied as calculated by 3dClustSim ( p  <.0001,  k  > 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 
 
 
 Occipital Cortex 
 R 
 27 
 −94 
 −7 
 13.47 
 2301 
 
 
 Occipital Cortex 
 L 
 −21 
 −100 
 −7 
 11.65 
 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 L 
 −42 
 −49 
 −19 
 10.79 
 
 
 
 Amygdala/Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 L 
 −30 
 −4 
 −22 
 10.42 
 
 
 
 Amygdala/Hippocampus/Parahippocampal Gyrus 
 R 
 21 
 −7 
 −19 
 9.99 
 
 
 
 Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 L 
 −51 
 −43 
 5 
 9.30 
 
 
 
 Hippocampus 
 L 
 −21 
 −31 
 −4 
 8.61 
 
 
 
 Vermis 
 
 0 
 −58 
 −34 
 7.62 
 
 
 
 Midbrain 
 R 
 12 
 −31 
 −4 
 6.35 
 
 
 
 dLPFC (Middle/Inferior Frontal Gyrus) 
 L 
 −42 
 17 
 26 
 12.40 
 980 
 
 
 vLPFC (Inferior Frontal Gyrus; Pars Orbitalis) 
 L 
 −48 
 26 
 −10 
 9.38 
 
 
 
 vLPFC (Inferior Frontal Gyrus; Pars Triangularis) 
 L 
 −51 
 29 
 2 
 7.82 
 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 L 
 −45 
 −1 
 53 
 5.65 
 
 
 
 Anterior Insula 
 L 
 −27 
 23 
 −1 
 4.86 
 
 
 
 dLPFC (Middle/Inferior Frontal Gyrus) 
 R 
 45 
 20 
 20 
 10.22 
 252 
 
 
 vLPFC (Inferior Frontal Gyrus; Pars Triangularis) 
 R 
 57 
 29 
 2 
 5.65 
 
 
 
 Supplementary Motor Area (Medial Frontal Gyrus) 
 
 −6 
 17 
 47 
 8.07 
 258 
 
 
 dMPFC (Medial Frontal Gyrus) 
 
 −6 
 59 
 23 
 7.34 
 
 
 
 MOFC (Orbital Gyrus/Medial Frontal Gyrus) 
 
 6 
 50 
 −19 
 7.84 
 71 
 
 
 Posterior Superior Temporal Sulcus 
 R 
 48 
 −37 
 2 
 6.77 
 86 
 
 
 Precentral Gyrus 
 R 
 36 
 −7 
 62 
 6.45 
 136 
 
 
 Fusiform Gyrus 
 R 
 42 
 −43 
 −16 
 6.11 
 39 
 
 
 Putamen/Caudate 
 R 
 24 
 2 
 11 
 5.77 
 238 
 
 
 Superior Parietal Lobule/Precuneus 
 L 
 −27 
 −61 
 53 
 5.13 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 dLPFC = dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex; vLPFC = ventral lateral prefrontal cortex; dMPFC = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex; MOFC = medial orbital frontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Whole brain parameter estimates of activity in contrast View > Label and Label > View. A combined voxel-height and cluster-extent correction was applied as calculated by 3dClustSim ( p  <.0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 
 t 
 
 
 k 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View > Label 
 
 
 
 Angular Gyrus 
 L 
 −39 
 −76 
 41 
 7.82 
 55 
 
 
 Angular Gyrus 
 R 
 45 
 −70 
 41 
 7.51 
 77 
 
 
 Posterior Cingulate Cortex/Precuneus 
 
 3 
 −37 
 41 
 7.45 
 233 
 
 
 Frontal Pole (Superior Frontal Gyrus) 
 L 
 −24 
 62 
 2 
 6.84 
 71 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Sulcus 
 R 
 24 
 29 
 35 
 6.74 
 173 
 
 
 mOFC (Orbital Gyrus/Medial Frontal Gyrus) extending into Subgenual Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 
 −9 
 32 
 −10 
 6.02 
 247 
 
 
 Middle/Superior Temporal Gyrus 
 R 
 63 
 −22 
 −7 
 5.68 
 92 
 
 
 Supramarginal Gyrus 
 R 
 48 
 −46 
 35 
 5.41 
 56 
 
 
 Superior Frontal Sulcus 
 L 
 −27 
 41 
 38 
 5.25 
 104 
 
 
 Superior/Middle Temporal Gyrus 
 L 
 −48 
 −19 
 −1 
 5.06 
 36 
 
 
 Frontal Pole (Superior Frontal Gyrus) 
 R 
 27 
 62 
 2 
 4.89 
 28 
 
 
 Paracentral Lobule 
 
 −6 
 −28 
 59 
 4.71 
 21 
 
 
 
 Label > View 
 
 
 
 LPFC/Insula/Cerebellum/Occipital Cortex/Fusiform/Thalamus/Caudate/Putamen/Amygdala/Hippocampus/Anterior Cingulate Cortex/Supplementary Motor Area 
 
 −45 
 2 
 8 
 13.88 
 15137 
 
 
 Postcentral Gyrus/Somatosensory Cortex 
 L 
 −57 
 −22 
 20 
 11.31 
 1566 
 
 
 Postcentral Gyrus/Somatosensory Cortex 
 R 
 54 
 −19 
 20 
 6.89 
 584 
 
 
 Brainstem 
 
 3 
 −34 
 −46 
 6.83 
 59 
 
 
 dMPFC (Medial Frontal Gyrus) 
 
 3 
 59 
 23 
 5.74 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 MOFC = medial orbital frontal cortex; LPFC = lateral prefrontal cortex; dMPFC = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4 
 
 Paired Sample T-tests of mean parameter estimates of activity between tasks. Bilateral dorsal and ventral lateral prefrontal cortex regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the Label > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). Medial orbital frontal cortex and bilateral amygdala regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the View > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Paired Sample T-test 
 M 
 SE 
 CI 
 
 t 
 
 
 df 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Label > Blur) > (View > Blur) 
 
 
 
 Left Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 0.39 
 0.04 
 (.30, .48) 
 8.88 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 Right Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 0.13 
 0.03 
 (.06, .20) 
 3.86 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 Left Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 0.48 
 0.05 
 (.38, .58) 
 9.63 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 Right Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 0.2 
 0.04 
 (.12, .28) 
 4.9 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 (View > Blur) > (Label > Blur) 
 
 
 
 Medial Orbital Frontal Cortex 
 0.23 
 0.07 
 (.08, .37) 
 3.16 
 57 
 <.01 
 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 −0.15 
 0.04 
 (−.08, −.23) 
 −4.3 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 Right Amygdala 
 −0.06 
 0.04 
 (−.14, .01) 
 −1.72 
 57 
 0.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 5 
 
 Paired Sample T-tests of mean parameter estimates of activity within tasks. Bilateral dorsal and ventral lateral prefrontal cortex regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the Label > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). Medial orbital frontal cortex and bilateral amygdala regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the View > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Paired Sample T-test 
 M 
 SE 
 CI 
 
 t 
 
 
 df 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Left Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Pos 
 0.16 
 0.07 
 (.30, .02) 
 2.36 
 57 
 0.02 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Neut 
 0.23 
 0.05 
 (.05, .13) 
 4.4 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 Right Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Pos 
 0.18 
 0.07 
 (.31, .04) 
 2.69 
 57 
 <.01 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Neut 
 0.2 
 0.43 
 (.06, .09) 
 3.61 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 Left Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Label Pos> Label Neut 
 0.21 
 0.08 
 (.06, .36) 
 2.76 
 57 
 <.01 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Neut 
 0.29 
 0.07 
 (.14, .43) 
 3.9 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 Right Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 Label Pos> Label Neut 
 0.23 
 0.07 
 (.10, .37) 
 3.45 
 57 
 <.01 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Neut 
 0.3 
 0.05 
 (.20, .40) 
 5.85 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 
 
 
 Label Pos> Label Neut 
 0.17 
 0.06 
 (.04, .30) 
 2.69 
 57 
 <.01 
 
 
 Label Neg > Label Neut 
 0.26 
 0.06 
 (.15, .37) 
 4.61 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 Medial Orbital Frontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 View Pos > View Neg 
 0.26 
 0.1 
 (.05, .46) 
 2.6 
 57 
 0.01 
 
 
 View Neut > View Neg 
 0.33 
 0.09 
 (.51, .15) 
 3.73 
 57 
 <.001 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pos = Positive; Neg = Negative; Neut = Neutral. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 
 
 Hierarchal Linear Regressions in  a priori  regions of interest using linear and quadratic age. Bilateral dorsal and ventral lateral prefrontal cortex regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the Label > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). Medial orbital frontal cortex and bilateral amygdala regions of interest defined by 8mm sphere around the peak within that region from the View > Blur contrast (at  p  < .0001,  k  ≥ 14). 
 
 
 
 
 Hierarchical Linear Regression 
 R2 
 Δ in R2 
 
 B 
 
 β 
 
 t 
 
 
 p 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medial Orbital Frontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.09 
 0.09 
 −0.06 
 −0.29 
 3.27 
 0.03 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.09 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.05 
 −2.23 
 0.70 
 
 
 
 Right Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.01 
 0.01 
 0.01 
 0.10 
 0.76 
 0.45 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.08 
 0.07 
 0.008 
 0.27 
 2.05 
 0.05 
 
 
 
 Right Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.03 
 0.03 
 0.02 
 0.19 
 1.48 
 0.14 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.08 
 0.05 
 <.01 
 0.22 
 1.73 
 0.08 
 
 
 
 Left Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 <.01 
 <.01 
 <.01 
 0.09 
 0.66 
 0.51 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.02 
 0.02 
 0.004 
 0.13 
 0.99 
 0.33 
 
 
 
 Left Ventral Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.01 
 0.01 
 −0.01 
 −0.08 
 −0.63 
 0.53 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.07 
 0.06 
 0.01 
 0.24 
 1.82 
 0.08 
 
 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.02 
 0.02 
 −0.01 
 −0.13 
 −0.97 
 0.337 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.02 
 0.005 
 0.002 
 0.07 
 0.54 
 0.591 
 
 
 
 Left Amygdala 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.03 
 0.03 
 −0.01 
 −0.16 
 −1.18 
 0.24 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.03 
 0.001 
 0.001 
 0.03 
 0.24 
 0.81 
 
 
 
 Right Amygdala 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.04 
 0.04 
 0.02 
 0.20 
 1.56 
 0.13 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.04 
 <.01 
 <.01 
 0.01 
 0.04 
 0.97 
 
 
 
 Right Amygdala 
 
 
 
 age linear 
 0.01 
 0.01 
 0.01 
 0.12 
 0.86 
 0.40 
 
 
 age quadratic 
 0.01 
 <.01 
 <.01 
 0.03 
 0.23 
 0.82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Highlights 
 
 
 
 Dynamic peer facial stimuli recruit key regions involved in emotion processing 
 
 
 LPFC shows a nonlinear age trend across adolescence to labeling dynamic peer faces 
 
 
 MOFC shows a linear decrease with age to viewing dynamic peer faces 
 
 
 No significant age trends were observed in amygdala during viewing or labeling dynamic peer faces 
 
 
 
 
