
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 0100725 
 3187 
 Cortex 
 Cortex 
 
 Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior 
 
 0010-9452 
 1973-8102 
 
 
 28324695 
 5438774 
 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.02.005 
 NIHMS855198 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Imagining the future: The core episodic simulation network
dissociates as a function of timecourse and the amount of simulated
information 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 Preston P. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 Roland G. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 Daniel L. 
 
 1 
 
 
 1 Department of Psychology, Harvard University 
 2 Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences 
 
 Corresponding author: Preston P. Thakral, Department of
Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
 prestonthakral@fas.harvard.edu , Phone: 1-617-347-2737, Fax:
1-617-496-8279 
 
 
 17 
 3 
 2017 
 
 
 24 
 2 
 2017 
 
 
 5 
 2017 
 
 
 01 
 5 
 2018 
 
 90 
 12 
 30 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Neuroimaging data indicate that episodic memory (i.e., remembering
specific past experiences) and episodic simulation (i.e., imagining specific
future experiences) are associated with enhanced activity in a common set of
neural regions, often referred to as the core network. This network comprises
the hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex, lateral and medial parietal cortex,
lateral temporal cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex. Evidence for a core
network has been taken as support for the idea that episodic memory and episodic
simulation are supported by common processes. Much remains to be learned about
how specific core network regions contribute to specific aspects of episodic
simulation. Prior neuroimaging studies of episodic  memory 
indicate that certain regions within the core network are differentially
sensitive to the amount of information recollected (e.g., the left lateral
parietal cortex). In addition, certain core network regions dissociate as a
function of their timecourse of engagement during episodic memory (e.g.,
transient activity in the posterior hippocampus and sustained activity in the
left lateral parietal cortex). In the current study, we assessed whether similar
dissociations could be observed during episodic  simulation . We
found that the left lateral parietal cortex modulates as a function of the
amount of simulated details. Of particular interest, while the hippocampus was
insensitive to the amount of simulated details, we observed a temporal
dissociation within the hippocampus: transient activity occurred in relatively
posterior portions of the hippocampus and sustained activity occurred in
anterior portions. Because the posterior hippocampal and lateral parietal
findings parallel those observed previously during episodic memory, the present
results add to the evidence that episodic memory and episodic simulation are
supported by common processes. Critically, the present study also provides
evidence that regions within the core network support dissociable processes. 
 
 
 Episodic memory 
 recollection 
 hippocampus 
 parietal 
 fMRI 
 
 
 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 1.1. Episodic Memory and Episodic Simulation 
 Humans have the ability to re-experience past experiences (i.e., episodic
memory) and to pre-experience hypothetical future experiences (i.e., episodic
simulation;  Schacter, Addis, Buckner,
2008 ;  Suddendorf & Corballis,
2007 ;  Szpunar, Spreng, &
Schacter, 2014 ;  Tulving,
2005 ). For example, one can mentally relive the last time they went to a
Metallica concert. In contrast, if one is trying to decide whether to go to a
Metallica concert for the first time, one can draw on details of similar
concerts one has attended in the past to simulate the future experience and
decide whether to go. According to the  constructive episodic simulation
hypothesis  ( Schacter & Addis,
2007 ), the ability to simulate future experiences draws on many of
the same mental processes that support episodic memory. Specifically, episodic
memory supports the construction of future experiences by providing access to
episodic details that can be recombined into novel events. 
 
 
 1.2. The Core Network 
 A number of studies have provided evidence for the idea that many of the
processes that support episodic simulation are shared with episodic memory (for
reviews, see  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ;
 Schacter & Madore, 2016 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 ;  Szpunar, 2010 ). For example, one of the most
consistent neuroimaging findings is that of the recruitment of a common set of
neural regions during episodic memory and episodic simulation (for a recent
review and meta-analysis, see  Benoit &
Schacter, 2015 ). These regions include the hippocampus,
parahippocampal cortex, lateral and medial parietal cortex, lateral temporal
cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex. Several researchers have argued that the
observed neural overlap constitutes evidence for a  core network 
that supports both the reconstruction of past episodes and the construction of
future episodes (e.g.,  Buckner & Carroll,
2007 ;  Hassabis & Maguire,
2007 ;  Schacter & Addis,
2007 ;  Schacter et al.,
2012 ). 
 Recent studies have begun to identify the specific contributions of
individual regions within the core network to episodic simulation (e.g.,  Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, Poulin, &
Buckner, 2010 ;  Benoit, Gilbert, &
Burgess, 2011 ;  Benoit, Szpunar, &
Schacter, 2014 ;  Gaesser, Spreng,
McLelland, Addis, & Schacter, 2013 ;  Gerlach, Spreng, Madore, & Schacter, 2014 ;  Hassabis et al., 2014 ;  Martin, Schacter, Corballis, & Addis, 2011 ;  Palombo, Hayes, Peterson, Keane, & Verfaellie,
2016 ;  Szpunar, St. Jacques, Robbins,
Wig, & Schacter, 2014 ;  Szpunar,
Jing, Benoit, & Schacter, 2015 ;  Xu, Yuan, & Lei, 2016 ; for discussion, see  Roberts, Schacter, & Addis, 2017 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 ). For example, by manipulating
the content of simulated episodes,  Szpunar et
al. (2014)  demonstrated that activation in specific core-network
regions are associated with processing different types of simulated content
(e.g., simulating social scenarios was associated with neural activity in the
posterior cingulate and lateral temporal cortex and simulating locations in
those scenarios was associated with retrosplenial and parahippocampal activity).
In a related study,  Hassabis et al.
(2014)  demonstrated that core network regions such as the lateral
temporal cortex and posterior cingulate are associated with processing
personality characteristics of the people comprising an episodic simulation
(e.g., agreeableness and extraversion, respectively). In another set of studies
( Gaesser et al., 2013 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ), greater hippocampal
activity during episodic simulation was predictive of subsequent memory for the
simulation, thus indicating that the hippocampus is involved in encoding a
simulated future event into memory. 
 
 
 1.3. Current Aim and Study 
 Although the foregoing and related studies represent a promising
beginning, much remains to be learned about how specific core network regions
contribute to specific aspects of episodic simulation. The aim of the present
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study is to elucidate the
contributions of individual regions within the core network to two specific
features of episodic simulation: 1) whether simulation-related activities in
different regions of the core network differ in their sensitivity to the
timecourse of simulation (i.e., whether neural activity is transient or
sustained), and 2) whether engagement of the regions depends on the amount of
information that is integrated in service of the simulation (i.e., an event with
fewer or more episodic details). 
 In the current study, participants imagined future events that included
specific places, people, and objects. We manipulated the amount of simulated
information by varying the number of people and objects that participants were
cued to incorporate in their simulation (3, 4, or 5 details). In addition to
manipulating the number of details, we also varied the duration for which
participants simulated the future event (8, 10, or 12 s). Through this
manipulation, we attempt to dissociate core network regions that demonstrate a
sustained 1  profile
(i.e., neural activity that covaries with the period during which participants
simulated a future episode) and core network regions that demonstrated a
transient profile (i.e., neural activity that is unaffected by the delay;  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). 
 
 
 1.4. Contributions of Core Regions to Episodic Memory 
 Our rationale for examining the factors of amount of information and
timecourse comes from findings in the episodic memory literature. A number of
studies examining the neural correlates of episodic memory have demonstrated
that neural activity in several core network regions covaries with the amount of
information recollected (for a review, see  Rugg,
Johnson, & Uncapher, 2015 ). For example, activity in the lateral
parietal cortex is greater under conditions of full relative to partial
recollection (e.g., recall of a studied episode and its contextual features
relative to recall of the studied episode alone;  Hayama, Vilberg, & Rugg, 2012 ;  Vilberg & Rugg, 2007 ; see also,  Thakral, Wang, & Rugg, 2015 ;  Yu,
Johnson, & Rugg, 2012 ). These findings have been taken to support
the idea that these regions contribute to the maintenance or representation of
recollected information ( Rugg et al.,
2015 ;  Vilberg & Rugg,
2008 ). 
 Regarding the timecourse of activation,  Vilberg and Rugg (2012 ,  2014) 
evaluated whether episodic memory-related activity in regions of the core
network is sustained across a delay over which recollected information is
maintained in working memory. They reasoned that regions where activity is
transient likely support processes associated with the
 initiation  of episodic memory. In contrast, regions where
activity is sustained across the delay support the representation and/or
 maintenance  of episodic information. Within the core
network, neural activity was sustained in the left lateral parietal cortex and
lateral temporal cortex. Transient episodic memory effects were observed in the
hippocampus, among other regions. The hippocampal effects are consistent with
the proposal that one way that the hippocampus supports episodic memory is by
initially reinstating the episodic details of a past experience (see,  Rugg et al., 2015 ;  Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). The observation of
sustained activation profiles in the left lateral parietal cortex, together with
the observation that activity within this region is sensitive to the amount of
recollected information (see above), provide strong support for the
interpretation the left lateral parietal cortex supports the maintenance of
episodic information ( Rugg et al.,
2015 ). 
 
 
 1.5. Hypotheses 
 
 1.5.1. Common Simulation and Memory Processes 
 To the extent that episodic simulation is supported by similar
processes as episodic memory ( Schacter &
Addis, 2007 ), we predicted to observe similar effects to those
during the simulation of future episodes. For example, the left lateral
parietal cortex may serve a similar role during episodic simulation
– to actively maintain and represent episodic information –
and therefore exhibit amount-sensitive and sustained activation profiles
like those observed previously in studies of episodic memory (see,  Rugg et al., 2015 ). In addition, if the
hippocampus provides the initial access to episodic details not only during
memory but also during simulation (see,  Addis
& Schacter, 2012 ;  Schacter
& Addis, 2007 ), its activity should demonstrate a transient
profile. In support of this prediction, previous studies have shown that
hippocampal activity increases during the initial construction of an
imagined event ( Addis, Wong, & Schacter,
2007 ;  Addis, Cheng, Roberts, &
Schacter, 2011a ;  Gaesser et al.,
2013 ;  Madore, Szpunar, Addis,
& Schacter, 2016 ). These findings provide support for the
idea that at least part of the hippocampal contribution to episodic
simulation involves processes that support access to and/or retrieval of
episodic details. 
 We also predicted to observe sustained effects in regions of the
frontoparietal control network ( Vincent,
Kahn, Snyder, Raichle, & Buckner, 2008 ), such as the lateral
prefrontal cortex. These regions have been implicated in various control
processes recruited during the maintenance of information during working
memory (e.g.,  Curtis &
D’Esposito, 2003 ;  Jonides
et al., 2008 ;  Wager & Smith,
2003 ). Thus, we expected that such regions would be recruited
during the active maintenance of a simulated episode. In support of this
prediction, prior studies have observed sustained activity in regions of the
frontoparietal control network during the maintenance of recollected
information ( Vilberg & Rugg,
2012 ,  2014 ). 
 
 
 1.5.2. Distinct Simulation and Memory Processes 
 In contrast to the above commonalities between episodic memory and
simulation, a number of studies have revealed differences between the two
(e.g.,  Addis et al., 2007 ;  Addis, Pan, Vu, Laisser, & Schacter,
2009 ; Gilmore, Nelson, & McDermott, 2014;  Szpunar, Chan, & McDermott, 2009 ;  Weiler, Suchan, & Daum, 2010 ; for a
review, see  Benoit & Schacter,
2015 ). These studies have shown that some regions of the core
network (such as the lateral and medial parietal cortex and hippocampus), as
well as some “non-core” regions (such as the right lateral
prefrontal cortex) are more strongly engaged during episodic simulation than
during episodic memory. Greater recruitment of activity within core regions
during simulation has been taken to reflect greater constructive processing
during simulation arising from the necessity to recombine elements of past
experience into a novel event ( Addis &
Schacter, 2012 ;  Benoit &
Schacter, 2015 ;  Schacter &
Addis, 2007 ). The greater recruitment of activity within non-core
regions, particularly those within the frontoparietal control network, may
reflect the sampling of a number of disparate past episodic details that
requires further control and selection processes ( Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ). In the present
study, we provided a direct test of these interpretations. We reasoned that
when a simulation is comprised of more relative to fewer details, greater
constructive and control processes should be recruited. Thus, neural
activity that varies with the amount of simulated information should be
evident in regions previously found to be modulated as a function of future
relative to past episodes (e.g.,  Benoit &
Schacter, 2015 ). 
 
 
 
 
 2. Materials and Methods 
 
 2.1. Participants 
 The experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of Harvard University. Informed consent was obtained prior to participation.
Twenty-eight participants completed the experiment. All self-reported to be
right handed, have normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and have no history of
psychiatric or neurological disorder. Two participants were excluded from all
analyses because their MRI data were acquired using a different imaging sequence
than that used for subsequent participants. One additional participant was
excluded because of excessive head movement (> 5 mm). The remaining 25
participants (18 female) had a mean age of 22.4 years (range 18–30). 
 
 
 2.2. Stimuli and Task 
 The study comprised two sessions. In Session 1, participants provided a
list of 162 people and 108 places with which they were personally familiar. We
instructed participants to provide people and places that they have come across
in the past and would also come across sometime in the near future. We asked
participants to generate places for which they could instantaneously imagine
themselves at an exact location (e.g., a specific table they may sit at in their
regularly visited coffee shop). For each person and place, participants provided
a familiarity rating (on a scale of 1 to 9, ranging from very unfamiliar to very
familiar) and a pleasantness rating (on a scale of 1 to 9, ranging from very
unpleasant to very pleasant; see  Benoit et al.,
2014 ). In addition to providing the person and place names,
participants were familiarized with a list of 378 object words. These words were
drawn from Hemera Photo Objects 50,000 Volume III ( http://www.hemera.com/index.html ). Their names ranged in length
from 3 to 10 letters and in frequency from 1 to 100 counts/million ( Kucera & Francis, 1967 ). Participants
read each word and made the same pleasantness and familiarity rating as they did
for the places and people. In addition, we instructed participants to imagine
performing an action with the object denoted by the word and to provide a rating
for how vivid the image/action was (on a scale of 1 to 9, ranging from not vivid
to very vivid). 
 Participants returned for Session 2 (median delay of 6 days, range
1–17 days) for the MRI portion of the study. In Session 2, participants
randomly alternated on a trial-by-trials basis between performing 2 tasks: an
episodic simulation task and a sentence task (i.e., the non-episodic control
task; for prior uses of this control task, see also  Addis et al., 2009 ;  Addis, Roberts, & Schacter, 2011b ;  Gaesser et al., 2013 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ;  van Mulukom,
Schacter, Corballis, & Addis, 2013 ). In the simulation task,
participants were presented with trial-unique combinations of 3, 4, or 5
episodic details (i.e., person, place, and object words from Session 1). On each
simulation trial, participants were shown one previously provided place, and a
random combination of people and objects (with the constraint that there was
always at least one person and at least one object). These details were
presented in the same order on the screen from top to bottom: place, people, and
then objects (see  Figure 1A ). The use of 3,
4, and 5 details was motivated by our previous experiments that have used a
minimum of 3 cued details (i.e., place, person, and object cues; see,  Addis et al., 2009 ;  Gaesser et al., 2013 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ;  Szpunar et al.,
2015 ). The use of three details allowed us to replicate prior
findings, and adding people and/or objects allowed us to manipulate the number
of details within a given simulation. In the sentence task, participants were
presented with trial-unique combinations of 3, 4, or 5 object words from Session
1. 
 As illustrated in  Figure 1 ,
participants were first presented a task cue (‘SIMULATE’ or
‘SENTENCE’) for 1 s. Following the task cue, the task-specific
stimuli were presented for 5 s, followed by a variable fixation/delay period (8,
10, or 12 s). The trial ended with the probe question presented for 2 s (i.e.,
plausibility or difficulty for the simulation and sentence tasks, respectively),
followed by a variable fixation period (i.e., inter-trial interval of 2, 4 or 6
s). All stimuli were presented on a black background in 25 point Arial font. 
 For the simulation task, participants were instructed to imagine a
specific future episode where they were interacting with the cued people and
objects in a location-specific manner. They were instructed to always imagine a
novel episode (i.e., not to simply recall an episode that they had experienced
before with the person(s) and object(s) at the given location). Person, place,
and object details were randomly combined to maximize the probability that
simulated episodes would be novel. Participants were instructed to begin
imagining the episode as quickly as possible. They were further instructed to
imagine the episode through their own eyes (e.g., as if they were experiencing
the episode at that specific location). Critically, participants were instructed
to continually imagine and simulate their episode throughout the fixation/delay
period until the probe question appeared on the screen. The probe asked
participants to rate how plausible the simulated episode would be if it were to
occur (on a scale from 1 to 5, ranging from not plausible to very
plausible). 
 For the sentence task, participants were instructed to covertly create a
sentence that ranked 3, 4, or 5 object words according to the size of the
objects (see  Figure 1B , e.g., “the
accordion is bigger than the bagel which is bigger than the lipstick”).
Participants were instructed to be as quick as possible in generating the
sentence. Once they had generated the sentence, for the remainder of the trial,
participants elaborated on the representation of the nouns, generating as much
detail about the meaning on the objects (including imagining the objects), or
covertly repeated the sentence. Analogous to the simulation task, participants
were thus instructed to continually perform the task throughout the
fixation/delay period until the probe question appeared. Here, they were asked
to rate how difficult it was to create the sentence (on a scale from 1 to 5,
ranging from very easy to very difficult). Adopting the logic of our prior
studies that also employed a similar sentence task as a non-episodic control
( Addis et al., 2009 ,  2011b ;  Gaesser et
al., 2013 ;  Martin et al.,
2011 ;  van Mulukom et al., 2013 ),
the sentence task is similar to the simulate task in that it requires the
integration of information, and generation of semantic and visual details, with
the critical exception of the requirement to generate a coherent imagined
event. 
 Participants completed 6 fMRI scans (for one participant only 5 scans
were collected due to technical difficulty). Across the 6 fMRI scans,
participants completed 108 simulation trials and 54 sentence trials. Simulation
and sentence trials were subdivided equally across the respective 3, 4, and 5
amount conditions (i.e., 36 trials for each amount of episodic details for the
simulation task and 18 trials for each amount of object words for the sentence
task). An equal proportion of each fixation delay period (8, 10, and 12 s
fixation periods) and inter-trial interval (2, 4, and 6 s fixation periods)
occurred for each task type. Each fMRI scan comprised 27 trials within which the
ordering of simulation and sentence trials was pseudo-randomized such that no
more than 4 trials of a given task occurred in succession. Participants
responded to probe questions using a button box in their right hand. Before
entering the scanner participants practiced both tasks to ensure that they
understood and complied with the instructions (e.g., performed tasks for
entirety of the trial). After exiting the scanner, we assessed memory for
simulations and sentences. Analyses pertaining to this final memory test phase
are not currently reported. 
 
 
 2.3. Image acquisition and analysis 
 Functional and anatomic images were acquired at the Harvard Center for
Brain Science using a 3 Tesla Siemens Prisma scanner equipped with a 32-channel
head coil. Anatomic images were acquired with a magnetization-prepared rapid
gradient echo sequence (matrix size of 256 × 256, voxel size of 1
mm 3 , 176 slices). Functional images were acquired with a
multiband echo-planar imaging sequence (University of Minnesota C2P sequence: TR
= 2 s, TE = 30 ms, matrix size of 136 × 136, 84 slices
(3 slices acquired simultaneously), 1.5 mm 3  resolution, multiband
factor of 3, in-plane GRAPPA acceleration factor of 2;  Moeller et al., 2009 ;  Feinberg et al., 2010 ;  Xu et al.,
2013 ). Slices were auto-aligned to an angle 20 o  towards
coronal from anterior-posterior commissure alignment ( van der Kouwe et al., 2005 ). For each fMRI scan, 309
images were acquired. To allow equilibration of tissue magnetization, each scan
began with a 10 s fixation period. 
 fMRI data were analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM12,
Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Functional image
preprocessing included three steps: 1) slice-time correction (using the first
slice as reference), 2) two-pass spatial realignment (first to mean image within
sessions and then to the mean image across sessions), and 3) normalization (into
Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using the TPM template supplied by
SPM12, no resampling). Functional images were smoothed with a 3 mm
full-width-half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel applied to the normalized
images. Anatomic images were normalized using an analogous procedure as that
used for the functional images. 
 Univariate analysis was conducted in a two stage mixed effects general
linear model (GLM). In the first stage, a 5 s boxcar function that onset
concurrently with the episodic details/object words was used to model
stimulus/transient neural activity. Sustained activity was modeled with a boxcar
that onset concurrently with the fixation following stimulus presentation (see
also,  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). This boxcar varied in length with
the duration of the fixation period (8, 10, or 12 s following the offset of the
episodic details/object words). The associated BOLD response was modeled by
convolving the boxcar functions with a canonical hemodynamic response function
to yield regressors in a GLM that modeled the BOLD response for each event
type. 
 There were six events of interest, comprising trials associated with
each task (simulation and sentence) and each amount (3, 4, or 5). The model thus
contained 6 events of interest for each transient and sustained regressor (for a
total of 12 events of interest in the model). There were three additional events
of no interest, including trials without a response (participants failed to
respond to < 1 % of all trials), the 1 s task cue period, and the
subsequent 2 s probe. Six regressors representing movement related variance
(three for rotation and three for rigid-body translation) and regressors
modeling each scan session were also entered into the design matrix. An AR(1)
model was used to estimate and correct for nonsphericity of the error covariance
( Friston et al., 2002 ). As detailed
above, the delay period and the inter-trial interval varied across both sentence
and simulation trials. The purpose of this jitter was to reduce the collinearity
between the transient and sustained regressors in the GLM (see also,  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). Temporal smoothing was conducted before
estimation of the parameter estimates (i.e., the default high-pass filter of 128
s in SPM12). 
 The participant-specific parameter estimates for the 12 events of
interest were carried forward to a second analysis stage where they were entered
into a repeated measures ANOVA with participants modeled as a random effect. The
ANOVA model employed factors of task (sentence or simulation), amount (3, 4, or
5), and regressor (transient or sustained). Unless otherwise noted, an
individual voxel threshold of p < 0.001 was employed corrected for multiple
comparisons to p < 0.05 with a cluster extent threshold of 19 voxels ( Slotnick, Moo, Segal, & Hart, 2003 ;
 Slotnick, 2016 , see also,  Thakral et al., 2015 ;  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). The cluster extent threshold was computed
using a Monte Carlo simulation with 10,000 iterations with an estimated spatial
autocorrelation of 11.13 mm (i.e., the full-width-half-maximum of the image
corresponding to the standard error of the ANOVA model). Our method for
computing the cluster extent threshold (for a similar approach, see also,  Ford & Kensinger, 2016 ;  Gu et al., 2015 ; Hoffman, Binney, Lambon Ralph, 2015;
 Shigemune, Tsukiura, Kambara, &
Kawashima, 2014 ;  Slotnick &
Schacter, 2004 ;  Thakral &
Slotnick, 2009 ) does not employ a random-field theory approach and
therefore does not make assumptions which may or may not be met with respect to
the data (e.g., that error be normally distributed). 
 In addition to the GLM analysis described above, we employed a
finite-impulse response (FIR) model to estimate the timecourses associated with
each of the events described above (see also,  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). The FIR model was used to evaluate the timecourse of neural
activity associated with activity identified by the GLM analysis. The
timecourses were separately modeled for the 8, 10, and 12 s delay periods across
12 TRs (i.e., from item onset to 24 seconds after stimulus onset). This time
window was selected a priori on the basis of the predicted timecourse after
convolving the canonical hemodynamic response function with the combined
stimulus and variable delay periods (i.e., 13, 15, and 17 s windows;  Slotnick, 2005 ; see also,  Thakral and Slotnick, 2009 ). To avoid signal
contamination from the preceeding trial, prior to averaging, the FIR timecourses
were truncated at the 16, 18, and 20 s post stimulus onset for the 8, 10, and 12
s delay periods, respectively. While the FIR timecourses were initially examined
in parallel to the extracted parameter estimates from the GLM, although
qualitatively similar, they did not fully replicate the results of the GLM.
These differential results suggest that the individual impulse response
functions used in the FIR analysis may not best characterize the neural activity
relative to the extended boxcar functions (for related disparate findings across
GLM and timecourse analyses, see  Slotnick and
Schacter (2006)  and  Thakral and
Slotnick (2009) ). 
 
 
 
 3. Results 
 
 3.1. Behavioral results 
 Mean difficulty and plausibility ratings, and associated reaction times
for each task are listed in  Table 1 . A
one-way nonparametric test revealed that difficulty ratings associated with the
sentence task significantly differed as a function of the number of objects
(Friedman test, Χ 2 (2) = 40.56, p < 0.001). As
expected, follow-up comparisons revealed greater difficulty with greater number
of objects (5 > 4 > 3, Wilcoxon Signed Rank tests, ps < 0.001).
Analyses of the reaction times associated with the difficulty responses also
revealed a significant difference amongst the three conditions (F(2, 48)
= 5.39, p < 0.05). Follow-up pairwise comparisons, revealed that
reaction times in making the difficulty response were significantly slower for
sentence trials with 4 objects relative to 3 objects (t(24) = 3.16, p
< 0.01). No other tests were significant (ps > 0.05). 
 Analogous analyses conducted on the simulation trials revealed that
plausibility also differed across the three conditions (Friedman test,
Χ 2 (2) = 42.32, p < 0.001). Follow-up Wilcoxon
Signed Rank tests revealed plausibility in the future episode decreased with the
amount of details simulated (3 > 4 > 5, ps < 0.001). Analyses of the
reaction times associated with the plausibility response also revealed a
significant difference (F(2, 48) = 9.47, p < 0.001). Follow-up
comparisons revealed slower reaction times for episodes containing 5 details
relative to episodes containing both 3 and 4 details (ts(24) > 3.63, ps >
0.01), which did not significantly differ from one another (p > 0.20). Of
most importance, across all experimental conditions and for both tasks, mean
plausibility and difficulty ratings did not approach the extreme ratings (i.e.
least plausible and very difficult), which indicates that the participants could
perform the tasks in an appropriate manner. 
 
 
 3.2. fMRI results 
 We first identified sustained simulation effects and then went on to
identify transient simulation effects. For both classes of effects, we also
identified neural regions that varied as a function of the amount of simulated
details 2 . 
 
 3.2.1. Sustained effects 
 Sustained simulation effects were identified by the outcome of the
simulate > sentence contrast for the sustained regressor (collapsed
across amount; threshold of p < 0.001 corrected for multiple comparisons
to p < 0.05, see Section 2.3). Note that this procedure does not identify
simulation effects specific to the delay period (e.g., via exclusively
masking of transient simulation effects). Such an analysis would identify
sustained effects with a delayed onset, which likely reflect processes other
than those associated with the maintenance of episodic content (e.g.,  Curtis & D’Esposito, 2003 )
and are distinct from what we refer to as ‘sustained’ (see
Introduction; and for a similar approach, see  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). 
 As detailed in  Figure 2  and
 Table 2 , sustained effects were
observed in every region of the core network including lateral parietal
cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, lateral temporal cortex, and hippocampus.
As depicted in the bottom of  Figure 2 ,
parameter estimates extracted from representative regions illustrate that
the clusters identified exhibited simulation effects (simulate >
sentence) for the sustained regressor. We also provide the parameter
estimates for the transient regressor to illustrate that neural activity
within these regions was persistently elevated across the trial. 
 
 
 3.2.2. Sustained effects, amount-dependent 
 To identify sustained effects that modulated as a function of the
amount of simulated details, we inclusively masked the outcome of the
simulate > sentence contrast (threshold of p < 0.001, see above) with
the 5 > 3 contrast for the sustained regressor (mask threshold of p <
0.01, giving an estimated conjoint significance of p < 0.0001;  Fisher, 1950 ; see also,  Thakral et al., 2015 ;  Thakral, Yu, & Rugg, 2015 ). This contrast
identifies regions maximally sensitive to differences in the amount of
simulated information (for control analyses including the 4 condition, see
below). Because the 5 relative to the 3 condition places greater demands on
maintenance-related cognitive processes this analysis identifies neural
activity underlying the maintenance of simulated information across the
delay period.  Figure 3  illustrates the
sustained simulation effects that varied as a function of the amount of
simulated details. As detailed in  Table
2 , amount-dependent effects (i.e., 5 > 3), were observed in,
among other regions, medial superior parietal lobule, left angular gyrus,
left parahippocampal cortex, and bilateral superior and medial frontal
regions. Parameter estimates extracted from these regions ( Figure 3 , bottom) indicate that the
amount-dependent effects (5 > 3) only emerged during the delay period
(i.e., the sustained regressor; bars 9 versus 7). These amount-dependent
effects cannot be accounted for by differences in visual presentation (i.e.,
5 cue words versus 3 cue words), as the delay period, during which
amount-dependent effects were evident, was perceptually identical in all
conditions (i.e., a fixation screen). 
 The parameter estimates illustrated in  Figure 3  show that activity associated with the 4 condition was
at an intermediate level relative to the 3 and 5 conditions, supporting the
observation that the regions were modulated by the amount of simulated
information (see bars 7, 8, and 9). To confirm that activity associated with
the 4 condition did not exceed the 5 condition or, conversely was
significantly lower than the 3 condition (both patterns violating the
amount-dependent nature of the activity), we conducted two follow-up
analyses. We performed the same analysis as that described above but
replaced the 5 > 3 contrast with, in the first analysis, the 4 > 5
contrast and, in the second analysis, the 3 > 4 contrast. Neither
contrast identified clusters of activity that overlapped with those
illustrated in  Figure 3  (i.e., 5 >
3). This was true even when the threshold for these contrasts was relaxed to
p < 0.05. These analysis support the interpretation that the clusters
identified by the 5 > 3 contrast were sensitive to the amount of
information simulated. 
 
 
 3.2.3. Transient effects 
 Transient simulation effects were identified in a two-stage
procedure. First, we identified regions demonstrating simulation >
sentence effects for the transient regressor (collapsed across amount;
threshold of p < 0.001). Then, the outcome of this contrast was
exclusively masked with the analogous contrast for the sustained regressor
(i.e., we identified simulation > sentence effects for the sustained
regressor at the threshold of p < 0.05 and the resulting map was used as
the exclusive mask; note the more liberal threshold the more conservative
the analysis; see also,  Thakral et al.,
2015 ;  Yu et al., 2012 ).
The outcome of this procedure yielded clusters of activity where simulation
effects were uniquely associated with the stimulus/transient regressor (see
also,  Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). We note that the exclusive
masking procedure is necessary as the contrast of the simulate > sentence
effect for the transient regressor alone would not dissociate between
activity associated with the stimulus or delay period. 
 As detailed in  Figure 4  (top)
and  Table 3 , transient effects were
identified in many brain regions, including extrastriate cortex, lateral
parietal cortex, middle and inferior frontal regions, lateral temporal
cortex in superior and middle temporal gyri, medial prefrontal cortex, and
bilateral hippocampus. Of note, the majority of these effects fell within
regions of the core simulation network such as the hippocampus. Parameter
estimates for representative regions are illustrated in the bottom of  Figure 4 . In accordance with how these
clusters were identified, the extracted parameter estimates demonstrate that
the simulation effects (simulate > sentence) were uniquely associated
with the transient regressor. 
 Notably, the transient hippocampal effects were spatially distinct
from those that were sustained which were observed relatively more anterior
(compare  Figure 2  and  Figure 4 ). Although the peak voxel of each effect
fell at the same y coordinate in each hemisphere (-21 in the left hemisphere
and -22 in the right hemisphere), the clusters of transient and sustained
activity extended more posteriorly and anteriorly, respectively.  Figure 5  illustrates the temporal
dissociation within each hemisphere. The sustained hippocampal effect
extended from y = -6 to y = -25 and the transient
hippocampal effect extended from y = -16 to y = -33 (in the
left hemisphere, the transient effect extended slightly more anterior to y
= -13). The timecourses are shown for illustrative purposes only as
they are not independent from the analysis employed to identify the
transient and sustained effects (i.e., GLM analysis). 
 
 
 3.2.4. Transient effects, amount-dependent 
 To identify transient effects that varied as a function of the
amount of simulated details, we inclusively masked the selective transient
effects (as depicted in  Figure 4 ) with
the 5 > 3 contrast for the transient regressor (employing the same mask
threshold of p < 0.01 as in the analysis of sustained effects).  Figure 6  illustrates the transient
effects that varied as a function of the amount of simulated details. As
detailed in  Table 2 , amount-dependent
effects (i.e., 5 > 3), were largely restricted to occipital cortex within
striate and extrastriate cortex. The bottom of  Figure 4  illustrates the parameter estimates extracted from the
peak voxel within the striate cluster. As can be seen from the figure, the
profile across the three simulate events for the transient regressor
demonstrates that these transient effects varied as a function of the amount
of simulated information (i.e., 5 > 3; bar 3 versus bar 1), with no
corresponding simulation effects for the sustained regressor. 
 Analogous to the sustained analyses, we performed the
amount-dependent transient analyses described above with the contrasts of 4
> 5 and 3 > 4, to corroborate the amount-dependent nature of the
regions identified. No overlapping clusters of activity were identified in
these subsidiary analyses even at the liberal threshold of p < 0.05. 
 
 
 
 
 4. Discussion 
 In the current study, we aimed to determine whether regions within the core
network dissociate as a function of the amount of simulated information and also
their timecourse of engagement. Relative to a non-episodic control task, sustained
simulation-related activity was identified in the majority of regions in the core
network. Additional analyses revealed that activity in the medial and lateral
parietal cortex and bilateral frontal cortex was further modulated as a function of
the amount of simulated information (i.e., greater activity when a simulated event
contained more relative to fewer episodic details). Of particular interest, we
observed a temporal dissociation within the hippocampus. Specifically,
transient-specific simulation effects were identified in relatively posterior
portions of the hippocampus and sustained simulation effects (i.e., those that
persisted across the trial) were identified in more anterior portions of the
hippocampus. We discuss the implications of these findings below. 
 
 
 
 4.1.2. Hippocampal Findings 
 In line with one of our initial predictions, we observed transient
simulation-related activity within the hippocampus. That is, these effects
are analogous to findings of transient episodic memory-related activity
within the hippocampus ( Vilberg & Rugg,
2012 ). Because these simulation effects closely correspond to
those observed during memory, we adopt a similar interpretation and suggest
that the transient hippocampal effects reflect the initial retrieval and
reinstatement of episodic details (see,  Addis
et al., 2007 ;  Madore et al.,
2016 ;  Rugg et al., 2015 ;
 Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). 
 The current findings are relevant to recent findings regarding
hippocampal involvement during the initial construction and subsequent
elaboration of simulated episodes ( Addis et
al., 2007 ;  Madore et al.,
2016 ; see also,  Gaesser et al.,
2013 ).  Addis et al., (2007) 
observed hippocampal activity, during  both  the construction
and elaboration phases, in a cluster that overlapped with the present
anterior/sustained effect. Under the assumption that that current sustained
activity reflects both construction-related and elaboration processes, the
current findings corroborate those reported by  Addis et al., (2007) . Unique to the present study
is the observation of more posterior hippocampal activity that was
exclusively transient. With respect to prior studies, we highlight an
important difference in the analysis procedures employed. In the present
study, we exclusively masked out neural activity associated with the
sustained regressor to isolate neural activity that was transient (see also,
 Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ). In contrast,  Addis et al., (2007)  simply identified activity
associated with each phase of the simulation trial (i.e., construction and
elaboration; a similar analysis was conducted in  Gaesser et al., 2013  and in  Madore et al., 2016 ). Without the use of an
exclusive mask, activity associated with the early phase of the trial,
although assumed to be ‘construction-related’, may extend
into the elaboration period and exhibit a sustained profile. Thus, it will
be important for future studies to utilize a similar analysis to the current
study when identifying construction-related processes during simulation. An
additional difference comes from the fact that in these prior studies,
participants were required to make a motor response when they had
successfully constructed an event. By contrast, in the current study there
was no requirement to signal when the simulated event was constructed. Thus,
the procedure used in the current study is different in that it allows for
the identification of transient-specific simulation effects devoid of any of
the cognitive operations associated with making a motor response (e.g.,
decision making and motor planning). Lastly, we highlight that we employed a
relatively higher resolution imaging protocol than these previous studies of
episodic simulation (i.e., 1.5 mm relative to 2–3 mm, e.g.,  Gaesser et al., 2013 ;  Madore et al., 2016 ). It will be critically
important for future studies to employ similar high-resolution imaging
protocols to replicate and extend the current findings (for further
discussion, see  Schacter, Addis, &
Szpunar, in press ). 
 Before discussing possible interpretations of the spatial
dissociation within the hippocampus, we highlight that both the sustained
and transient effects in this region were insensitive to the amount of
simulated details. As stated in the Introduction, a number of studies
directly comparing episodic memory and episodic simulation have observed
greater activity in the hippocampus during simulation than during memory
(for reviews, see  Addis & Schacter,
2012 ;  Benoit & Schacter,
2015 ;  Schacter et al., in
press ), with this difference possibly reflecting greater
recruitment of hippocampally-mediated construction and relational ( Eichenbaum & Cohen, 2014 )
processes. Thus we predicted that hippocampal activity would modulate as a
function of the amount of detail simulated, given the greater
construction/relational processing demands in the 5 relative to the 3
condition. As with any null finding, the lack of amount-dependent
hippocampal effects can be accounted for in any number of ways (e.g., low
statistical power) 3 . One
notable difference from prior studies is that  Addis and Schacter (2008)  operationalized amount of detail as
subjectively rated vividness. This approach stands in contrast to the
present study, where the amount of detail was operationalized as the number
of objectively cued details. Future research is necessary to further examine
the nature of differences between objective and subjective measures of
simulated content. For example, it may be the case that, akin to episodic
memory, episodic simulations with more objective details are experienced as
more subjectively vivid (cf.,  Slotnick,
2010 ). 
 There are a number of prior theoretical proposals that can account
for the present anterior-posterior temporal dissociation of hippocampal
function during episodic simulation. According to  Addis and Schacter (2012 ; see also  Gaesser et al., 2013 ), posterior
hippocampal activity supports the retrieval of previously experienced
details, particularly those spatial in nature. Anterior hippocampal
activity, by contrast, reflects the relational processing (i.e.
recombination) of accessed details into a coherent scenario and the encoding
of the episode for later use. As we noted above, the posterior and transient
hippocampal effect replicates previous episodic memory findings ( Vilberg & Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ), and thus support the retrieval
interpretation of  Addis and Schacter
(2012) . However, the posterior effects may also reflect the
initial recruitment of spatial processing required in configuring the
episodic details within a given episode (e.g., where people are seated,
where is the object, etc.). Interestingly, activity in sensory cortical
regions (in occipital cortex), similar to the posterior hippocampal
activity, was also transient. As these regions have been implicated in
visual-spatial memorial processing (for a review, see  Slotnick, 2004 ), these findings, together with
the posterior hippocampal effects, may reflect the retrieval of the visual
spatial information associated with the cued details. In contrast, the
anterior hippocampal effects may reflect the continual recruitment of
encoding and relational processing associated with the novel episodic
simulation (see also  Martin et al.,
2011 ). 
 There are alternative proposals of hippocampal function that may
also be compatible with the current hippocampal temporal dissociation (e.g.,
 Sheldon & Levine, 2016 ;
Zeidman, Mullally, & Maguire, 2016). Regardless of which proposal is
correct, however, the current findings have implications for any theoretical
proposal of hippocampal function during episodic simulation because they
highlight the necessity of considering  when  hippocampal
processes are engaged and not simply  what  processes are
engaged. The present findings clearly add to the evidence of a functional
dissociation within the hippocampus, and are the first to indicate that this
dissociation extends to the temporal domain during episodic simulation. 
 The current hippocampal findings add to the growing interest in
research examining the temporal properties of hippocampal function. Such
research includes experiments examining how the hippocampus codes the
passage of time (i.e., ‘time cells’), the role of the
hippocampus in encoding temporal context information, and the role of the
hippocampus in retrieving temporal sequences (for reviews, see  Howard & Eichenbaum, 2015 ;  Ranganath & Hsieh, 2016 ). Of direct
relevance to the present results, D’Argembeau, Jeunehomme, Majerus,
Bastin, and Salmon (2014) found that activity in the posterior hippocampus
was recruited when participants judged the temporal order of both past and
future events (relative to a judgment concerning the content of past and
future events). These authors suggested that the posterior hippocampal
activity reflects its role in temporal order processing (e.g., representing
the temporal context within which events occur). In light of these results,
one possibility is that the transient and posterior hippocampal activity
observed here reflects the retrieval of the different temporal contexts
associated with the cued details (e.g., differentiating between the prior
times one went to Starbucks, see  Figure
1 ). The present findings highlight the need for future work in
understanding the temporal properties of hippocampal function not only
during episodic simulation but across domains. 
 
 
 4.1.3. Lateral Parietal Findings 
 In line with another of our predictions, we observed
amount-dependent and sustained effects in the left lateral parietal cortex,
within the left angular gyrus (see  Figure
5A ). These results mirror the amount-sensitive and sustained
effects observed in the angular gyrus during episodic memory (see
Introduction). Therefore, the results are in line with the proposal that the
lateral parietal cortex, particularly the left angular gyrus, actively
maintains/represents episodic content ( Rugg
et al., 2015 ;  Vilberg & Rugg,
2008 ). Critically, the present findings extend this function to
episodic simulation, and therefore lend further support to the idea that
episodic simulation is supported, in part, by episodic memory processes
( Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). 
 In addition to the sustained effects observed within the lateral
parietal cortex, we also observed transient effects within this region (see
 Figure 4 ). On inspection of their
respective spatial locations, the sustained effects were more ventral
relative to the transient effects, which were observed near the
intraparietal sulcus. A recent meta-analysis examining lateral parietal
involvement across a number of cognitive domains (including episodic memory,
attention, semantic memory, numerical processing, sentence processing, and
phonology), concluded that executive processes (e.g., top-down attention and
executive semantic decisions) and automatic processes (e.g., episodic
retrieval, automatic semantic retrieval, and sentence level processing)
cluster around dorsal and ventral parietal regions, respectively ( Humphries & Ralph, 2015 ). In light
of these findings, the transient/dorsal parietal effects may reflect the
recruitment of transient executive processing to assist construction of the
episodic simulation (e.g., top-down attention to the cued episodic details).
The relatively more ventral parietal effects, which were sustained, may
reflect the relatively automatic maintenance of the episodic content during
simulation, consistent with proposals from the episodic memory literature
( Rugg et al., 2015 ;  Vilberg & Rugg, 2008 ). This
interpretation is also consistent with a recent meta-analysis showing that
more ventral lateral parietal cortex is commonly engaged during both
episodic memory and simulation, whereas simulation (requiring greater
cognitive control) compared to memory (requiring lesser cognitive control)
also engages more dorsal lateral parietal cortex ( Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ). 
 
 
 4.1.4. Lateral Frontal and Medial Parietal Findings 
 In addition, regions of the lateral frontal cortex (e.g., in the
middle and superior frontal gyri) as well as superior medial parietal
cortex/precuneus were modulated by the amount of simulated information (see
 Figure 3 ). The lateral prefrontal
regions correspond well to prior working memory findings, which have
implicated these regions in various control processes that support the
maintenance of information held in working memory (for reviews, see  Curtis & D’Esposito, 2003 ;
 Jonides et al., 2008 ;  Wager & Smith, 2003 ). As
participants were required to maintain simulated information across a
variable delay, it is unsurprising that such control process were engaged.
The medial parietal cortex has also been associated with executive
processing during working memory ( Wager and
Smith, 2003 ). More recent findings have indicated that this
region supports domain-independent control processes ( Chiu & Yantis, 2009 ;  Tamber-Rosenau, Esterman, Chiu, & Yantis,
2011 ). In these studies, common activity in the medial superior
parietal lobule has been observed across various tasks that require
cognitive ‘shifts’, such as shifts of attention between
spatial locations, shifts between categorization rules, and shifts between
elements held in working memory. The present medial parietal activity, which
overlapped with those reported by  Chiu and
Yantis (2009) , may thus reflect the recruitment of a control
process associated with shifting between the episodic details comprising the
simulation. As participants were instructed to continuously interact with
all the cued details during simulation, such a shift process would have been
recruited to a greater extent under conditions with more relative to fewer
details. These lateral prefrontal and medial parietal regions also overlap
with those reported in the meta-analysis of  Benoit & Schacter (2015) , who reported that these regions
were recruited to a greater extent during simulation relative to remembering
(see Introduction). The overlapping nature of the current and past findings
adds support to the idea that some processes are more strongly associated
with episodic simulation than episodic memory ( Addis & Schacter, 2012 ;  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ;  Schacter & Addis, 2007 ). The present findings
provide specific clues concerning the nature and role of these processes
(i.e., maintenance of information and shift-related control processes). 
 
 
 
 4.2. Possible Challenges to the Current Study 
 With respect to the amount-dependent effects described above, there are
two possible confounds that are important to consider. First, it is possible
that as the number of details increased (e.g., 3 versus 5), the phenomenal
quality of the simulated event decreased because of more effortful demands to
create a coherent simulation (e.g., a less vivid simulation when cued with 5
relative to 3 details). Second, an event with more details may have been more
difficult to simulate. Although both of these differences could be considered as
confounds that covary with our manipulation of amount, it is possible that these
sorts of differences are  defining characteristics of simulations with
more versus less information . An important avenue for future
research is to independently manipulate different factors such as difficulty and
vividness to determine if regions of the core network are differentially
sensitive to them (see also,  Gaesser et al.,
2013 ). 
 An additional challenge to our interpretation of the present results
concerns the use of the sentence task as a non-episodic control. We attempted to
match the demands of the sentence and simulation tasks as closely as possible
except for the requirement of generating a coherent imagined event (see, 2.2.
Stimuli and Task). However, it is still important to directly address whether
the sentence task is an appropriate control for the episodic simulation task.
First, we note that the simulation and sentence tasks have been shown to be
generally matched with respect to construction times. Across two studies that
employed the similar sentence task (with the same number of 3 cue words;  Addis et al., 2009 ,  2011b ), either construction times were slightly
albeit significantly faster (on the order of only 1 sec) for the sentence
relative to the simulate tasks ( Addis et al.,
2009 ), or construction times did not significantly differ for the two
tasks ( Addis et al., 2011b ). Second, we
think that the sentence task as a control is empirically validated in so far as
it has yielded very similar results in the present study to other neuroimaging
studies that have identified activity in the core network using the same control
task as well as different control tasks (for a review, see  Benoit & Schacter, 2015 ). Of particular
importance, we replicate core network activity relative to studies that could be
argued to have employed relatively  stricter  control tasks
(i.e., semantic memory and visual imagery tasks that required the generation of
information not visually cued; see  Addis et al.,
2007 ;  Addis et al., 2011a ).
These findings demonstrate that our results do not critically depend on our
choice of control task. 
 Although we identified regions of the core network where activation
varied with the amount of simulated information (e.g., left angular gyrus), the
large majority of regions did not show such an effect (e.g., hippocampus and
medial prefrontal cortex; compare  Figure 2 
versus  Figure 3 ) 4 . As noted earlier, any null finding should
of course be treated with caution, but our findings nevertheless suggest a
possible dissociation between these two classes of simulation effects (cf.,
 Vilberg & Rugg, 2007 ). Regions
demonstrating amount-dependent effects may support processes that contribute to
the maintenance or representation of simulated information (cf.,  Hayama et al., 2012 ). In contrast, amount-invariant
effects may reflect processes engaged during initial construction of a
simulation or during post-simulation-guided decision processes, respectively
(e.g.,  Benoit et al., 2014 ;  Gerlach et al., 2014 ). It will be critical
for future research to clarify the nature of these processes. 
 One final limitation of the current study comes from the novelty of our
analytic procedure and associated findings relative to the episodic simulation
literature. This is the first application of the transient/sustained analysis
approach to the episodic simulation literature, and thus the assumptions
underlying this approach, and the reliability of the current results, need to be
examined in future studies. Until then, caution should be exercised when
interpreting the present findings. 
 
 
 4.3. Conclusions 
 To conclude, the current findings add to the growing body of studies
that have attempted to elucidate the contributions of specific brain regions
within the core simulation network. Here, we demonstrated that some of these
regions differentially respond with regard to their timecourse of engagement and
also with the amount of simulated information. We provide the first evidence of
a temporal dissociation along the long axis of the hippocampus during episodic
simulation. While relatively more posterior portions of the hippocampus
demonstrated a transient response, more anterior portions demonstrated a
sustained profile. This dissociation should motivate further inquiries into its
functional significance. 
 We think that the present findings are also relevant to the broader
literature concerning the adaptive role of episodic simulation (for review, see
 Schacter, 2012 ). It is now clear that
episodic simulation can positively impact a variety of psychological functions,
including far-sighted decision making (e.g.,  Benoit et al., 2011 ;  Peters &
Büchel, 2010 ), planning (e.g.,  Taylor, Pham, Rivkin, & Armor, 1998 ), emotional
wellbeing (e.g.,  Brown, Macleod, Tata, &
Goddard, 2002 ; Jing,  Madore, &
Schacter, 2016 ) and prosocial intentions (e.g.,  Gaesser & Schacter, 2014 ). However, only a few
studies have examined the neural underpinnings of these adaptive benefits (e.g.,
 Benoit et al., 2011 ,  Gerlach et al., 2014 ;  Peters & Büchel, 2010 ). Advances in identifying the role
of individual core network regions in specific aspects of episodic simulation
should provide a foundation that supports the development of a deeper
understanding of how episodic simulation enhances cognitive functioning in
everyday life. 
 
 
 
 
 We thank Haley Dodds for assistance in data collection and Scott Slotnick for
statistical advice. We thank the Center for Magnetic Resonance Research at the
University of Minnesota for use of the functional imaging sequence. This research
was supported by NIMH Grant RO1MH60941 (to DLS) and NIH Shared Instrumentation Grant
S10OD020039. 
 
 
 
 1 
 Here, the term ‘sustained’ refers to persistent neural activity
across a given trial (i.e., across a variable delay until behavioral response;
cf.,  Vilberg and Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ; see also,  Curtis and D’Esposito, 2003 ). Note that this
characterization differs from others who have used the term to refer to
sustained activity across a block of different trials and responses (e.g.,  Donaldson et al., 2001 ;  Dosenbach et al., 2006 ;  Visscher et al., 2003 ). 
 
 
 2 
 We chose to perform our analyses in an identical fashion to prior studies that
have dissociated recollection-related neural activity as a function of
timecourse ( Vilberg and Rugg, 2012 ,  2014 ) and the amount of information
recollected (for a review, see  Rugg et al.,
2015 ). This approach was taken so as to directly compare our episodic
simulation effects with prior episodic memory effects (see Introduction). We do
note that an alternative approach would have been to report every simple effect
and interaction resulting from our 2 × 3 × 2 experimental design
(i.e., factors of task (simulation and sentence), detail (3, 4, and 5) and time
(transient and sustained)). We highlight that our approach was hypothesis-driven
and therefore does not entail the increase in multiple comparisons and post-hoc
interpretation of statistical tests that would arise from the alternative
approach. 
 
 
 3 
 One may want to consider another reason for the absence of amount-dependent
hippocampal effects. Based on prior findings indicating that the hippocampus
contributes to the successful encoding of simulations (e.g.,  Gaesser et al., 2013 ;  Martin et al., 2011 ), together with the possibility that the number
of event details simulated (e.g., 5 versus 3) is negatively correlated with
later subsequent memory, one may suggest that the absence of any
amount-dependent hippocampal effects reflects an absence of successful encoding
for the events comprised of more details. To assess this possibility, we
conducted a follow-up subsequent memory analysis ( Thakral et al., 2016 ). Although the analysis
identified successful encoding effects within the hippocampus (i.e.,
subsequently remembered simulations > subsequently forgotten simulations),
the hippocampal effects were not modulated as a function of the amount of
simulated information. These findings fail to support the possibility that
differences in memorability can account for the failure to identify
amount-dependent hippocampal effects. 
 
 
 4 
 To determine whether the majority of the core network was indeed insensitive to
the amount of information simulated, we exclusively masked the outcome of the
simulate > sentence contrast (for the sustained regressor) with the main
effect of amount (i.e., an F-contrast across the three amount conditions of 3,
4, and 5; exclusive mask threshold of p < 0.05). This analysis identified the
same peak clusters as those listed in  Table
2  (top). Thus the majority of the sustained effects within the core
network were amount-invariant. The same was true for the transient simulation
effects (see  Table 3 , top). That is, when
the contrast used to identify the transient simulation effects was exclusively
masked with the main effect of amount (i.e., an F-contrast across the three
amount conditions of 3, 4, and 5 for the transient regressor), the same clusters
were identified, indicating that the large majority of the transient effects
were also insensitive to the amount of simulated information. 
 
 
 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript
that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are
providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is
published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production
process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Cheng 
 T 
 
 
 Roberts 
 R 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2011a 
 Hippocampal contributions to the episodic simulation of specific
and general future events 
 Hippocampus 
 21 
 1045 
 1052 
 20882550 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Pan 
 L 
 
 
 Vu 
 M-A 
 
 
 Laiser 
 N 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2009 
 Constructive episodic simulation of the future and the past:
Distinct subsystems of a core brain network mediate imagining and
remembering 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 2222 
 2238 
 19041331 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2011b 
 Age-related neural changes in autobiographical remembering and
imagining 
 Neuropsychologia 
 4 
 3656 
 3669 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2008 
 Constructive episodic simulation: Transient distance and detail
of past and future events modulate hippocampal engagement 
 Hippocampus 
 18 
 227 
 237 
 18157862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2012 
 The hippocampus and imagining the future: where do we
stand? 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 5 
 1 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Wong 
 AT 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2007 
 Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common and
distinct neural substrates during event construction and
elaboration 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 1363 
 1377 
 17126370 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Andrews-Hanna 
 JR 
 
 
 Reidler 
 JS 
 
 
 Sepulcre 
 J 
 
 
 Poulin 
 R 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2010 
 Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain's default
network 
 Neuron 
 65 
 550 
 562 
 20188659 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Gilbert 
 SJ 
 
 
 Burgess 
 PW 
 
 
 2011 
 A neural mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospection
on farsighted decisions 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 6771 
 6779 
 21543607 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2015 
 Specifying the core network supporting episodic simulation and
episodic memory by activation likelihood estimation 
 Neuropsychologia 
 75 
 450 
 457 
 26142352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 Ventromedial prefrontal cortex supports affective future
simulation by integrating distributed knowledge 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 111 
 16550 
 16555 
 25368170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 GP 
 
 
 Macleod 
 AK 
 
 
 Tata 
 P 
 
 
 Goddard 
 L 
 
 
 2002 
 Worry and the simulation of future outcomes 
 Anxiety Stress Coping 
 15 
 1 
 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Carroll 
 DC 
 
 
 2007 
 Self-projection and the brain 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 49 
 57 
 17188554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2009 
 A Domain-independent source of cognitive control for task sets:
Shifting spatial attention and switching categorization
rules 
 J Neurosci 
 29 
 3930 
 3938 
 19321789 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Curtis 
 CE 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2003 
 Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during working
memory 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 7 
 415 
 423 
 12963473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D’Argembeau 
 A 
 
 
 Jeunehomme 
 O 
 
 
 Majerus 
 S 
 
 
 Bastin 
 C 
 
 
 Salmon 
 E 
 
 
 2015 
 The neural basis of temporal order processing in past and future
thought 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 27 
 185 
 197 
 24960045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 Ollinger 
 JM 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2001 
 Dissociating state and item components of recognition memory
using fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 13 
 129 
 142 
 11133316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dosenbach 
 NUF 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Palmer 
 ED 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Wenger 
 KK 
 
 
 Kang 
 HC 
 
 
 … Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2006 
 A core system for the implementation of task sets 
 Neuron 
 50 
 799 
 812 
 16731517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 HE 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2014 
 Can we reconcile the declarative memory and spatial navigation
views on hippocampal function? 
 Neuron 
 83 
 764 
 770 
 25144874 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Ramanna 
 S 
 
 
 Glasser 
 MF 
 
 
 Miller 
 KL 
 
 
 Uğurbil 
 K 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 2010 
 Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain fMRI
and fast diffusion imaging 
 PLoS One 
 5 
 1 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fisher 
 RA 
 
 
 1950 
 Statistical Methods for Research Workers 
 Oliver and Boyd 
 London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ford 
 JH 
 
 
 Kensinger 
 EA 
 
 
 2016 
 Effects of internal and external vividness on hippocampal
connectivity during memory retrieval 
 Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 
 134 
 78 
 90 
 26778653 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Friston 
 KJ 
 
 
 Penny 
 W 
 
 
 Phillips 
 C 
 
 
 Kiebel 
 S 
 
 
 Hinton 
 G 
 
 
 Ashburner 
 J 
 
 
 2002 
 Classical and Bayesian inference in neuroimaging:
theory 
 Neuroimage 
 16 
 465 
 483 
 12030832 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gaesser 
 B 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Mclelland 
 VC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2013 
 Imagining the future: Evidence for a hippocampal contribution to
constructive processing 
 Hippocampus 
 23 
 1150 
 1161 
 23749314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gaesser 
 B 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 Episodic simulation and episodic memory can increase intentions
to help others 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 111 
 4415 
 20 
 24616532 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gerlach 
 KD 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 Future planning: Default network activity couples with
frontoparietal control network and reward-processing regions during process
and outcome simulations 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 9 
 1942 
 1951 
 24493844 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 2016 
 The contextual association network activates more for remembered
than for imagined events 
 Cereb Cortex 
 26 
 611 
 617 
 25260708 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gu 
 X 
 
 
 Eilam-stock 
 T 
 
 
 Zhou 
 T 
 
 
 Anagnostou 
 E 
 
 
 Kolevzon 
 A 
 
 
 Soorya 
 L 
 
 
 … Fan 
 J 
 
 
 2015 
 Autonomic and Brain Responses Associated with Empathy Deficits in
Autism Spectrum Disorder, Humm 
 Brain Map 
 3338 
 3323 
 3338 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2007 
 Deconstructing episodic memory with construction 
 Trends Cogn Sci 
 11 
 299 
 306 
 17548229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Rusu 
 AA 
 
 
 Robbins 
 CA 
 
 
 Mar 
 RA 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 Imagine all the people: How the brain creates and uses
personality models to predict behavior 
 Cereb Cortex 
 24 
 1979 
 1987 
 23463340 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hayama 
 HR 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2012 
 Overlap between the neural correlates of cued recall and source
memory: Evidence for a generic recollection network? 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 24 
 1127 
 1137 
 22288393 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hoffman 
 P 
 
 
 Binney 
 RJ 
 
 
 Lambon 
 MA 
 
 
 2014 
 Differing contributions of inferior prefrontal and anterior
temporal cortex to concrete and abstract conceptual
knowledge 
 Cortex 
 63 
 250 
 266 
 25303272 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howard 
 MW 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 2015 
 Time and space in the hippocampus 
 Brain Res 
 1621 
 345 
 354 
 25449892 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Humphreys 
 GF 
 
 
 Lambon Ralph 
 MA 
 
 
 2015 
 Fusion and fission of cognitive functions in the human parietal
cortex 
 Cereb Cortex 
 25 
 3547 
 3560 
 25205661 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jing 
 H 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Worrying about the future: An episodic specificity induction
impacts problem solving, reappraisal, and well-being 
 J Exp Psychol Gen 
 145 
 402 
 418 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jonides 
 J 
 
 
 Lewis 
 RL 
 
 
 Nee 
 DE 
 
 
 Lustig 
 CA 
 
 
 Berman 
 MG 
 
 
 Moore 
 KS 
 
 
 2008 
 The mind and brain of short-term memory 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 59 
 193 
 224 
 17854286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kucera 
 H 
 
 
 Francis 
 WN 
 
 
 1967 
 Computational analysis of present-day American English 
 Brown University Press 
 Providence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2016 
 Remembering the past and imagining the future: Selective effects
of an episodic specificity induction on detail generation 
 Q J Exp Psychol 
 69 
 285 
 298 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2016 
 Episodic specificity induction impacts activity in a core brain
network during construction of imagined experiences 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 10.1073/pnas.1612278113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martin 
 VC 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 2011 
 A role for the hippocampus in encoding simulations of future
events 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 108 
 13858 
 13863 
 21810986 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Olman 
 CA 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 E 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Harel 
 N 
 
 
 Uğurbil 
 K 
 
 
 2009 
 Multiband multislice GE-EPI at 7 tesla, with 16-fold acceleration
using partial parallel imaging with application to high spatial and temporal
whole-brain fMRI 
 Magn Reson Med 
 63 
 1144 
 1153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Palombo 
 DJ 
 
 
 Hayes 
 SM 
 
 
 Peterson 
 KM 
 
 
 Keane 
 MM 
 
 
 Verfaellie 
 M 
 
 
 2016 
 Medial temporal lobe contributions to episodic future thinking:
Scene construction or future projection? 
 Cereb Cortex 
 10.1093/cercor/bhw381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Peters 
 J 
 
 
 Büchel 
 C 
 
 
 2010 
 Episodic future thinking reduces reward delay discounting through
an enhancement of prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions 
 Neuron 
 66 
 138 
 148 
 20399735 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 Hsieh 
 LT 
 
 
 2016 
 The hippocampus: A special place for time 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1369 
 93 
 110 
 27082833 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Roberts 
 RR 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 2017 
 Scene construction and relational processing: Separable
constructs? 
 Cereb Cortex 
 in press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rorden 
 C 
 
 
 Karnath 
 H 
 
 
 Bonilha 
 L 
 
 
 2007 
 Improving lesion-symptom mapping 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 1081 
 1088 
 17583985 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 Uncapher 
 MR 
 
 
 2015 
 Encoding and retrieval in episodic memory: Insights from
fMRI 
 
 
 Duarte 
 A 
 
 
 Barense 
 MD 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Handbook on the cognitive neuroscience of memory 
 Wiley-Blackwell 
 Oxford 
 84 
 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2012 
 Adaptive constructive processes and the future of
memory 
 Am Psychol 
 67 
 603 
 613 
 23163437 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Madore 
 KP 
 
 
 2016 
 Remembering the past and imagining the future: Identifying and
enhancing the contribution of episodic memory 
 Mem Stud 
 9 
 245 
 255 
 28163775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2008 
 Episodic simulation of future events: Concepts, data, and
applications 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1124 
 39 
 60 
 18400923 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 D 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 2007 
 The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering
the past and imagining the future 
 Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 
 362 
 773 
 786 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Martin 
 VC 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 2012 
 The future of memory: Remembering, imagining, and the
brain 
 Neuron 
 76 
 677 
 694 
 23177955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 (in press) 
 Escaping the past: Contributions of the hippocampus to future
thinking and imagination 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 The Hippocampus from cells to systems: Structure, connectivity, and
functional contributions to memory and flexible cognition 
 Springer 
 New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sheldon 
 S 
 
 
 Levine 
 B 
 
 
 2016 
 The role of the hippocampus in memory and mental
construction 
 Ann N Y Acad Sci 
 1369 
 76 
 92 
 26849289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shigemune 
 Y 
 
 
 Tsukiura 
 T 
 
 
 Kambara 
 T 
 
 
 Kawashima 
 R 
 
 
 2014 
 Remembering with gains and losses: Effects of monetary reward and
punishment on successful encoding activation of source
memories 
 Cereb Cortex 
 24 
 1319 
 1331 
 23314939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2004 
 Visual memory and visual perception recruit common neural
substrates 
 Behav Cogn Neurosci Rev 
 3 
 207 
 221 
 15812107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2005 
 Spatial working memory specific activity in dorsal prefrontal
cortex? Disparate answers from fMRI beta-weight and timecourse
analysis 
 Cogn Neuropsychol 
 22 
 905 
 20 
 21038282 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2010 
 Does the hippocampus mediate objective binding or subjective
remembering? 
 NeuroImage 
 49 
 1769 
 76 
 19786107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2016 
 Cluster_threshold 
 Retrieved September 1, 2016 from Web site:  http://www2.bc.edu/~slotnics/scripts.htm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Moo 
 LR 
 
 
 Segal 
 JB 
 
 
 Hart 
 J 
 
 
 2003 
 Distinct prefrontal cortex activity associated with item memory
and source memory for visual shapes 
 Cogn Brain Res 
 17 
 75 
 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2004 
 A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false
memories 
 Nat Neurosci 
 7 
 664 
 672 
 15156146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2006 
 The nature of memory related activity in early visual
areas 
 Neuropsychologia 
 44 
 2874 
 2886 
 16901520 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Suddendorf 
 T 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 2007 
 The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it
unique to humans? 
 Behav Brain Sci 
 30 
 299 
 313-51 
 17963565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 2010 
 Episodic future thought: An emerging concept 
 Perspect Psychol Sci 
 5 
 142 
 162 
 26162121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Chan 
 JCK 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 2009 
 Contextual processing in episodic future thought 
 Cereb Cortex 
 19 
 1539 
 1548 
 18980949 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Jacques 
 PLS 
 
 
 Robbins 
 CA 
 
 
 Wig 
 GS 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 Repetition-related reductions in neural activity reveal component
processes of mental simulation 
 Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 
 9 
 712 
 722 
 23482621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Jing 
 HG 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2015 
 Repetition-related reductions in neural activity during emotional
simulations of future events 
 PLoS One 
 10 
 1 
 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 2008 
 Episodic future thought and its relation to remembering: Evidence
from ratings of subjective experience 
 Conscious Cogn 
 17 
 330 
 334 
 17540581 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2014 
 A taxonomy of prospection: introducing an organizational
framework for future-oriented cognition 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 111 
 18414 
 21 
 25416592 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tamber-Rosenau 
 BJ 
 
 
 Esterman 
 M 
 
 
 Chiu 
 YC 
 
 
 Yantis 
 S 
 
 
 2011 
 Cortical mechanisms of cognitive control for shifting attention
in vision and working memory 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 23 
 2905 
 19 
 21291314 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Taylor 
 SE 
 
 
 Pham 
 LB 
 
 
 Rivkin 
 ID 
 
 
 Armor 
 DA 
 
 
 1998 
 Harnessing the imagination. Mental simulation, self-regulation,
and coping 
 Am Psychol 
 53 
 429 
 439 
 9572006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 PP 
 
 
 Benoit 
 RG 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 2016 
 11 
 Characterizing the role of the hippocampus during episodic
simulation and episodic encoding 
 Poster presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomic
Society 
 Boston, MA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 PP 
 
 
 Yu 
 SS 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2015 
 The hippocampus is sensitive to the mismatch in novelty between
items and their contexts 
 Brain Res 
 1602 
 144 
 152 
 25623847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 PP 
 
 
 Wang 
 TH 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2015 
 Cortical reinstatement and the confidence and accuracy of source
memory 
 Neuroimage 
 109 
 118 
 129 
 25583615 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Thakral 
 PP 
 
 
 Slotnick 
 SD 
 
 
 2009 
 The role of parietal cortex during sustained visual spatial
attention 
 Brain Res 
 1302 
 157 
 166 
 19765554 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tulving 
 E 
 
 
 2005 Episodic memory and autonoesis: uniquely
human? 
 In The missing link in cognition: origins of self-reflective
consciousness 
 
 
 Terrace 
 HS 
 
 
 Metcalfe 
 J 
 
 
 3 
 56 
 New York, NY 
 Oxford University Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van der Kouwe 
 AJW 
 
 
 Benner 
 T 
 
 
 Fischl 
 B 
 
 
 Schmitt 
 F 
 
 
 Salat 
 DH 
 
 
 Harder 
 M 
 
 
 Sorensen 
 AG 
 
 
 Dale 
 AM 
 
 
 2005 
 On-line automatic slice positioning for brain MR
imaging 
 Neuroimage 
 27 
 222 
 230 
 15886023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 van Mulukom 
 V 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Corballis 
 MC 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 2013 
 Re-imagining the future: Repetition decreases hippocampal
involvement in future simulation 
 PLoS ONE 
 8 
 1 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2007 
 Dissociation of the neural correlates of recognition memory
according to familiarity, recollection, and amount of recollected
information 
 Neuropsychologia 
 45 
 2216 
 2225 
 17449068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2008 
 Memory retrieval and the parietal cortex: A review of evidence
from a dual-process perspective 
 Neuropsychologia 
 46 
 1787 
 1799 
 18343462 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2012 
 The neural correlates of recollection: Transient versus sustained
fMRI effects 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 15679 
 15687 
 23136408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vilberg 
 KL 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2014 
 Temporal dissociations within the core recollection
network 
 Cogn Neurosci 
 5 
 77 
 84 
 24283400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vincent 
 JL 
 
 
 Kahn 
 I 
 
 
 Snyder 
 AZ 
 
 
 Raichle 
 ME 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2008 
 Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by
intrinsic functional connectivity 
 J Neurophys 
 100 
 3328 
 3342 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Visscher 
 KM 
 
 
 Miezin 
 FM 
 
 
 Kelly 
 JE 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 Donaldson 
 DI 
 
 
 McAvoy 
 MP 
 
 
 … Petersen 
 SE 
 
 
 2003 
 Mixed blocked/event-related designs separate transient and
sustained activity in fMRI 
 NeuroImage 
 19 
 1694 
 1708 
 12948724 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wager 
 TD 
 
 
 Smith 
 EE 
 
 
 2003 
 Neuroimaging studies of working memory: a
meta-analysis 
 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
 3 
 255 
 274 
 15040547 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Weiler 
 JA 
 
 
 Suchan 
 B 
 
 
 Daum 
 I 
 
 
 2010 
 When the future becomes the past: Differences in brain activation
patterns for episodic memory and episodic future thinking 
 Behav Brain Res 
 212 
 196 
 203 
 20399235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 J 
 
 
 Moeller 
 S 
 
 
 Auerbach 
 EJ 
 
 
 Strupp 
 J 
 
 
 Smith 
 SM 
 
 
 Feinberg 
 DA 
 
 
 Yacoub 
 E 
 
 
 Uğurbil 
 K 
 
 
 2013 
 Evaluation of slice accelerations using multiband echo planar
imaging at 3T 
 Neuroimage 
 83 
 991 
 1001 
 23899722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Xu 
 X 
 
 
 Yuan 
 H 
 
 
 Lei 
 X 
 
 
 2016 
 Activation and connectivity within the default mode network
contribute independently to future-oriented thought 
 Sci Rep 
 6 
 1 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yu 
 SS 
 
 
 Johnson 
 JD 
 
 
 Rugg 
 MD 
 
 
 2012 
 Dissociation of recollection-related neural activity in ventral
lateral parietal cortex 
 Cogn Neurosci 
 3 
 142 
 149 
 23049621 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zeidman 
 P 
 
 
 Mullally 
 SL 
 
 
 Maguire 
 EA 
 
 
 2015 
 Constructing, perceiving, and maintaining scenes: Hippocampal
activity and connectivity 
 Cereb Cortex 
 25 
 3836 
 3855 
 25405941 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 A. Simulation task. Participants were instructed to simulate a hypothetical
future episode that involved all of the cued episodic details (i.e., 3, 4, or 5
person, place and object details; every simulation trial consisted of only one
place cue and a varying combination of person and object cues, with the
restriction that there was always at least one person and object). Participants
were instructed to continually simulate until the onset of the probe question.
B. Sentence task. Participants were instructed to construct a sentence that
ranked the cued objects by their respective size. Trials varied with respect to
the number of objects to be included in their sentence (i.e., 3, 4, or 5
objects). Participants were instructed to continually think about the meanings
of the word or repeat the sentence until the onset of the probe question.
Durations are shown to the left of each frame. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Sustained simulation effects. Sustained simulation effects identified with the
contrast of simulate > sentence of the sustained regressors (collapsed across
amount). In this and subsequent figures, results are also are overlaid onto the
coronal and sagittal sections of the across-participants mean T1-weighted
anatomical image (results are also projected onto a cortical surface using the
skull-stripped template of MRIcron;  Rorden,
Karnath, & Bonilha, 2007 ). Parameter estimates extracted from
peak voxels within representative regions are denoted by white circles with
corresponding MNI coordinates. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Sustained and amount-dependent simulation effects. These effects were identified
by inclusively masking the outcome of the simulate > sentence contrast with
the 5 > 3 contrast of the sustained regressors. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Transient simulation effects. Transient simulation effects were identified with
the contrast simulate > sentence of the transient regressors (collapsed
across amount), exclusively masked with the identical contrast for the sustained
regressors. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Anterior-posterior hippocampal simulation effects. Neural activity in blue
signifies transient-specific simulation effects and neural activity in red
signifies the sustained simulation effects. Timecourses extracted from the peak
voxel within the left hemisphere for the transient effect (left) and sustained
effect (right). 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 6 
 
 Transient and amount-dependent simulation effects. Effects were identified by
inclusively masking the transient-specific simulation effects with the 5 > 3
contrast for the transient regressors. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Mean reaction times (± 1 standard error of the mean) and ratings
(± 1 standard error of the mean) as a function of task (sentence and
simulate) and amount (3, 4, and 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reaction times 
 Ratings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 Sentence (Difficulty) 
 1156 (78) 
 1285 (82) 
 1242 (76) 
 1.54 (0.11) 
 2.15 (0.14) 
 3.42 (0.17) 
 
 
 Simulate (Plausibility) 
 1260 (61) 
 1240 (76) 
 1434 (62) 
 3.26 (0.10) 
 2.81 (0.10) 
 2.48 (0.09) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2 
 
 Loci of sustained simulation effects 
 
 
 
 
 MNI Coordinates  
 Peak Z 
 Number of above-threshold
voxels 
 Region 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sustained simulation
effects 
 
 
 
 −2 
 49 
 −13 
 Inf 
 35118 
 L ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 −2 
 35 
 −25 
 Inf 
 
 L orbitofrontal cortex 
 
 
 −15 
 37 
 54 
 Inf 
 
 L superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −4 
 66 
 18 
 Inf 
 
 L anterior prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 6 
 44 
 −16 
 Inf 
 
 R ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 23 
 40 
 50 
 Inf 
 
 R superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −24 
 31 
 52 
 Inf 
 
 L superior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −32 
 20 
 59 
 Inf 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −62 
 −7 
 −13 
 Inf 
 
 L superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 −65 
 −13 
 −12 
 Inf 
 
 L middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −56 
 −63 
 20 
 Inf 
 
 L superior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −41 
 20 
 −22 
 7.69 
 
 L temporal pole 
 
 
 −50 
 37 
 −10 
 7.67 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 2 
 62 
 11 
 7.62 
 
 R anterior prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 −21 
 −21 
 −16 
 7.33 
 
 L hippocampus 
 
 
 29 
 −34 
 −15 
 7.31 
 
 R parahippocampal cortex 
 
 
 −32 
 −39 
 −13 
 7.00 
 
 L parahippocampal cortex 
 
 
 9 
 55 
 11 
 6.77 
 
 R medial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 23 
 28 
 41 
 6.59 
 
 R superior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 27 
 20 
 41 
 5.81 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 24 
 −22 
 −15 
 4.68 
 
 R hippocampus 
 
 
 −44 
 43 
 −9 
 4.63 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −51 
 −70 
 30 
 Inf 
 4678 
 L angular gyrus 
 
 
 12 
 −84 
 −40 
 Inf 
 5282 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 −2 
 −55 
 37 
 Inf 
 8093 
 L precuneus 
 
 
 −2 
 −54 
 19 
 Inf 
 
 L retroslpenial/posterior cingulate
cortex 
 
 
 −12 
 −58 
 14 
 Inf 
 
 L parietooccipital sulcus 
 
 
 63 
 −4 
 −22 
 Inf 
 4686 
 R middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 56 
 −6 
 −18 
 Inf 
 
 R superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 53 
 −66 
 35 
 Inf 
 3268 
 R angular gyrus 
 
 
 −14 
 −85 
 −42 
 7.73 
 1873 
 L cerebellum 
 
 
 6 
 −55 
 −45 
 7.61 
 989 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 −15 
 10 
 17 
 5.61 
 258 
 L caudate 
 
 
 −17 
 −72 
 −28 
 5.53 
 105 
 L cerebellum 
 
 
 17 
 11 
 10 
 5.28 
 179 
 R caudate 
 
 
 63 
 −39 
 1 
 5.15 
 182 
 R superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 71 
 −36 
 1 
 5.09 
 
 R middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −41 
 −18 
 −27 
 4.74 
 105 
 L fusiform gyrus 
 
 
 0 
 −15 
 11 
 4.72 
 42 
 L caudate 
 
 
 38 
 −42 
 −25 
 4.17 
 58 
 L fusiform gyrus 
 
 
 42 
 7 
 50 
 3.98 
 45 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 
 Sustained simulation
effects, amount dependent (5 > 3) 
 
 
 
 0 
 −58 
 41 
 Inf 
 1038 
 L precuneus 
 
 
 0 
 −61 
 49 
 Inf 
 
 L medial superior parietal lobule 
 
 
 −46 
 −61 
 22 
 Inf 
 103 
 L superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 −45 
 −70 
 25 
 7.24 
 
 L angular gyrus 
 
 
 14 
 −82 
 −39 
 Inf 
 144 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 15 
 −70 
 −30 
 Inf 
 49 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 −21 
 20 
 46 
 7.64 
 723 
 L superior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −29 
 20 
 58 
 7.41 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 0 
 17 
 59 
 7.19 
 100 
 L medial superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 42 
 −52 
 26 
 7.16 
 100 
 R superior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 8 
 −52 
 −43 
 7.15 
 32 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 41 
 −73 
 −43 
 7.04 
 60 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 −26 
 −39 
 −15 
 6.98 
 97 
 L parahippocampal cortex 
 
 
 9 
 −61 
 17 
 6.48 
 37 
 R parietooccipital sulcus 
 
 
 −26 
 −78 
 53 
 6.34 
 75 
 L extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 24 
 23 
 44 
 6.03 
 131 
 R superior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −56 
 26 
 10 
 6.02 
 310 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −50 
 20 
 37 
 4.87 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 35 
 −61 
 −30 
 5.43 
 35 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 38 
 −67 
 −54 
 5.25 
 24 
 R cerebellum 
 
 
 −2 
 28 
 38 
 3.84 
 57 
 L medial superior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates for cluster sub-peaks which lay in distinct cortical regions are
listed directly below relevant peak cluster. 
 
 
 
 
 Table 3 
 
 Loci of transient simulation effects 
 
 
 
 
 MNI Coordinates  
 Peak Z 
 Number of above-threshold
voxels 
 Region 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 y 
 
 
 z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Transient simulation
effects 
 
 
 
 −15 
 −64 
 23 
 Inf 
 2101 
 L parietooccipital sulcus 
 
 
 18 
 −91 
 4 
 Inf 
 5827 
 R extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 −6 
 −94 
 −6 
 Inf 
 
 L extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 29 
 35 
 −15 
 6.94 
 250 
 R orbital gyrus 
 
 
 29 
 13 
 −25 
 5.26 
 
 R inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 2 
 19 
 −7 
 6.49 
 64 
 R anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 −6 
 −40 
 43 
 6.26 
 335 
 L precuneus 
 
 
 −5 
 −31 
 40 
 5.39 
 
 L posterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 2 
 −39 
 40 
 5.15 
 
 R precuneus 
 
 
 −27 
 28 
 −15 
 6.23 
 181 
 L orbital gyrus 
 
 
 −26 
 11 
 −21 
 4.95 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −30 
 16 
 −18 
 5.28 
 
 L insula 
 
 
 −16 
 8 
 −21 
 6.16 
 23 
 L orbital gyrus 
 
 
 −39 
 17 
 35 
 5.97 
 105 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −36 
 20 
 22 
 4.45 
 
 L inferior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −27 
 −21 
 −16 
 5.76 
 196 
 L hippocampus 
 
 
 −41 
 16 
 29 
 5.69 
 33 
 L inferior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −35 
 −69 
 52 
 5.61 
 225 
 L angular gyrus/intraparietal sulcus 
 
 
 63 
 −39 
 −6 
 5.53 
 227 
 R middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 68 
 −42 
 7 
 3.33 
 
 R superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 48 
 26 
 20 
 5.38 
 279 
 L inferior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 53 
 31 
 −1 
 4.66 
 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 56 
 32 
 22 
 4.65 
 
 L middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 30 
 −43 
 −12 
 4.84 
 145 
 R parahippocampal cortex 
 
 
 27 
 −22 
 −16 
 4.76 
 
 R hippocampus 
 
 
 −3 
 −45 
 17 
 5.35 
 45 
 L posterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 −3 
 35 
 2 
 5.32 
 479 
 L anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 5 
 35 
 −7 
 5.06 
 
 R anterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 5 
 49 
 −7 
 4.98 
 
 R medial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 57 
 −51 
 34 
 4.97 
 177 
 R supramarginal/angular gyrus 
 
 
 42 
 −67 
 50 
 4.88 
 
 R angular gyrus/intraparietal sulcus 
 
 
 −38 
 32 
 2 
 4.91 
 85 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 38 
 −34 
 −19 
 4.90 
 30 
 R fusiform gyrus 
 
 
 −50 
 −48 
 17 
 4.64 
 33 
 L superior temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −68 
 −42 
 −3 
 4.63 
 88 
 L middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 −68 
 −28 
 −3 
 4.40 
 
 L superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 50 
 22 
 47 
 4.62 
 52 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 33 
 7 
 35 
 4.45 
 91 
 R inferior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 41 
 11 
 46 
 4.28 
 
 R middle frontal gyrus 
 
 
 −47 
 22 
 13 
 4.43 
 39 
 L inferior frontal gyrus 
 
 
 11 
 −48 
 22 
 4.25 
 24 
 R posterior cingulate cortex 
 
 
 −2 
 −55 
 −36 
 4.20 
 23 
 L cerebellum 
 
 
 35 
 17 
 28 
 4.20 
 32 
 R inferior frontal sulcus 
 
 
 −54 
 −49 
 −6 
 4.10 
 55 
 L middle temporal gyrus 
 
 
 2 
 47 
 31 
 4.08 
 36 
 R medial prefrontal cortex 
 
 
 5 
 −88 
 29 
 4.06 
 36 
 R extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 −42 
 −33 
 −21 
 4.02 
 55 
 L fusiform gyrus 
 
 
 42 
 −75 
 26 
 4.01 
 39 
 R angular gyrus 
 
 
 35 
 −82 
 34 
 3.57 
 
 R extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 −54 
 −57 
 13 
 3.93 
 22 
 L superior temporal sulcus 
 
 
 
 Transient simulation
effects, amount dependent (5 > 3) 
 
 
 
 5 
 −91 
 −1 
 Inf 
 1408 
 R striate cortex 
 
 
 −2 
 −93 
 −7 
 7.54 
 
 L extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 −5 
 −72 
 34 
 6.86 
 43 
 L precuneus 
 
 
 21 
 −85 
 −7 
 5.35 
 144 
 R extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 17 
 −96 
 8 
 4.75 
 52 
 R extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 −18 
 −82 
 −18 
 4.33 
 29 
 L extrastriate cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinates for cluster sub-peaks which lay in distinct cortical regions are
listed directly below relevant peak cluster. 
 
 
 
 
