
 properties manuscript? 
 
 
 8910747 
 20835 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 
 Journal of cognitive neuroscience 
 
 0898-929X 
 1530-8898 
 
 
 28471729 
 5689086 
 10.1162/jocn_a_01143 
 NIHMS916962 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 Distinct hippocampal versus frontoparietal-network contributions to retrieval and memory-guided exploration 
 
 
 
 
 Bridge 
 Donna J. 
 
 1 
 * 
 
 
 
 Cohen 
 Neal J. 
 
 2 
 
 
 
 Voss 
 Joel L. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 1 Department of Medical Social Sciences and Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611 
 
 2 Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 
 
 * Please address correspondence to: Donna J. Bridge, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Laboratory for Human Neuroscience, Ward 18-134, 303 E. Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL 60611, (312) 503-5173,  d-bridge@northwestern.edu 
 
 
 1 
 11 
 2017 
 
 
 04 
 5 
 2017 
 
 
 8 
 2017 
 
 
 16 
 11 
 2017 
 
 29 
 8 
 1324 
 1338 
 
 
 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law. 
 
 
 
 Memory can profoundly influence new learning, presumably because memory optimizes exploration of to-be-learned material. Although hippocampus and frontoparietal networks have been implicated in memory-guided exploration, their specific and interactive roles have not been identified. We examined eye movements during fMRI scanning to identify neural correlates of the influences of memory retrieval on exploration and learning. Following retrieval of one object in a multi-object array, viewing was strategically directed away from the retrieved object toward non-retrieved objects, such that exploration was directed towards to-be-learned content. Retrieved objects later served as optimal reminder cues, indicating that exploration caused memory to become structured around the retrieved content. Hippocampal activity was associated with memory retrieval whereas frontoparietal activity varied with strategic viewing patterns deployed following retrieval, thus providing spatiotemporal dissociation of memory retrieval from memory-guided learning strategies. Time-lagged fMRI connectivity analyses indicated that hippocampal activity predicted frontoparietal activity to a greater extent for a condition in which retrieval guided exploration than for a passive control condition in which exploration was not influenced by retrieval. This demonstrates network-level interaction effects specific to influences of memory on strategic exploration. These findings show how memory guides behavior during learning and demonstrate distinct yet interactive hippocampal-frontoparietal roles in implementing strategic exploration behaviors that determine the fate of evolving memory representations. 
 
 
 active learning 
 exploration 
 eye-movement tracking 
 spatial memory 
 fMRI 
 retrieval 
 hippocampus 
 frontoparietal cortex 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 Memory retrieval is crucial for adaptive processes such as exploration ( Okeefe & Nadel, 1979 ;  Voss, Gonsalves, Federmeier, Tranel, & Cohen, 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ), decision making ( Gupta et al., 2009 ;  Johnson & Redish, 2007 ;  Redish, 2016 ;  Wang, Cohen, & Voss, 2015 ), future planning ( Buckner, 2010 ;  Eichenbaum & Fortin, 2009 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 ), creative thinking ( Duff, Kurczek, Rubin, Cohen, & Tranel, 2013 ), and memory updating ( Bridge & Paller, 2012 ;  Bridge & Voss, 2014a ,  2014b ;  Iordanova, Good, & Honey, 2011 ;  Winters, Tucci, Jacklin, Reid, & Newsome, 2011 ). However, mechanisms supporting memory’s influence on adaptive functions such as learning remain unresolved. The hippocampus is strongly implicated in memory-mediated learning ( Bridge & Voss, 2014b ;  Iordanova et al., 2011 ;  Shohamy & Wagner, 2008 ;  Zeithamova, Dominick, & Preston, 2012 ;  Zeithamova & Preston, 2010 ) and memory-guided exploration ( Buckner, 2010 ;  Kaplan et al., 2012 ;  Redish, 2016 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ). Both processes involve using memory to determine what information is attended to and therefore integrated into coherent memory representations. Previous studies have shown that memory-guided exploration involves self-directed encoding strategies that can enhance later memory. In these circumstances, memory for previously sampled information presumably is used to guide exploration of new information in a way that promotes memory for the entire episode. This memory-guided exploration process has been hypothesized to involve interactions of hippocampus and frontoparietal networks, which are thought to support memory versus exploration, respectively ( Redish, 2016 ;  Voss, Galvan, & Gonsalves, 2011 ;  Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ). However, hippocampal versus frontoparietal contributions to memory versus exploration-related processes triggered by memory have not been fully segregated, as they tend to occur in rapid succession during memory-guided exploration in most circumstances. Thus, although it is known that memory retrieval optimizes exploratory behavior and learning, specific mechanisms are unclear. 
 Most mechanistic evidence for memory influences on behavior is relevant to how memory dictates choice behavior for learned information ( Brown et al., 2016 ;  Johnson & Redish, 2007 ;  Redish, 2016 ;  Rich & Wallis, 2016 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ). For instance, after learning a T-maze with two competing paths, rats look back and forth between the paths at the intersection/decision point. During this iterative sampling behavior, reactivation of hippocampal place cells associated with each path was identified ( Johnson & Redish, 2007 ). This suggests that the two choices cued retrieval of each path, allowing for simulation of possible outcomes to optimize decision-making. Neural findings have converged on the notion that hippocampus interacts with cortical regions to optimize choice behavior. Given two choices, hippocampal-mediated retrieval of each associated outcome allows for cortically mediated behavioral selection of the most advantageous choice, therefore putting choice behavior in alignment with learning history ( Redish, 2016 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ). Although these studies have focused on the influence of memory for established outcomes, and have implicated hippocampal-cortical interactivity in this process, mechanisms for how memory-guided behavior supports new learning remain hypothetical ( Redish, 2016 ;  Tolman, 1932 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ). Rather than simply providing concrete information about past experiences to influence choice between well-learned alternatives, we propose that memory shapes learning by determining how information in the environment is sampled and incorporated into existing representations. 
 We previously found evidence implicating hippocampal-frontoparietal interactions in memory-guided exploration during new learning ( Voss, Galvan, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ), but we were unable to distinguish hippocampal from frontoparietal contributions to memory retrieval versus memory-guided exploration. Indeed, studies that implicate hippocampal and frontoparietal networks in future-oriented functions such as prediction, prospection, and future imagining have not clearly segregated the role of hippocampus in storing and retrieving memories versus using this information to construct mental images of future possibilities (e.g., ( Buckner, 2010 ;  Gupta et al., 2009 ;  Redish, 2016 ;  Schacter et al., 2012 )). Here, we attempted to segregate memory retrieval from adaptive functions that strategically utilize memory to guide behavior. We implemented a novel experimental design that was capable of distinguishing retrieval from memory-triggered exploration processes. We used a combination of behavior and eye tracking measures to examine neural correlates of memory retrieval and memory-guided exploration as they unfolded over time, which enabled us to pinpoint influences of retrieval on visual exploration and learning. 
 We hypothesized that memory retrieval would be associated with hippocampal activity and would influence subsequent viewing behavior during exploration ( Bridge & Voss, 2015 ). Because memory retrieval should cause retrieved information to temporarily enter an active state ( Lewis, 1979 ), we reasoned that viewing would be strategically allocated to other, non-retrieved information immediately following retrieval. We predicted that these strategic viewing behaviors during exploration would be related to frontoparietal networks implicated in coordinating planned action sequences ( Duncan, 2013 ). This hypothesized fMRI pattern would provide spatiotemporal dissociation of activity related to memory retrieval from activity related to subsequently deployed exploration strategies influenced by memory. We also predicted that memory-guided exploration would influence the structure of later memories. We hypothesized that retrieved information would become disproportionately bound with the explored information, because more opportunities existed for binding it to explored information, as it remains active in memory while other information is sampled iteratively. This hypothesis provides a specific mechanism for previously reported beneficial effects of memory-guided exploration on subsequent memory ( Redish, 2016 ;  Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ;  Wang et al., 2014 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ); i.e., better integration of retrieved information with explored information. 
 
 
 Materials and Methods 
 
 Overview 
 We used an episodic memory task in which each episode included three objects appearing at arbitrarily assigned locations on a rectangular grid ( Figure 1 ). Each study trial comprised three periods: Initial Study, Manipulation, and Restudy. The manipulation portion was either  Active , involving spatial recall of a selected object, or  Passive , involving re-exposure to the selected object-location, but no recall demand. We hypothesized that retrieval in the Active condition would cause the retrieved object to be preferentially bound with other information during Restudy and that viewing behavior would reflect this preferential binding. In order to assess this hypothesized preferential binding, two types of retrieval cues were used during a subsequent test phase ( Figure 1 ). The retrieval cue was either a manipulated or non-manipulated (i.e., “other”) object, and subjects were prompted to select the associated other object and recall its grid location. This test therefore probed influences of memory retrieval on the resulting structure by determining which content was most central to the resulting memory representation (retrieved content versus other content). 
 
 
 Subjects 
 Data were collected from 23 people. Two subjects were excluded from all analysis because performance on the short-term recall task during the Active manipulation fell two standard deviations below the group mean (M=0.50, SD=0.05). One subject was excluded from the fMRI analysis only due to physical removal from the scanner mid-experiment. Data from 21 subjects remained for behavioral analysis (12 women; ages 21–33 years,  M =26.33; all right-handed). All subjects reported no history of neurological or psychiatric conditions and no current use of any psychoactive drugs. Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to participation in accordance with the Northwestern University Institutional Review Board. Subjects were paid for their participation. 
 
 
 Stimuli 
 Visual stimuli were displayed on an MRI-compatible projector screen with an eye-to-screen distance of approximately 70 cm. Two sets of 216 object images were used, for a total of 432 unique object images. Due to the large quantity of images needed for the experiment, two object sets were used. One set comprised images of real-life objects ( Brodeur, Dionne-Dostie, Montreuil, & Lepage, 2010 ) and the other set comprised color drawings of objects ( Rossion & Pourtois, 2004 ). Each block contained objects from only one object set. A white box with dimensions 3.30×3.30 cm encapsulated each object. The majority of the screen was occupied by a green rectangular grid composed of 18 individual spaces separated by thick, black lines. Additional gray space at the bottom of the screen was reserved for the object recognition and spatial recall tests. Each object could appear in the center of any of the 18 grid spaces. The grid dimensions were 26×13 cm. 
 
 
 Design 
 Each block comprised a Study and Test phase, separated by a one-minute distractor task. There were six blocks with 24 study trials and 20 test trials. Each study phase was intermixed with three trial types: 10 Active manipulation trials, 10 Passive manipulation trials, and 4 catch trials. 
 Each Active/Passive study trial had three parts: Initial Study, Manipulation, and Restudy. A 1–2 s jittered grid image preceded each study trial. During Initial Study, subjects first viewed three objects in distinct locations on the grid for 4000 ms ( Figure 1 ). There was a delay between Initial Study and the manipulation phase of the trial, during which subjects completed a distractor task. For the distractor task, two fractal images appeared consecutively in the center of the screen and subjects were prompted to indicate if the images were the same or different. The duration of the distractor task was on average 6.85 s, (SD=0.12). Importantly, subjects did not know which type of manipulation would occur after the distractor until a cue appeared. Therefore, subjects were unaware which type of manipulation would occur during the Initial Study phase. 
 At the end of the distractor task, a cue trial indicating the upcoming manipulation type (Active, Passive, or Catch) appeared for 1–2.5 s. For the Active/Passive trials, subjects next completed the Manipulation task. For this manipulation, all three objects were positioned at the bottom of the screen below the grid, and subjects were prompted to move one object to its associated location while the other two objects remained at the bottom of the screen. For the Active manipulation, subjects selected one object (M=1.60 s, SD=0.27) and then recalled its associated grid location by moving the object with a mouse (M=1.32 s, SD=0.38). If the object was placed in the incorrect location, it immediately moved to the correct location. Accuracy was high (M=84.49% correct, SD=9.89%), and incorrect trials were excluded from all analyses. For the Passive manipulation, subjects were prompted to select the highlighted object (M=1.51 s, SD=0.24) and then move it to its associated location on the grid (M=1.37 s, SD=0.45). The preselected object was highlighted by a thick red outline, and its associated location was marked by a red box on the grid. In the Passive condition, subjects occasionally failed to select the preselected object and move it accordingly within the allotted time limit (5 s). These trials were omitted from analyses, leaving 98.56% of trials for analysis (SD=2.00%). 
 Immediately after placement of the manipulated object, subjects restudied the three objects in their locations 4000 ms (Restudy). Eye movements were recorded during the Initial Study and Restudy phases of each trial. The Active manipulation included both active selection of an object and active recall of the object’s associated location. Therefore, it is possible that both the active selection and retrieval processes contributed to the entrance of the manipulated object into the active memory state. However, we have shown in a prior study that retrieval in the absence of selection influences subsequent memory similarly to the effects reported here ( Bridge & Voss, 2015 ). 
 In addition to the Active/Passive trials, 4 randomly distributed catch trials occurred during the Study Phase. The catch trials served to encourage subjects to view all objects during the Initial Study period. On catch trials, subjects were required to recall one randomly selected object’s location after the Initial Study period. Subjects then received immediate feedback on their recall accuracy. Catch trials were not subsequently tested or analyzed. 
 After the study phase, subjects viewed various images of cats ( Zhang, Sun, & Tang, 2011 ) for one minute as a distractor before the test. After the distractor, the corresponding test was administered. Subjects were given an associative object-recognition test and spatial recall test for the non-manipulated (tested) objects. During each Test trial, a fixation cross flashed on and off the screen in the upcoming cue object’s location (200 ms on, 100 ms off, 1000 ms on) to orient the subject’s attention to that location. Then, the cue object appeared in that location for 2000 ms. Subjects attempted to recall the entire episode associated with the cue during this time (including the two other objects and their locations). The cue disappeared and the grid remained on the screen for 1–3 s. Then, the cue reappeared along with two object choices at the bottom on the screen. One of the objects at the bottom of the screen was associated with the cue object and the other object was associated with a different set of studied objects. Each tested object appeared on two test trials: once as the correct associate and once as a familiar lure. Importantly, each object choice appeared in only one cue condition (i.e. if an object was the correct associate of a manipulated cue object, then it also appeared as a lure for a different manipulated cue object on another trial). Subjects chose the object that was associated with the retrieval cue by clicking on the object with the mouse (M=1.91 s, SD=0.25). Then, subjects used the mouse to move the selected object to its associated location on the grid (spatial recall) and clicked a button on the mouse (M=1.48 s, SD=0.37). The objects remained on the screen for 500 ms after the mouse was clicked. A confidence trial followed the spatial test, in which subjects were asked to indicate whether the combination of their associative recognition and spatial recall responses were made with low, medium, or high confidence. The trial ended after the confidence decision was made or after 3 s, whichever came first. 
 We examined memory for the original multi-object spatial event ( Figure 2A ) by conducting behavioral analyses of object recognition and spatial recall accuracy. For object recognition, we measured the proportion of trials in which the correct object was selected ( Figure 2B ). Following correct selection of the associated object, we measured spatial recall. We conducted analyses involving memory for the precise object-location pairings (“bullseye memory”) and memory for the overall spatial configuration of the objects (“configural memory”). We measured bullseye memory by calculating the proportion of correctly recognized objects that were placed in their associated locations on the grid ( Figure 2C ). We measured configural memory by examining the proportion of correctly recognized objects that were placed in either their associated grid locations or in the non-tested object’s location (i.e. subjects remember the spatial layout of the episode, but not necessarily the specific object-location pairings) ( Figure 2D ). Configural memory accuracy was used to subdivide fMRI and eye movement contrasts based on subsequent memory. We intentionally did not test memory for the manipulated object itself, as this was not the focus of the current study. However, we have demonstrated a long-term memory advantage for retrieved information in other studies using similar memory paradigms ( Bridge & Paller, 2012 ;  Bridge & Voss, 2014b ). 
 
 
 Eye-tracking methods 
 Eye movements were recorded at 500 Hz during the Initial Study and Restudy phases of each trial using an Eyelink 1000 remote tracking system (SR Research, Ontario, Canada) that was focused on the right eye via the mirror that subjects used to view the projection screen in the MRI scanner. The continuous eye-movement records were transformed into a timeseries of fixations, saccades, and blinks. Motion (0.15°), velocity (30°/s), and acceleration (8000°/s 2 ) thresholds were used to identify saccades. Periods during which the pupil size was very small were classified as blinks. Saccade- and blink-free periods were categorized as fixation events. The average gaze position was calculated over the duration of each fixation event. The duration and time course of fixations in regions of interest (ROIs) were analyzed using custom scripts in Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc.). ROIs were circles that encompassed the three individual objects in their corresponding locations. The average ROI radius was 4.64 cm (SD=0.78). 
 Eye movements were recorded during Initial Study (4000 ms) and Restudy (4000 ms). Subjects spent an average of 2.79 s (SE=0.067) viewing any of the three objects during the Initial Study phase for the Active condition and 2.76 s (SE=0.07) viewing any objects in the Passive condition (overall viewing time did not differ significantly for these conditions [ t (20)=0.97, p=0.34]). For the Restudy phase, subjects spent an average of 3.05 s (SE=0.06) viewing any of the three objects in the Active condition and 3.04 s (SE=0.05) viewing any of the objects in the Passive condition (overall viewing time did not differ significantly for these conditions [ t (20)=0.32, p=0.75]). Therefore, overall attention to the three objects did not differ across conditions during either the Initial Study or the Restudy phases. 
 Our primary analysis focused on eye movements following the Active/Passive manipulation during the Restudy period. We analyzed eye movements separately for each Restudy trial by first summing the total time spent fixating within the three ROIs ( Hannula et al., 2010 ). We divided the total viewing time for each individual ROI by the total ROI viewing time to obtain a location-based proportion of viewing time measurement for each latency interval, using standard bin sizes ( Hannula, Baym, Warren, & Cohen, 2012 ). Specifically, we examined the proportion of time spent viewing each ROI during eight 500 ms intervals across the entire Restudy period: between 1–500 ms, 501–1000 ms, 1001–1500 ms, 1501–2000 ms, 2001–2500 ms, 2501–3000 ms, 3001–3500 ms, and 3501–4000 ms. For the eye movement analysis, we report only significant differences with regard to manipulation condition and viewing period. Greenhouse-Geisser correction denoted by  GG  in text. Trials with less than 20% total viewing time directed to the three ROIs during the Restudy phase were excluded from all eye-movement related analysis. Subjects who did not have >5 trials in any condition of interest were excluded from the eye movement analysis that included that condition (see details for each analysis, including trial counts and number of subjects contributing to each analysis below). 
 We performed three different eye-movement analyses. First, we examined proportion of time viewing the manipulated object during the Restudy phase for the Active and Passive conditions ( Figure 3A ). For this comparison, there was a mean of 50.71 trials (SD=10.20) in the Active condition and a mean of 58.19 trials (SE=7.65) in the Passive condition. Data from 21 subjects were included in this analysis. For the second and third analyses, we examined the proportion of object-to-object transitions. Trials in which there was at least one object-to-object transition were included in these analyses. For the second analysis, we examined the proportion of transitions subjects made between the objects during the Restudy phase for later correct (configural memory) trials in the Manipulated cue condition ( Figure 3C ). Data from 18 subjects were included in this analysis. There was a mean of 14 trials (SD=6.38) in the Active condition and a mean of 14.17 trials (SD=5.70) in the Passive condition. For the third eye analysis, we examined the proportion of transitions subjects made between objects during the Restudy phase as a function of subsequent configural memory for Manipulated cue trials. Data from 16 subjects were included in this analysis. There was a mean of 13.06 Active later correct (SD=6.12), 13.13 Active later incorrect (SD=3.96), 13.75 Passive later correct (SD=5.90), and 15.69 Passive later incorrect trials (SD=3.68). 
 
 
 fMRI methods 
 We measured fMRI BOLD signal during the Study and Test phases using a Siemens 3T PRISMA scanner with a 64-channel head coil. BOLD fMRI was conducted using whole-brain EPI oriented with the AC-PC axis (TR=2000 ms; TE=20 ms; FOV=210 mm; voxel size = 1.7mm isotropic, 70 slices, 0mm inter-slice gap), with multi-band factor 2 acquisition. Structural MRI was obtained following the task to provide anatomical localization (MPRAGE T 1 -weighted scans, voxel size = 1mm isotropic, FOV=256, 176 sagittal slices). Responses were made with the right hand using an MRI-compatible mouse. fMRI data were analyzed using AFNI ( Cox, 1996 ). Preprocessing steps included motion correction, correction of multiband and slice-timing discrepancies, co-registration of structural and functional images, transformation to stereotactic space ( Rex, Ma, & Toga, 2003 ), removal of linear signal drift, spatial smoothing of functional data with a 4-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel, and conversion of raw BOLD signal values to timeseries proportion-change values. 
 We conducted univariate analysis based on conditions separated by manipulation condition (Active vs. Passive), later test-cue (manipulated vs. non-manipulated cue), and phase (Initial Study, Manipulation, and Restudy). Conditions were further separated based on subsequent configural memory accuracy (correct vs. incorrect), as this behavioral measure resulted in meaningful Active versus Passive differences (see Results). Parameter estimates corresponding to these conditions were obtained for each subject using a deconvolution approach within a general linear model (as in standard event-related fMRI designs). For the Manipulation phase, trials were modeled using a duration-modulated regressor by convolving a boxcar function corresponding to the length of the trial periods with a canonical hemodynamic response function. For the Initial Study and Restudy phases, trials were modeled using a regressor generated by convolving a boxcar function corresponding to 4-s trial periods with a canonical hemodynamic response function. Nuisance variables for each model included T 0  and T 1 * components of the MR signal and six-parameter movement estimates. For group-level random effects analyses incorporating 2-tailed T tests, the voxel-wise threshold was set to  p <0.005 and a spatial extent threshold was determined using Monte Carlo simulation ( Forman et al., 1995 ) and mixed-effects multilevel analysis (MEMA) ( Chen, Saad, Nath, Beauchamp, & Cox, 2012 ). The spatial-extent threshold for whole-brain analyses was identified as 119 contiguous suprathreshold voxels to obtain a combined corrected threshold of  p <0.05 (identified for the most conservative level for any contrast and applied to all contrasts). For targeted analysis of medial temporal lobe activity, we used a small-volume corrected extent threshold of 30 contiguous voxels, which was below the cluster size of hippocampal activity detected in our whole brain analysis (see Results). Non-brain voxels, including ventricles, as well as voxels that were not sampled from the brain in every subject were masked from all analyses. 
 For the eye-movement fMRI analysis, we used the proportion of other-object transitions during Restudy as a parametric regressor to identify activity associated with this eye-movement behavior. Each phase (Initial Study, Manipulation, Restudy) and condition (Active, Passive), were modeled separately. For the connectivity analysis, we used the beta-series correlation method ( Rissman, Gazzaley, & D’Esposito, 2004 ). Individual trials were modeled within the context of a general linear model. Parameter estimates for individual trials were sorted based on phase (Initial Study, Manipulation, Restudy) and condition (Active, Passive). This analysis enabled us to examine relationships between brain regions across different phases of the task. For the Manipulation phase, we created a time-series of beta values for the hippocampal cluster identified in the Active versus Passive manipulation. For the Restudy phase, we created a time-series of beta values for the three cortical regions that were associated with other-object transition eye movements (see Results), collapsed across right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (R-DLPFC), right inferior parietal lobe (R-IPL), and right lateral occipital cortex (R-LOC). We then correlated the hippocampal Manipulation phase beta timeseries with the cortical Restudy phase beta timeseries for the Active and Passive condition separately for each participant. Each correlation value was then Fisher z-transformed, and statistics were performed on these normalized correlation values. 
 To summarize the fMRI group-level analysis strategy, the following steps were performed. First, we examined activity related to subsequent configural memory accuracy for the Active versus Passive manipulation conditions. For this analysis, we assessed activity during Manipulation and Restudy, comparing Active later-correct configural memory trials to Passive later-correct configural memory trials. This yielded several ROIs from the Manipulation phase contrast and the Restudy contrast, which were further interrogated. Next, we aimed to identify activity during the Restudy phase that was significantly correlated with exploratory viewing behavior. For this analysis, we used other-test transitions as a parametric modulator of brain activity during Restudy for the Active and Passive conditions, and focused on activity that was significantly modulated by eye movements using ROIs obtained from the univariate Restudy contrast. Finally, we conducted a beta-series connectivity analysis using ROIs derived from the aforementioned Manipulation and Restudy analyses. Specifically, we correlated hippocampal activity during Manipulation (predictive of subsequent memory) with fronto-parietal regions during Restudy (correlated with exploratory viewing behavior) to identify correlation between activity from distinct regions across phases. 
 
 
 
 Results 
 
 Active retrieval effects on subsequent memory accuracy 
 Each episode contained three objects and three grid locations ( Figure 2A ); therefore, Active retrieval could influence memory of different types of information from the episode, including spatial information and object-identity information. First, Active retrieval could promote memory of the associated object identities (e.g. the cake is associated with the elephant and the ball) ( Figure 2B ). To test this, we examined memory for associated object-identities by measuring performance on the recognition test ( Figure 2B ). We subjected the proportion of trials in which the correct object was selected to repeated-measures ANOVA with manipulation (Active, Passive) and cue type (Manipulated, Other) as factors. There were no significant effects (Interaction of Manipulation condition and cue type: [ F (1,20)=0.03,  p =0.861]; main effect condition [ F (1,20)=0.66,  p =0.43]; main effect of cue type [ F (1,20)=0.07,  p =0.80]), indicating that Active retrieval of one object-location during the manipulation phase did not influence later memory for the associated identities of the other objects. 
 Second, Active retrieval could promote memory of the precise object-location pairings (e.g. elephant is in the bottom left corner; ball is in the bottom right corner) ( Figure 2C ). To test this, we examined memory for precise object-location pairings by calculating the proportion of trials on which the tested object was placed in its associated location on the grid (bullseye hit) ( Figure 2C ). There was a nonsignificant trend for active retrieval to promote memory for the precise object-location associations (Interaction of Manipulation condition and Cue type:  F (1,20)=2.12,  p =0.161; main effect of condition [F(1,20)=0.70, p=0.41]; main effect of cue type [F(1,20)=0.16, p=0.70]). Therefore, although there was a trend, Active retrieval did not significantly promote memory of the precise-object location pairings from the episode. 
 Finally, Active retrieval could promote memory of the overall spatial configuration (e.g. the other objects are located in the bottom two corners) ( Figure 2D ). We therefore tested the influence of Active retrieval on memory for the spatial configuration of each episode ( Figure 2D ). We reasoned that Active retrieval would promote memory of the other object-locations associated with the actively retrieved object, because the manipulation involved recalling a specific location from the episode, which could have caused subjects to focus on the spatial arrangement of the objects. We defined configural recall accuracy as proportion of trials in which the tested object was placed in its precise location or the non-tested object’s location from that trial ( Figure 2E ; see Materials and Methods). As predicted, configural memory accuracy varied significantly by Active/Passive manipulation condition and Manipulated/Other retrieval cue type [Interaction  F (1,20)=5.99,  p =0.024]. When manipulated objects from the Active condition served as retrieval cues, spatial recall of the overall configuration was superior compared to when manipulated objects from the Passive condition were cues [ t (20)=2.54,  p =0.019] or when other objects from the Active condition were cues [ t (20)=3.22,  p =0.004]. Memory did not differ for Manipulated/Other cue types in the Passive condition [ t (20)=0.80,  p =0.435], nor for Active/Passive conditions when given other cues [ t (20)=0.87,  p =0.393]. Active retrieval thus enhanced binding of the retrieved object with other object-locations, such that it later served as a better retrieval cue for the entire spatial configuration (i.e., better recall of other object locations that were not themselves actively retrieved). Notably, this pattern could not have been due merely to better memory for any of the objects encoded within an Active trial, as accuracy did not improve when the non-manipulated objects from Active trials were used as cues. 
 These results indicate that the Active manipulation employed here benefited memory for the overall spatial layout rather than specifically promoting memory for the precise object-location pairings. Active retrieval of one object influenced memory for the entire spatial configuration and the inter-relationships between the other objects and the manipulated object, while having minimal effects on associative recognition and precise object-location pairings of the other objects. 
 
 
 Hippocampal activity during Active Retrieval predicts disproportionate binding 
 Given the effects of Active retrieval on memory for the episodic spatial configuration, we used this behavioral measure to identify specific activity associated with Active retrieval versus Passive re-exposure. To identify neural correlates corresponding to the effect of active retrieval on memory for the overall spatial configuration, we compared fMRI activity during the Manipulation phase for the Active versus Passive conditions for trials that were later correct (spatial configuration accuracy). Three Active>Passive activity clusters were identified, including hippocampus ( Figure 2F ), left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), and left insula ( Table 1 ). 
 We further interrogated the hippocampal cluster to identify activity associated with subsequent memory in the Active condition. We hypothesized that hippocampus would be sensitive to binding in the Active manipulated cue condition, as activity during retrieval may predict strong binding between the retrieved object and the other objects, but not necessarily binding between the other objects. Therefore, we conducted targeted analyses of subsequent memory effects as a function of later cue condition in the Active condition. Hippocampal activity was greater for manipulated cue trials that were later correct (M=0.05, SE=0.02) compared to later incorrect trials (M=0.00, SE=0.02) [ t (19)=2.48,  p =0.023]. On the other hand, in the Active non-manipulated cue condition, hippocampal activity during the Active manipulation did not differentiate between later correct (M=0.007, SE=0.04) and later incorrect trials (M=0.017, SE=0.02) [ t (19)=0.19,  p =0.85]. Hippocampal activity did not differ for later correct manipulated versus non-manipulated trials [ t (19)=0.19,  p =0.85], indicating that hippocampus was not selective to binding in the Active manipulated cue condition only. Instead, these results show that hippocampus is associated with successful retrieval during Active Retrieval versus Passive re-exposure. Further, this pattern of hippocampal activity enhancement for the Active condition predictive of memory accuracy in the later-manipulated cue condition provides some supporting evidence that right hippocampus supported retrieval of object-location associations in a manner that contributed to binding with other objects during the upcoming Restudy phase. 
 We also interrogated the two prefrontal clusters to identify any subsequent memory effects for the Active condition. Unlike the hippocampal cluster, no subsequent memory effects arose in the left IFG or left insula ( t s<1.63,  p s>0.12). These results suggest that these two prefrontal regions did not track binding in the Active condition, regardless of later cue condition. On the other hand, hippocampus was predictive of subsequent memory in the Active manipulated cue condition only. 
 
 
 Exploration-related eye movements 
 We hypothesized that memory retrieval would trigger the implementation of eye movement strategies during learning of other information ( Figure 3 ). Retrieval of select information could prompt a number of viewing behaviors that either facilitate or impair memory of the retrieved information and the other information. First, it is possible that retrieval simply promotes memory of retrieved information (i.e. the testing effect ( Karpicke & Roediger, 2008 ;  Landauer & Bjork, 1978 ;  Runquist, 1983 )). In this scenario, we would expect that viewing would be primarily directed to the retrieved object, while the other objects would be largely ignored ( Figure 3A ). This type of viewing behavior would be strategic if the only goal was to later remember the retrieved information, but it would be detrimental to memory of the other information and likely would not support memory for the entire spatial configuration associated with the retrieved object. A second possibility is that the retrieved object could be used as a visual anchor to learn and associate the other objects. In this scenario, subjects would implement a viewing strategy that involves making iterative fixations between the retrieved objects and the other objects ( Figure 3B ). This type of strategy could be expected to boost binding between the retrieved object and the other objects. A third type of viewing strategy would involve diverting attention away from the retrieved object and making iterative eye movements between the other objects (eye movements that exclude the retrieved object) ( Figure 3C ). Presumably, this type of strategy would promote memory of the other objects and the association between those objects, but not between the other objects and the retrieved object. However, we hypothesize that retrieval causes information to enter a temporary active state, so even if visual attention is directed elsewhere, it remains active for a temporary period of time. Therefore, this third type of viewing behavior could be effective in promoting memory for the retrieved object and the other objects if the retrieved object is maintained in an active state during viewing of the other objects. 
 We evaluated these three possible eye-movement behaviors following Active retrieval versus Passive re-exposure that could indicate strategic deployment of viewing following the manipulation. To evaluate the first hypothesis ( Figure 3A ; retrieved information dominates attention), we examined whether the overall proportion of viewing the manipulated object differed following the Active versus the Passive condition. Counter to the hypothesis that Active Retrieval causes subjects to focus attention solely on the retrieved object, the overall proportion of time spent viewing the manipulated object during the Restudy phase tended to be less following the Active ( M =0.30,  SE =0.01) versus the Passive condition ( M =0.33,  SE =0.01) [ t (20)=1.93,  p =0.067]. 
 We next asked whether viewing of the manipulated object varied over the course of the restudy phase. We therefore subdivided the proportion of time viewing manipulated objects into a timecourse of eight 500-ms intervals ( Figure 3D ) (cf. ( Hannula & Ranganath, 2009 )). Manipulated object viewing differed significantly for the Active compared to Passive conditions [main effect of condition [ F ( 3.47,69.34)=4.04,  p =0.008 GG ]. Post hoc testing indicated significantly less viewing in the Active relative to the Passive condition from 1501–3000 ms (1501–2000 ms:  t (20)=3.05,  p =0.006; 2001–2500 ms:  t (20)=2.82,  p =0.011; 2501–3000 ms:  t (20)=2.76,  p =0.012; all other intervals:  p s>0.10). Taken together with the overall proportion of viewing time analysis, these results indicate that subjects did not direct their focus of attention to the retrieved object, but instead diverted their gaze to the other objects on the screen following the Active versus the Passive manipulation. 
 We next tested hypotheses 2 ( Figure 3B ; retrieved information serves as a visual anchor) and 3 ( Figure 3C ; retrieved information is ignored because it is in active memory) by examining object-to-object transitions, which have previously been linked to memory-guided exploration ( Redish, 2016 ;  Tolman, 1932 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ). For this analysis, we focused our attention on Manipulated cue trials that were later correct (configural memory accuracy). We examined the proportion of transitions subjects made between the manipulated object and the later-tested object. More transitions between the manipulated object (cue) and the later tested object following Active retrieval would provide support for the visual anchor hypothesis, as subjects would use the retrieved object as the anchor to look between the other objects. To test the active memory hypothesis, we examined the proportion of transitions between the two other, non-manipulated objects. More other-test transitions in the Active condition would reflect strategic allocation of learning resources to the non-retrieved objects, while the retrieved object remained active in memory. To directly compare these competing hypothesis, we subjected the proportion of transitions to a repeated measures ANOVA with transition type (Other-test/Manipulated-test) and manipulation condition (Active/Passive) as factors ( Figure 3E ). A significant interaction of transition type and manipulation condition [ F (1,17)=5.35,  p =0.034] indicated that subjects made more other-test transitions relative to manipulated-test transitions in the Active condition [ t (17)=2.47,  p =0.024], whereas transition-type did not vary in the Passive condition [ t (17)=1.21,  p =0.241]. Furthermore, subjects made significantly more other-test transitions in the Active relative to the Passive condition [ t (17)=4.37,  p =0.0004] ( Figure 4E ). These results provide evidence supporting the active memory hypothesis, given that subjects diverted their attention away from the retrieved object, even though it later served as a strong cue to recall the other objects’ locations. That is, even though subjects made more other-test transitions in the Active condition, the other (non-manipulated) object did not serve as a strong cue to later recall the tested object. These differential viewing patterns across conditions support the interpretation that active retrieval strategically enhanced viewing of non-retrieved objects to promote learning. Coupled with the memory benefit achieved when manipulated objects were test cues in the Active condition only, these results suggest that other-test transitions served to increase integration of the retrieved object with the other objects that were viewed. 
 This interpretation was further supported by an analysis of the relationship between iterative viewing patterns and subsequent memory (Materials and Methods). For this analysis, we examined the proportion of other-test transitions for later Manipulated cue trials ( Figure 3F ). The proportion of other-test transitions varied significantly by condition (Active/Passive) and subsequent memory accuracy (Correct/Incorrect) [ F (1,15)=5.29,  p =0.036]. Whereas other-test transitions were detrimental to memory in the Passive condition, in that they were more prevalent for later incorrect compared to correct trials [ t (15)=2.43,  p <0.026], the proportion of other-test transitions did not differ between correct and incorrect trials in the Active condition [ t (15)=0.47,  p =0.645]. On the other hand, manipulated-test transitions did not vary significantly by condition and memory accuracy [ F (1,15)=0.28,  p =0.603]. Thus, in the Passive condition, other-test viewing behavior was detrimental to later memory for the retrieved item because viewing was directed at the other items at the expense of the retrieved item. This was not the case in the Active condition, because the retrieved item was in active memory during other-test viewing and was therefore protected against the detrimental effects of reduced viewing on later memory. Active retrieval thus protected the actively retrieved information from the damaging effects of reduced viewing (i.e, other-test transitions) selectively in the Active condition. 
 These results support the interpretation that other-test transitions were only strategic following Active retrieval and not Passive re-exposure, because attentional resources needed to be distributed across all objects in the Passive condition (not just allocated toward non-manipulated objects). In contrast, because the manipulated object was recently retrieved in the Active condition, resources could be efficiently allocated to the other objects, while it remained available for binding as subjects iteratively viewed the other objects ( Figure 3C ). 
 
 
 Frontoparietal network activity during strategic exploration 
 To identify corresponding fMRI activity correlates, we tested for activity that varied parametrically from trial to trial with the proportion of other-test viewing transitions ( Figure 4A ), restricted to regions broadly implicated in Active memory effects during Restudy (i.e., Active/Passive activity contrast ROIs for later-correct trials; Materials and Methods;  Table 1 ). This parametric analysis for the Active condition identified regions in the frontoparietal network, including R-DLPFC:  t (19)=2.38,  p =0.028 [ M =0.104;  SE =0.044], R-IPL: t(19)=2.60,  p =0.018 [ M =0.083;  SE =0.032], and R-LOC:  t (19)=3.46,  p =0.003 [ M =0.149;  SE =0.043] ( Figure 4B ). Activity did not vary with other-test viewing transitions for any activity cluster in the Passive condition (R-DLPFC: t(19)=0.260, p=0.798 [M=0.018; SE=0.071], R-IPL: t(19)=0.760, p=0.457 [M=0.028; SE=0.036], R-LOC: t(19)=0.917, p=0.371 [M=0.045; SE=0.049]). Importantly, this analysis was based on the proportion of other-test eye movement transitions that were made following Active versus Passive Manipulation, not on the number of object-to-object transitions. Therefore, this activity did not reflect the simple implementation of eye-movement transitions, but corresponded to a specific behavioral strategy that was only used following Active retrieval (higher proportion of other-test transitions versus other types of transitions). These results suggest that the frontoparietal network was involved in strategic other-test viewing transitions following active retrieval only. 
 
 
 Hippocampus predicts frontoparietal network activity associated with implementation of strategic eye movements 
 We next tested whether hippocampal activity associated with Active retrieval during the Manipulation phase predicted frontoparietal exploration-related activity during the subsequent Restudy phase. Greater hippocampal activity during active retrieval predictive of enhanced activity in the frontoparietal network during Restudy would implicate hippocampus in permitting the cortical network to implement strategic eye movements. We evaluated this relationship using a novel time-lagged beta-series correlation analysis (Materials and Methods). Relative to the Passive condition, hippocampal activity during the Active Manipulation phase significantly correlated with activity in the frontoparietal network during the Restudy phase [ t (19)=2.24,  p =0.038] ( Figure 5 ). Thus, hippocampal activity reflecting Active retrieval significantly predicted subsequent activity reflecting strategic exploration eye movement patterns during Restudy. Time-lagged coordination between the hippocampus and the frontoparietal network was associated with cortically-mediated implementation of exploratory viewing strategies during Restudy, which contributed to disproportionate binding between the actively retrieved information and the other episodic elements. 
 
 
 
 Discussion 
 We designed a memory task that artificially segregated active retrieval from memory-guided exploration. In a spatial memory task, subjects studied multi-object location associations and then selectively retrieved one object. We examined viewing behavior following the manipulation, when subjects restudied all three objects. Active retrieval of one object promoted memory of the entire spatial configuration of the episode, only when the retrieved object was given as a cue on the final test. Following active retrieval, but not following a passive control condition, subjects implemented an exploration strategy that involved directing attention away from the retrieved object and making iterative transitions between the non-retrieved objects. We propose that the retrieved object was active in memory following the retrieval manipulation, enabling subjects to ignore the retrieved object, while focusing attentional resources to the other objects. Our results showed that Active Retrieval not only influences memory for the retrieved material, but also influences how other information in the episode is learned and incorporated into a cohesive memory representation. 
 Hippocampal activity was linked to successful memory retrieval, whereas frontoparietal activity was associated with strategic viewing patterns triggered by retrieval. This constitutes the first within-experiment spatiotemporal dissociation involving hippocampal contributions to memory retrieval versus frontoparietal contributions to memory-guided exploration strategies. Notably, hippocampal activity during active retrieval predicted immediately upcoming frontoparietal activity compared to the passive re-exposure condition, showing that the extent of hippocampal engagement during memory retrieval predicted frontoparietal engagement during the implementation of memory-guided exploratory strategies. Thus, active retrieval shaped learning by dictating how other information in the episode was explored and therefore how it was stored in memory. 
 The current evidence for distinct yet interactive roles of hippocampus and frontoparietal networks in memory-guided exploration builds on previous findings of hippocampal and frontoparietal interactions for memory-based strategic exploration during learning ( Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ;  Wang et al., 2015 ;  Wang & Voss, 2014 ;  Yee et al., 2014 ). For instance, during object-location learning, hippocampal-cortical activity was associated with an iterative viewing strategy that enhanced memory for specific objects and their locations ( Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ;  Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ). The crucial role of hippocampal-dependent memory in guiding exploration was supported by two findings: (1) individuals with hippocampal amnesia did not benefit from having active control of exploration (despite overall above-chance performance) ( Voss, Gonsalves, et al., 2011 ) and (2) these amnestic patients did not engage in strategic exploration behaviors ( Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 ), indicating that exploration was memory-dependent. Although these previous findings indicate that memory retrieval and strategic exploration are interactive and supported by hippocampal-cortical interactions, they were unable to isolate specific memory retrieval events and the exploration patterns that they trigger. The iterative viewing strategy described here ( Figure 3C ) is functionally similar to the strategy reported in ( Voss, Warren, et al., 2011 )(see also ( Redish, 2016 )), and the current findings further include clear specification of the effects of retrieval on exploration strategies and the resultant binding that occurred with retrieved elements. The current results are unique in showing that hypothesized interactions between memory and exploration can be directly observed in viewing behavior and thereby localized to relevant brain activity. Hippocampal activity indicative of memory retrieval correlated with frontoparietal correlates of subsequent exploration triggered by this retrieval. These findings pinpoint the role of hippocampal-frontoparietal interactivity in memory’s influence on exploration and suggest network-level mechanisms for interaction of memory with exploration and learning. 
 Disproportionate binding of the retrieved object to the other objects’ locations occurred despite less overall viewing of the retrieved element and fewer direct transitions between the retrieved object and the other object that was later tested. We propose that this occurred because memory retrieval caused content to enter an “active-memory” state ( Lewis, 1979 ) such that it was available for binding with other content that was sampled during learning, despite being viewed less itself ( Bridge & Voss, 2015 ). In this way, memory retrieval shaped the resultant memory representation by structuring episodic memories around the retrieved content that guided exploration behavior. This was accomplished via active visual exploration of content that was not in the active memory state ( Figure 3C ). Even though other-test transitions that excluded the manipulated object was actually detrimental to memory in the Passive condition, memory for the manipulated-test object association was protected in the Active condition, because the manipulated object was in active memory during the implementation of this sampling behavior. We propose that preferential sampling of other objects allowed the retrieved object to be repeatedly bound with sampled content, and therefore caused it to become central to resulting memory representations. This suggests a covert form of binding between the retrieved object and other objects, which we interpret as a signal that the retrieved object was in active memory for a temporary period ( Lewis, 1979 ), and therefore available for binding even when not directly viewed. Consistent with this interpretation, functional connectivity analyses indicated that hippocampal activity corresponding to memory retrieval (and therefore the entrance of objects into active memory), predicted immediately upcoming activity correlates of exploration behavior in the frontoparietal network. Thus, active retrieval provided a window during which enhanced binding with the retrieved information could occur, and influenced exploration strategies, thus determining what information would be bound to the active memory trace. These findings show that retrieval and exploration interact to form and structure episodic memories, associated with interactive hippocampal cortical regions implicated in retrieval-induced binding and strategic exploration. 
 Testing memory for previously learned material enhances later memory compared to passive re-exposure to the same information ( Hogan & Kintsch, 1971 ;  Karpicke & Roediger, 2008 ;  Runquist, 1983 ). Unlike previous experiments on fMRI correlates of such retrieval influences on memory ( Nelson, Arnold, Gilmore, & McDermott, 2013 ;  Wing, Marsh, & Cabeza, 2013 ), the current study assessed influences of retrieval on memory for interrelationships among elements of an episode, rather than for specific retrieved material itself. Eye tracking provided measurement of attentional focus with high precision across space and time. Even though subjects viewed other, non-retrieved objects more so than the retrieved object following retrieval, the retrieved object was nonetheless disproportionately bound with the viewed objects. Our interpretation of this effect is an indication that retrieved content was temporarily in an active memory state ( Lewis, 1979 ) and therefore available for binding despite attention being directed elsewhere is consistent with previous studies showing maintenance of attended information across distractor periods. Multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI data ( Larocque, Lewis-Peacock, & Postle, 2014 ;  Lewis-Peacock, Drysdale, Oberauer, & Postle, 2012 ) has shown that information can be maintained over a delay period even when a distractor shifts attentional focus away to task-irrelevant information. These findings provide converging evidence that information can be maintained in an active state even when the focus of visuospatial attention is elsewhere ( Lewis-Peacock et al., 2012 ). Although these studies were unable to identify specific neural correlates of maintaining information in an active state outside the focus of attention ( LaRocque, Lewis-Peacock, Drysdale, Oberauer, & Postle, 2013 ;  Larocque et al., 2014 ;  Lewis-Peacock et al., 2012 ), this information was available for rapid access compared to inactive information in long-term memory ( Larocque et al., 2014 ), therefore indirectly yielding evidence for active maintenance. Here, we provide evidence that hippocampus is involved in the entrance of retrieved information into the active memory state, allowing binding with other information when available (as in our study), and perhaps maintenance across delays when necessary (as in previous studies). 
 A caveat of these retrieval effects is that active retrieval supported memory for the overall spatial configuration but not associative recognition or precise object-location memory. Although there was a nonsignificant trend for active retrieval to promote memory for the precise object-location associations, the only robust effects of active retrieval were on memory for the overall spatial configuration of the objects. The analysis of eye movements during the restudy phase following active retrieval indicated that subjects alternated their gaze between the other objects on the grid, presumably while the retrieved object was active in memory. It is possible that this eye movement pattern supported memory for the overall configuration of the objects on the grid by increasing memory for the fixation pattern that was made during viewing itself, without enhancing memory for the precise object-location associations as robustly. Therefore, the eye movement behavior generated during Restudy may have contributed to the type of memory representation that was formed. 
 Active retrieval may have been more engaging than Passive re-exposure, although both conditions involved using the mouse to select an object and move it to its associated location on the grid. Further, trial order was randomized and subjects did not know the condition for a specific trial until after the Initial Study portion. Nonetheless, it is possible that greater attention was a factor in the effects of Active retrieval, given the established association between attention and learning ( Chun & Turk-Browne, 2007 ). However, the pattern of findings would be very hard to reconcile with a simple attention account. First, memory was not overall better in the Active condition, but rather memory for non-manipulated objects benefited following Active retrieval only when an Active manipulated object was used as a test cue (not when an Active non-manipulated object was a test cue). This selective effect of Active retrieval on the association between the retrieved object and other objects does not fit with the notion that attention was nonspecifically enhanced in the Active condition, as presumably memory for all objects would benefit equally due to heightened attention. Furthermore, the time spent viewing any of the three objects did not differ during the restudy period for the Active compared to Passive conditions (see Eye Movement Methods), which is also inconsistent with Active retrieval causing heightened visuospatial attention. Finally, we found that the specific viewing strategy employed following Active versus Passive retrieval was a critical component of the beneficial effects on memory. This specific pattern of viewing linked to correspondingly specific effects on memory would not be expected under a heightened-attention account. Thus, although many factors could potentially vary between the Active and Passive conditions, including attention, our results suggest that the most salient factors contributing to later memory are retrieval and subsequent viewing strategies triggered by retrieval, not other nonspecific variables. 
 This experiment adds to theoretical accounts of the dynamic influences memory retrieval has on new learning. Findings support theories of hippocampal-cortical connectivity involvement in the generation of exploratory behaviors based on memory content ( Wang et al., 2015 )( Redish, 2016 ). These theories propose that cortical regions generate information-gathering behaviors based on the content of ongoing hippocampal-dependent memory retrieval, thus yielding behavior that is strategic in the sense that it is tuned to relevant information based on what has already been learned. Indeed, the current findings demonstrate hippocampal interaction with frontoparietal cortex in the service of strategic, exploratory viewing that forms cohesive memory representations centered on retrieved memory content. Although the current approach measured retrieval influences on exploratory behavior and its ramifications for the structure of resulting memories (and corresponding fMRI correlates) with greater specificity than has been achieved in previous studies, future work using methods with greater anatomical and temporal precision than fMRI, such as intracranial electrophysiological recordings from the hippocampus and cortex, will be needed to identify the fine-grained dynamics of hippocampal-cortical interactions supporting retrieval influences on exploration. 
 
 
 
 Financial support was provided by grants F32NS087885 and R00NS069788 from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and grants R21MH108863 and R01MH062500 from the National Institute of Mental Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. We thank Elise Gagnon and Bianca Marin for assistance with data collection and Peter Winter for helpful discussion. Neuroimaging was performed at the Center for Translational Imaging, supported by the Northwestern University Department of Radiology. This research was supported in part through the computational resources and staff contributions provided for the Quest high performance computing facility at Northwestern University which is jointly supported by the Office of the Provost, the Office for Research, and Northwestern University Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 Conflict of Interest: None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bridge 
 DJ 
 
 
 Paller 
 KA 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural correlates of reactivation and retrieval-induced distortion 
 J Neurosci 
 32 
 35 
 12144 
 12151 
 22933797 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bridge 
 DJ 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 2014a 
 Active retrieval facilitates across-episode binding by modulating the content of memory 
 Neuropsychologia 
 63 
 154 
 164 
 25173711 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bridge 
 DJ 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 2014b 
 Hippocampal binding of novel information with dominant memory traces can support both memory stability and change 
 J Neurosci 
 34 
 6 
 2203 
 2213 
 24501360 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bridge 
 DJ 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 2015 
 Binding among select episodic elements is altered via active short-term retrieval 
 Learn Mem 
 22 
 8 
 360 
 363 
 26179229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brodeur 
 MB 
 
 
 Dionne-Dostie 
 E 
 
 
 Montreuil 
 T 
 
 
 Lepage 
 M 
 
 
 2010 
 The Bank of Standardized Stimuli (BOSS), a new set of 480 normative photos of objects to be used as visual stimuli in cognitive research 
 PLoS One 
 5 
 5 
 e10773 
 20532245 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Brown 
 TI 
 
 
 Carr 
 VA 
 
 
 LaRocque 
 KF 
 
 
 Favila 
 SE 
 
 
 Gordon 
 AM 
 
 
 Bowles 
 B 
 
 
 
 2016 
 Prospective representation of navigational goals in the human hippocampus 
 Science 
 352 
 6291 
 1323 
 1326 
 27284194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buckner 
 RL 
 
 
 2010 
 The role of the hippocampus in prediction and imagination 
 Annu Rev Psychol 
 61 
 27 
 48 
 C21 
 28 
 19958178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chen 
 G 
 
 
 Saad 
 ZS 
 
 
 Nath 
 AR 
 
 
 Beauchamp 
 MS 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 2012 
 FMRI group analysis combining effect estimates and their variances 
 Neuroimage 
 60 
 1 
 747 
 765 
 22245637 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chun 
 MM 
 
 
 Turk-Browne 
 NB 
 
 
 2007 
 Interactions between attention and memory 
 Curr Opin Neurobiol 
 17 
 2 
 177 
 184 
 17379501 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cox 
 RW 
 
 
 1996 
 AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages 
 Computers and Biomedical Research 
 29 
 3 
 162 
 173 
 8812068 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Kurczek 
 J 
 
 
 Rubin 
 R 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 2013 
 Hippocampal amnesia disrupts creative thinking 
 Hippocampus 
 23 
 12 
 1143 
 1149 
 24123555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Duncan 
 J 
 
 
 2013 
 The structure of cognition: attentional episodes in mind and brain 
 Neuron 
 80 
 1 
 35 
 50 
 24094101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eichenbaum 
 H 
 
 
 Fortin 
 NJ 
 
 
 2009 
 The neurobiology of memory based predictions 
 Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
 364 
 1521 
 1183 
 1191 
 19527999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forman 
 SD 
 
 
 Cohen 
 JD 
 
 
 Fitzgerald 
 M 
 
 
 Eddy 
 WF 
 
 
 Mintun 
 MA 
 
 
 Noll 
 DC 
 
 
 1995 
 Improved Assessment of Significant Activation in Functional Magnetic-Resonance-Imaging (Fmri) - Use of a Cluster-Size Threshold 
 Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 
 33 
 5 
 636 
 647 
 7596267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gupta 
 R 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Denburg 
 NL 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Bechara 
 A 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 2009 
 Declarative memory is critical for sustained advantageous complex decision-making 
 Neuropsychologia 
 47 
 7 
 1686 
 1693 
 19397863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Althoff 
 RR 
 
 
 Warren 
 DE 
 
 
 Riggs 
 L 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Ryan 
 JD 
 
 
 2010 
 Worth a glance: using eye movements to investigate the cognitive neuroscience of memory 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 4 
 166 
 21151363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Baym 
 CL 
 
 
 Warren 
 DE 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2012 
 The Eyes Know: Eye Movements as a Veridical Index of Memory 
 Psychological Science 
 23 
 3 
 278 
 287 
 22327015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hannula 
 DE 
 
 
 Ranganath 
 C 
 
 
 2009 
 The eyes have it: hippocampal activity predicts expression of memory in eye movements 
 Neuron 
 63 
 5 
 592 
 599 
 19755103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hogan 
 RM 
 
 
 Kintsch 
 W 
 
 
 1971 
 Differential Effects of Study and Test Trials on Long-Term Recognition and Recall 
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 
 10 
 5 
 562 
 567 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Iordanova 
 MD 
 
 
 Good 
 M 
 
 
 Honey 
 RC 
 
 
 2011 
 Retrieval-mediated learning involving episodes requires synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 19 
 7156 
 7162 
 21562278 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Johnson 
 A 
 
 
 Redish 
 AD 
 
 
 2007 
 Neural ensembles in CA3 transiently encode paths forward of the animal at a decision point 
 J Neurosci 
 27 
 45 
 12176 
 12189 
 17989284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaplan 
 R 
 
 
 Doeller 
 CF 
 
 
 Barnes 
 GR 
 
 
 Litvak 
 V 
 
 
 Duzel 
 E 
 
 
 Bandettini 
 PA 
 
 
 
 2012 
 Movement-related theta rhythm in humans: coordinating self-directed hippocampal learning 
 PLoS Biol 
 10 
 2 
 e1001267 
 22389627 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Karpicke 
 JD 
 
 
 Roediger 
 HL 
 3rd 
 
 
 2008 
 The critical importance of retrieval for learning 
 Science 
 319 
 5865 
 966 
 968 
 18276894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Landauer 
 T 
 
 
 Bjork 
 R 
 
 
 1978 
 Optimum rehearsal patterns and name learning 
 
 
 Gruneberg 
 M 
 
 
 Morris 
 P 
 
 
 Sykes 
 R 
 
 
 Practical aspects of memory 
 625 
 632 
 London 
 Academic Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LaRocque 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Drysdale 
 AT 
 
 
 Oberauer 
 K 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2013 
 Decoding attended information in short-term memory: an EEG study 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 25 
 1 
 127 
 142 
 23198894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Larocque 
 JJ 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2014 
 Multiple neural states of representation in short-term memory? It’s a matter of attention 
 Front Hum Neurosci 
 8 
 5 
 24478671 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis 
 DJ 
 
 
 1979 
 Psychobiology of Active and Inactive Memory 
 Psychological Bulletin 
 86 
 5 
 1054 
 1083 
 386401 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lewis-Peacock 
 JA 
 
 
 Drysdale 
 AT 
 
 
 Oberauer 
 K 
 
 
 Postle 
 BR 
 
 
 2012 
 Neural evidence for a distinction between short-term memory and the focus of attention 
 J Cogn Neurosci 
 24 
 1 
 61 
 79 
 21955164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nelson 
 SM 
 
 
 Arnold 
 KM 
 
 
 Gilmore 
 AW 
 
 
 McDermott 
 KB 
 
 
 2013 
 Neural signatures of test-potentiated learning in parietal cortex 
 J Neurosci 
 33 
 29 
 11754 
 11762 
 23864663 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Okeefe 
 J 
 
 
 Nadel 
 L 
 
 
 1979 
 Precis of Okeefe and Nadel the Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
 2 
 4 
 487 
 494 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Redish 
 AD 
 
 
 2016 
 Vicarious trial and error 
 Nat Rev Neurosci 
 17 
 3 
 147 
 159 
 26891625 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rex 
 DE 
 
 
 Ma 
 JQ 
 
 
 Toga 
 AW 
 
 
 2003 
 The LONI Pipeline Processing Environment 
 Neuroimage 
 19 
 3 
 1033 
 1048 
 12880830 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rich 
 EL 
 
 
 Wallis 
 JD 
 
 
 2016 
 Decoding subjective decisions from orbitofrontal cortex 
 Nat Neurosci 
 19 
 7 
 973 
 980 
 27273768 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rissman 
 J 
 
 
 Gazzaley 
 A 
 
 
 D’Esposito 
 M 
 
 
 2004 
 Measuring functional connectivity during distinct stages of a cognitive task 
 Neuroimage 
 23 
 2 
 752 
 763 
 15488425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rossion 
 B 
 
 
 Pourtois 
 G 
 
 
 2004 
 Revisiting Snodgrass and Vanderwart’s object pictorial set: the role of surface detail in basic-level object recognition 
 Perception 
 33 
 2 
 217 
 236 
 15109163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Runquist 
 WN 
 
 
 1983 
 Some Effects of Remembering on Forgetting 
 Memory & Cognition 
 11 
 6 
 641 
 650 
 6669033 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Schacter 
 DL 
 
 
 Addis 
 DR 
 
 
 Hassabis 
 D 
 
 
 Martin 
 VC 
 
 
 Spreng 
 RN 
 
 
 Szpunar 
 KK 
 
 
 2012 
 The future of memory: remembering, imagining, and the brain 
 Neuron 
 76 
 4 
 677 
 694 
 23177955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shohamy 
 D 
 
 
 Wagner 
 AD 
 
 
 2008 
 Integrating memories in the human brain: hippocampal-midbrain encoding of overlapping events 
 Neuron 
 60 
 2 
 378 
 389 
 18957228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tolman 
 EC 
 
 
 1932 
 Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men 
 New York 
 Century 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 Galvan 
 A 
 
 
 Gonsalves 
 BD 
 
 
 2011 
 Cortical regions recruited for complex active-learning strategies and action planning exhibit rapid reactivation during memory retrieval 
 Neuropsychologia 
 49 
 14 
 3956 
 3966 
 22023912 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 Gonsalves 
 BD 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Hippocampal brain-network coordination during volitional exploratory behavior enhances learning 
 Nat Neurosci 
 14 
 1 
 115 
 120 
 21102449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 Warren 
 DE 
 
 
 Gonsalves 
 BD 
 
 
 Federmeier 
 KD 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2011 
 Spontaneous revisitation during visual exploration as a link among strategic behavior, learning, and the hippocampus 
 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
 108 
 31 
 E402 
 409 
 21768385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 JX 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 2015 
 Covert rapid action-memory simulation (CRAMS): a hypothesis of hippocampal-prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior 
 Neurobiol Learn Mem 
 117 
 22 
 33 
 24752152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 JX 
 
 
 Rogers 
 LM 
 
 
 Gross 
 EZ 
 
 
 Ryals 
 AJ 
 
 
 Dokucu 
 ME 
 
 
 Brandstatt 
 KL 
 
 
 
 2014 
 Targeted enhancement of cortical-hippocampal brain networks and associative memory 
 Science 
 345 
 6200 
 1054 
 1057 
 25170153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang 
 JX 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 2014 
 Brain networks for exploration decisions utilizing distinct modeled information types during contextual learning 
 Neuron 
 82 
 5 
 1171 
 1182 
 24908493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wing 
 EA 
 
 
 Marsh 
 EJ 
 
 
 Cabeza 
 R 
 
 
 2013 
 Neural correlates of retrieval-based memory enhancement: an fMRI study of the testing effect 
 Neuropsychologia 
 51 
 12 
 2360 
 2370 
 23607935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Winters 
 BD 
 
 
 Tucci 
 MC 
 
 
 Jacklin 
 DL 
 
 
 Reid 
 JM 
 
 
 Newsome 
 J 
 
 
 2011 
 On the dynamic nature of the engram: evidence for circuit-level reorganization of object memory traces following reactivation 
 J Neurosci 
 31 
 48 
 17719 
 17728 
 22131432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yee 
 LT 
 
 
 Warren 
 DE 
 
 
 Voss 
 JL 
 
 
 Duff 
 MC 
 
 
 Tranel 
 D 
 
 
 Cohen 
 NJ 
 
 
 2014 
 The hippocampus uses information just encountered to guide efficient ongoing behavior 
 Hippocampus 
 24 
 2 
 154 
 164 
 24123615 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zeithamova 
 D 
 
 
 Dominick 
 AL 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2012 
 Hippocampal and ventral medial prefrontal activation during retrieval-mediated learning supports novel inference 
 Neuron 
 75 
 1 
 168 
 179 
 22794270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zeithamova 
 D 
 
 
 Preston 
 AR 
 
 
 2010 
 Flexible memories: differential roles for medial temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex in cross-episode binding 
 J Neurosci 
 30 
 44 
 14676 
 14684 
 21048124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Zhang 
 W 
 
 
 Sun 
 J 
 
 
 Tang 
 X 
 
 
 2011 
 From tiger to panda: animal head detection 
 IEEE Trans Image Process 
 20 
 6 
 1696 
 1708 
 21156394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1 
 
 Study Design. For each trial, subjects studied three objects on a grid during Initial Study. Then, in the Active condition, subjects selected one object and recalled its associated location. Alternatively, in the Passive condition, subjects moved an experimenter-selected object to its location, which was marked by a visual cue. Subjects then viewed all objects in their correct locations during Restudy. On the subsequent memory test, subjects were given either manipulated or other objects as cues. Subjects selected the associated object and moved it to its location. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2 
 
 Retrieval influences later memory structure and corresponds to hippocampal activity. (A) Original event consisted of later manipulated object, tested object, and the other non-manipulated object. (B) On the final test, subjects first complete an associative recognition test. Selection of the correct object indicates successful memory of the object identities from the event. (C) After recognition, subjects recall the selected object’s location. Placement of the object in its associated location corresponds to precise memory for the object-location pairings. The gray X depicts the correctly recalled object-location; not actually shown during test. (D) Correct configural memory occurs when subjects place the object in its associated location of the other (non-tested) object’s location, indicating memory for the associated locations but not precise object-location pairings. The two gray Xs depict the other objects’ original locations; not actually shown during the test. (E) Manipulation condition influenced configural memory performance. (F) Hippocampal activity was greater for Active versus Passive trials during the manipulation phase for later correct configural memory trials. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3 
 
 Hypothesized viewing strategies and observed viewing behavior following active retrieval. (A) If retrieved information dominates attention, then viewing the retrieved/manipulated object should be disproportionately higher following the Active compared to Passive manipulation, as indicated by the thick circle. (B) If the retrieved object serves as an anchor for exploration during Restudy, then subjects would iteratively view the other objects with the manipulated object. Arrows denote viewing transitions between the manipulated object (thick circle) and the other objects (thin circles). (C) If the manipulated object enters an active memory state following Active retrieval, then subjects would spend more time viewing the other objects (thick circles) compared to the manipulated object, and binding of the manipulated object to the other objects would thus be heightened despite relatively little viewing of the manipulated object. Arrows depict viewing transitions between the other objects. The cake in cloud above the grid signifies the retrieved object in the active memory state during other-test viewing. (D) Proportion of time viewing manipulated objects in the Active and Passive conditions during Restudy, divided into 500-ms intervals. (E) Proportion of other-test and direct manipulated-test transitions during Restudy for later-correct configural memory trials in the Manipulated-cue condition. (F) Proportion of other-test transitions during Restudy as a function of later configural memory accuracy for the Manipulated-cue condition. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 
 
 Neural correlates of strategic viewing behavior following active retrieval. (A) Bold arrow depicts other-test viewing transitions used as parametric modulator of neural activity during Restudy. (B) Activity of frontoparietal network parametrically varied with amount of other-test transitions during Active Restudy. Average parametric modulation collapsed across this network is shown on the right for the Active and Passive conditions (values for each region are given in SI). R-LOC: right lateral occipital cortex; R-DLPFC: right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; R-IPL: right inferior parietal lobule. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5 
 
 Cross-phase activity correlation of hippocampus with frontoparietal regions reflect binding between active object and other objects during exploration. (A) Trial-by-trial activity of right hippocampus during the active manipulation phase varied significantly with the corresponding trial-by-trial activity of the frontoparietal regions identified for binding-related eye movements during Active Restudy ( Figure 4 ; R-DLPFC, R-IPL, and R-LOC). (B) Normalized cross-phase fMRI connectivity values for the Active and Passive condition. *p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1 
 
 Summary of fMRI activity estimates for primary comparisons. 
 
 
 
 
 Region 
 Hemisphere 
 Volume (mm 3 ) 
 x 
 y 
 z 
 Brodmann area(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Active > Passive during the manipulation phase 
 
 
 
 Insula 
 Left 
 591 
 −34 
 19 
 14 
 13 
 
 
 Inferior frontal gyrus 
 Left 
 452 
 −29 
 23 
 −3 
 47 
 
 
 Hippocampus* 
 Right 
 230 
 25 
 −28 
 −11 
 
 
 
 
 Active > Passive during the restudy phase 
 
 
 
 Precuneus 
 Right 
 3024 
 5 
 −73 
 49 
 7 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 Left 
 2541 
 −27 
 −64 
 −50 
 
 
 
 Inferior parietal lobe 
 Right 
 2211 
 34 
 −55 
 40 
 39/40 
 
 
 Superior parietal lobe 
 Left 
 1080 
 −15 
 −71 
 55 
 7 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 Left 
 851 
 −46 
 −61 
 −48 
 
 
 
 Lateral occipital gyrus 
 Right 
 705 
 36 
 −87 
 10 
 19 
 
 
 Medial frontal gyrus 
 Bilateral 
 584 
 3 
 31 
 41 
 6 
 
 
 Medial frontal gyrus 
 Bilateral 
 564 
 4 
 41 
 29 
 9 
 
 
 Cerebellum 
 Right 
 530 
 9 
 −69 
 −25 
 
 
 
 Dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex 
 Right 
 469 
 44 
 38 
 29 
 46/10 
 
 
 
 
 
 Note. MNI coordinates are the centroids of the clusters. Activity identified by targeted analysis of MTL regions denoted by *. 
 
 
 
 
